Changes take place in the protein and isozyme patterns of tissue adjacent to cut surfaces of sweet potato roots infected by the fungus Ceratocystis fimbriata. Chromatography and gel electrophoresis of extracts from sections cut at known distances from a plane of infection showed that inoculation with a pathogenic or nonpathogenic isolate produced similar changes in several proteins and enzymes. Inoculation of a susceptible variety of sweet potato with the nonpathogenic isolate induced in a thin layer of tissue around the site of inoculation an acquired immunity to subsequent inoculation with the pathogen.
Geographic atrophy (GA), an untreatable advanced form of age-related macular degeneration, results from retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) cell degeneration. Here we show that the microRNA (miRNA)-processing enzyme DICER1 is reduced in the RPE of humans with GA, and that conditional ablation of Dicer1, but not seven other miRNA-processing enzymes, induces RPE degeneration in mice. DICER1 knockdown induces accumulation of Alu RNA in human RPE cells and Alu-like B1 and B2 RNAs in mouse RPE. Alu RNA is increased in the RPE of humans with GA, and this pathogenic RNA induces human RPE cytotoxicity and RPE degeneration in mice. Antisense oligonucleotides targeting Alu/B1/B2 RNAs prevent DICER1 depletion-induced RPE degeneration despite global miRNA downregulation. DICER1 degrades Alu RNA, and this digested Alu RNA cannot induce RPE degeneration in mice. These findings reveal a miRNA-independent cell survival function for DICER1 involving retrotransposon transcript degradation, show that Alu RNA can directly cause human pathology, and identify new targets for a major cause of blindness.
Many biological processes depend on the function of proteins that detect changes in a cell's environment and transmit the information to the cytoplasm, for example, peptide hormone receptors. In Escherichia coli this class of proteins is exemplified by the sensory transducers (also called signalling proteins or methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins) which have a central role in mediating chemotactic behaviour. The sensory transducers are the products of four genes: tsr, tar, tap and trg. Each transducer detects changes in the environmental concentration of one or a very few attractants: Tsr, serine; Tar, aspartate and maltose; Tap, unknown; and Trg, ribose and galactose. Tsr and Tar act directly as chemoreceptors for the amino acid attractants and signal changes in their degree of occupancy to the flagellar apparatus. Detection of these changes in occupancy is made possible as the transducers are methylated at multiple glutamate residues such that their level of methylation reflects the most recent chemoeffector concentration. Biochemical and genetic information concerning the serine transducer protein has been accumulating rapidly but little is known about the structure of the molecule. We present here the nucleotide sequence of the tsr gene of E. coli; the amino acid sequence derived from it suggests that the Tsr transducer protein has a relatively simple transmembrane structure that may place limits on the mechanisms available for the transmission of sensory information into the cell.
Signaling pathways that link extracellular factors to activation of the monomeric guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) Rho control cytoskeletal rearrangements and cell growth. Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) participate in several of these pathways, although their mechanisms are unclear. The GTPase activities of two G protein alpha subunits, Galpha12 and Galpha13, are stimulated by the Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor p115 RhoGEF. Activated Galpha13 bound tightly to p115 RhoGEF and stimulated its capacity to catalyze nucleotide exchange on Rho. In contrast, activated Galpha12 inhibited stimulation by Galpha13. Thus, p115 RhoGEF can directly link heterotrimeric G protein alpha subunits to regulation of Rho.
The crystal structure of the protease of the human immunodeficiency virus type (HIV-1), which releases structural proteins and enzymes from viral polyprotein products, has been determined to 3 A resolution. Large regions of the protease dimer, including the active site, have structural homology to the family of microbial aspartyl proteases. The structure suggests a mechanism for the autoproteolytic release of protease and a role in the control of virus maturation.
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 3-O-acyltransferase (LpxA) catalyzes the transfer of (R)-3-hydroxymyristic acid from its acyl carrier protein thioester to UDP-N-acetylglucosamine. LpxA is the first enzyme in the lipid A biosynthetic pathway and is a target for the design of antibiotics. The x-ray crystal structure of LpxA has been determined to 2.6 angstrom resolution and reveals a domain motif composed of parallel beta strands, termed a left-handed parallel beta helix (L beta H). This unusual fold displays repeated violations of the protein folding constraint requiring right-handed crossover connections between strands of parallel beta sheets and may be present in other enzymes that share amino acid sequence homology to the repeated hexapeptide motif of LpxA.
Retroviruses and many other types of genetic elements replicate by reverse transcription of RNA. Although structurally and biologically very diverse, such elements carry conserved polymerase genes (pol) that encode proteins required for reverse transcription. In most cases, the pol gene is preceded by an overlapping gene encoding one or more nucleocapsid proteins, in a different reading frame. Because both coding regions are represented in a single mRNA, the question arises of how the reverse transcriptase in the alternative reading frame is expressed. In retroviruses and retrotransposons it is expressed as a nucleocapsid-polymerase fusion protein by ribosomal frameshifting during translation of the overlapping region. We have examined the mechanism of polymerase biosynthesis in another family of animal viruses that use reverse transcription, the hepatitis B viruses. Genetic and biochemical studies reveal that these viruses do not use ribosomal frameshifting to generate this enzyme, but instead direct translation initiation at an internal initiation (AUG) codon in the polymerase gene.
All organisms have to monitor the folding state of cellular proteins precisely. The heat-shock protein DegP is a protein quality control factor in the bacterial envelope that is involved in eliminating misfolded proteins and in the biogenesis of outer-membrane proteins. Here we describe the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulated protease and chaperone function of DegP from Escherichia coli. We show that binding of misfolded proteins transforms hexameric DegP into large, catalytically active 12-meric and 24-meric multimers. A structural analysis of these particles revealed that DegP represents a protein packaging device whose central compartment is adaptable to the size and concentration of substrate. Moreover, the inner cavity serves antagonistic functions. Whereas the encapsulation of folded protomers of outer-membrane proteins is protective and might allow safe transit through the periplasm, misfolded proteins are eliminated in the molecular reaction chamber. Oligomer reassembly and concomitant activation on substrate binding may also be critical in regulating other HtrA proteases implicated in protein-folding diseases.
Several inflammatory diseases, including asthma, arthritis and psoriasis are associated with the production of leukotrienes by neutrophils, mast cells and macrophages. The initial enzymatic step in the formation of leukotrienes is the oxidation of arachidonic acid by 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) to leukotriene A4. Osteosarcoma cells transfected with 5-LO express active enzyme in broken cell preparations, but no leukotriene metabolites are produced by these cells when stimulated with the calcium ionophore A23187, indicating that an additional component is necessary for cellular 5-LO activity. A new class of indole leukotriene inhibitor has been described that inhibits the formation of cellular leukotrienes but has no direct inhibitory effect on soluble 5-LO activity. We have now used these potent agents to identify and isolate a novel membrane protein of relative molecular mass 18,000 which is necessary for cellular leukotriene synthesis.
Nucleosome organization is critical for gene regulation. In living cells this organization is determined by multiple factors, including the action of chromatin remodellers, competition with site-specific DNA-binding proteins, and the DNA sequence preferences of the nucleosomes themselves. However, it has been difficult to estimate the relative importance of each of these mechanisms in vivo, because in vivo nucleosome maps reflect the combined action of all influencing factors. Here we determine the importance of nucleosome DNA sequence preferences experimentally by measuring the genome-wide occupancy of nucleosomes assembled on purified yeast genomic DNA. The resulting map, in which nucleosome occupancy is governed only by the intrinsic sequence preferences of nucleosomes, is similar to in vivo nucleosome maps generated in three different growth conditions. In vitro, nucleosome depletion is evident at many transcription factor binding sites and around gene start and end sites, indicating that nucleosome depletion at these sites in vivo is partly encoded in the genome. We confirm these results with a micrococcal nuclease-independent experiment that measures the relative affinity of nucleosomes for approximately 40,000 double-stranded 150-base-pair oligonucleotides. Using our in vitro data, we devise a computational model of nucleosome sequence preferences that is significantly correlated with in vivo nucleosome occupancy in Caenorhabditis elegans. Our results indicate that the intrinsic DNA sequence preferences of nucleosomes have a central role in determining the organization of nucleosomes in vivo.
To characterize the precursor of mammalian thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), a rat hypothalamic lambda gt11 library was screened with an antiserum directed against a synthetic peptide representing a portion of the rat TRH prohormone. The nucleotide sequence of the immunopositive complementary DNA encoded a protein with a molecular weight of 29,247. This protein contained five copies of the sequence Gln-His-Pro-Gly flanked by paired basic amino acids and could therefore generate five TRH molecules. In addition, potential cleavage sites in the TRH precursor could produce other non-TRH peptides, which may be secreted. In situ hybridization to rat brain sections demonstrated that the pre-proTRH complementary DNA detected neurons concentrated in the parvocellular division of the paraventricular nucleus, the same location as cells detected by immunohistochemistry. These findings indicate that mammalian TRH arises by posttranslational processing of a larger precursor protein. The ability of the TRH prohormone to generate multiple copies of the bioactive peptide may be an important mechanism in the amplification of hormone production.
DNA helicases are ubiquitous enzymes that unwind double-stranded DNA. They are a diverse group of proteins that move in a linear fashion along a one-dimensional polymer lattice--DNA--by using a mechanism that couples nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis to both translocation and double-stranded DNA unwinding to produce separate strands of DNA. The RecBC enzyme is a processive DNA helicase that functions in homologous recombination in Escherichia coli; it unwinds up to 6,250 base pairs per binding event and hydrolyses slightly more than one ATP molecule per base pair unwound. Here we show, by using a series of gapped oligonucleotide substrates, that this enzyme translocates along only one strand of duplex DNA in the 3'-->5' direction. The translocating enzyme will traverse, or 'step' across, single-stranded DNA gaps in defined steps that are 23 (+/-2) nucleotides in length. This step is much larger than the amount of double-stranded DNA that can be unwound using the free energy derived from hydrolysis of one molecule of ATP, implying that translocation and DNA unwinding are separate events. We propose that the RecBC enzyme both translocates and unwinds by a quantized, two-step, inchworm-like mechanism that may have parallels for translocation by other linear motor proteins.
Rapidly growing cells produce thousands of new ribosomes each minute, in a tightly regulated process that is essential to cell growth. How the Escherichia coli 16S ribosomal RNA and the 20 proteins that make up the 30S ribosomal subunit can assemble correctly in a few minutes remains a challenging problem, partly because of the lack of real-time data on the earliest stages of assembly. By providing snapshots of individual RNA and protein interactions as they emerge in real time, here we show that 30S assembly nucleates concurrently from different points along the rRNA. Time-resolved hydroxyl radical footprinting was used to map changes in the structure of the rRNA within 20 milliseconds after the addition of total 30S proteins. Helical junctions in each domain fold within 100 ms. In contrast, interactions surrounding the decoding site and between the 5', the central and the 3' domains require 2-200 seconds to form. Unexpectedly, nucleotides contacted by the same protein are protected at different rates, indicating that initial RNA-protein encounter complexes refold during assembly. Although early steps in assembly are linked to intrinsically stable rRNA structure, later steps correspond to regions of induced fit between the proteins and the rRNA.
Chemical modification with 2,3-butanedione in borate buffer indicates that nine of ten glycolytic enzymes studied contain arginyl residues at their active sites. Fructose-1,6-diphosphatase also has arginines at its binding site for the allosteric inhibitor, adenosine monophosphate. These and other data suggest that, as a general rule, enzymes acting on anionic substrates or cofactors will probably contain arginyl residues as components of their ligand binding sites. This could account in part for the relatively infrequent occurrence of arginine in proteins.
The terminal step in the anaerobic glycolysis of muscle in the chambered nautilus, Nautilus pompilius, is not pyruvate reduction to lactate as in vertebrate muscle. Instead of lactate dehydrogenase, these organisms utilize octopine dehydrogenase (E.C. 1.5.1.11), catalyzing the reductive condensation of pyruvate and arginine, which is dependent on the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, to form octopine and the oxidized form of the coenzyme. The kinetic properties of octopine dehydrogenase favor the production of octopine, which accumulates under a variety of conditions.
Protein farnesyltransferase (FTase) catalyzes the carboxyl-terminal lipidation of Ras and several other cellular signal transduction proteins. The essential nature of this modification for proper function of these proteins has led to the emergence of FTase as a target for the development of new anticancer therapy. Inhibition of this enzyme suppresses the transformed phenotype in cultured cells and causes tumor regression in animal models. The crystal structure of heterodimeric mammalian FTase was determined at 2.25 angstrom resolution. The structure shows a combination of two unusual domains: a crescent-shaped seven-helical hairpin domain and an alpha-alpha barrel domain. The active site is formed by two clefts that intersect at a bound zinc ion. One cleft contains a nine-residue peptide that may mimic the binding of the Ras substrate; the other cleft is lined with highly conserved aromatic residues appropriate for binding the farnesyl isoprenoid with required specificity.
Prion protein (PrP) is a glycoprotein constitutively expressed on the neuronal cell surface. A protease-resistant isoform of prion protein is implicated in the pathogenesis of a series of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. We have developed a line of mice homozygous for a disrupted PrP gene in which the whole PrP-coding sequence is replaced by a drug-resistant gene. In keeping with previous results, we find that homozygous loss of the PrP gene has no deleterious effect on the development of these mice and renders them resistant to prion. The PrP-null mice grew normally after birth, but at about 70 weeks of age all began to show progressive symptoms of ataxia. Impaired motor coordination in these ataxic mice was evident in a rotorod test. Pathological examination revealed an extensive loss of Purkinje cells in the vast majority of cerebellar folia, suggesting that PrP plays a role in the long-term survival of Purkinje neurons.
THE regulatory systems controlling cell division have not been identified, but it has been shown that growth factors such as epidermal growth factor, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), and serum initiate rapid changes in cellular metabolism, probably involving post-transcriptional control mechanisms(1-5). As phosphorylation has been shown to be an important regulatory mechanism in several metabolic pathways, we initiated experiments to determine whether factors which stimulate DNA synthesis also stimulate endogenous phosphorylation. We find mat, within 5 min of addition of FGF or serum to (32)P-labelled Swiss 3T3 cells, there is a specific increase in the phosphorylation of a membrane protein with an apparent molecular weight of 33,000. Experiments with isolated cell fractions demonstrate that the phosphorylation of this protein is stimulated by cyclic AMP. This rapid and specific response to mitogens raises the possibility that this phosphorylation might be part of the initial, cellular signal for DNA synthesis.
A peptide having enzyme-like catalytic activity has been designed and synthesized. Computer modeling was used to design a bundle of four short parallel amphipathic helical peptides bearing the serine protease catalytic site residues serine, histidine, and aspartic acid at the amino end of the bundle in the same spatial arrangement as in chymotrypsin (ChTr). The necessary "oxyanion hole" and substrate binding pocket for acetyltyrosine ethyl ester, a classical ChTr substrate, were included in the design. The four chains were linked covalently at their carboxyl ends. The peptide has affinity for ChTr ester substrates similar to that of ChTr and hydrolyzes them at rates approximately 0.01 that of ChTr; total turnovers greater than 100 have been observed. The peptide is inhibited by ChTr specific inhibitors and is inactive toward benzoyl arginine ethyl ester, a trypsin substrate. The peptide is inactivated by heating above 60 degrees C, but recovers full catalytic activity upon cooling and lyophilization from acetic acid.
The central portion (region P) of the 742-nucleotide noncoding 5' end of poliovirus allows the RNA to initiate protein synthesis in the absence of the usual 5' 7-methylguanosine capping group. Poliovirus 5' noncoding region was fused to a reporter gene and transfected into cells. There was extensive augmentation of the expression of this gene by poliovirus-mediated inhibition of cap-dependent protein synthesis. That the construct initiated in a cap-independent manner was verified through in vitro experiments. Small lesions throughout region P blocked its initiation function, implying that a coherent functional unit, hundreds of nucleotides long, is responsible for cap-independent initiation by poliovirus RNA.
A TANDEM repeat of the sequence Ser-Pro-Thr-Ser-Pro-Ser-Tyr has been found at the C terminus in the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (refs 1-5) with, for example, 26 units in yeast and 52 in mammals. By removal of this 'tail', it has been shown that 11-23 units are necessary for the normal functioning of the polymerase. The functional role of the repeat is however, unclear, although it has been proposed that it binds to transcription factors. As discussed in an earlier paper, the repeat unit contains two Ser-Pro sequences which seem to be related to a DNA-binding unit found in histones, Ser-Pro-Lys-Lys, and to the Ser-Pro-X-X motif which is often found in gene regulatory proteins and which, it has been proposed, is also a DNA-binding unit. Here, I show that the repeat does indeed bind DNA and present evidence that it does so by the intercalation of tyrosine residues. These experiments involved synthetic peptides containing one or two repeat units. As the sequence Ser-Pro-X-X (where X represents any amino acid) has a strong tendency to assume a special beta-turn, a model of the unit composed of two such beta-turns was made and compared with the structure of the drug Triostin A which is known to intercalate into DNA. Two tyrosine side chains of the repeat overlap well with two quinoxaline rings of the drug and therefore, the model can provide a good explanation of the experimental results.
Zeins, the storage proteins of maize, are totally lacking in the essential amino acids lysine and tryptophan. Lysine codons and lysine- and tryptophan-encoding oligonucleotides were introduced at several positions into a 19-kilodalton zein complementary DNA by oligonucleotide-mediated mutagenesis. A 450-base pair open reading frame from a simian virus 40 (SV40) coat protein was also engineered into the zein coding region. Messenger RNAs for the modified zeins were synthesized in vitro with an SP6 RNA polymerase system and injected into Xenopus laevis oocytes. The modifications did not affect the translation, signal peptide cleavage, or stability of the zeins. The ability of the modified zeins to assemble into structures similar to maize protein bodies was assayed by two criteria: assembly into membrane-bound vesicles resistant to exogenously added protease, and ability to self-aggregate into dense structures. All of the modified zeins were membrane-bound; only the one containing a 17-kilodalton SV40 protein fragment was unable to aggregate. These findings suggest that it may be possible to create high-lysine corn by genetic engineering.
The RNA polymerase II holoenzyme consists of RNA polymerase II, a subset of general transcription factors, and regulatory proteins known as SRB proteins. The genes encoding SRB proteins were isolated as suppressors of mutations in the RNA polymerase II carboxy-terminal domain (CTD). The CTD and SRB proteins have been implicated in the response to transcriptional regulators. We report here the isolation of two new SRB genes, SRB10 and SRB11, which encode kinase- and cyclin-like proteins, respectively. Genetic and biochemical evidence indicates that the SRB10 and SRB11 proteins form a kinase-cyclin pair in the holoenzyme. The SRB10/11 kinase is essential for a normal transcriptional response to galactose induction in vivo. Holoenzymes lacking SRB10/11 kinase function are strikingly deficient in CTD phosphorylation. Although defects in the kinase substantially affect transcription in vivo, purified holoenzymes lacking SRB10/11 kinase function do not show defects in defined in vitro transcription systems, suggesting that the factors necessary to elicit the regulatory role of the SRB10/11 kinase are missing in these systems. These results indicate that the SRB10/11 kinase is involved in CTD phosphorylation and suggest that this modification has a role in the response to transcriptional regulators in vivo.
The ASCE (additional strand, conserved E) superfamily of proteins consists of structurally similar ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities involving metabolism and transport of proteins and nucleic acids in all forms of life. A subset of these enzymes consists of multimeric ringed pumps responsible for DNA transport in processes including genome packaging in adenoviruses, herpesviruses, poxviruses and tailed bacteriophages. Although their mechanism of mechanochemical conversion is beginning to be understood, little is known about how these motors engage their nucleic acid substrates. Questions remain as to whether the motors contact a single DNA element, such as a phosphate or a base, or whether contacts are distributed over several parts of the DNA. Furthermore, the role of these contacts in the mechanochemical cycle is unknown. Here we use the genome packaging motor of the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage varphi29 (ref. 4) to address these questions. The full mechanochemical cycle of the motor, in which the ATPase is a pentameric-ring of gene product 16 (gp16), involves two phases-an ATP-loading dwell followed by a translocation burst of four 2.5-base-pair (bp) steps triggered by hydrolysis product release. By challenging the motor with a variety of modified DNA substrates, we show that during the dwell phase important contacts are made with adjacent phosphates every 10-bp on the 5'-3' strand in the direction of packaging. As well as providing stable, long-lived contacts, these phosphate interactions also regulate the chemical cycle. In contrast, during the burst phase, we find that DNA translocation is driven against large forces by extensive contacts, some of which are not specific to the chemical moieties of DNA. Such promiscuous, nonspecific contacts may reflect common translocase-substrate interactions for both the nucleic acid and protein translocases of the ASCE superfamily.
It is generally accepted that DNA appeared after RNA during the chemical evolution of life. To synthesize DNA, deoxyribonucleotides are required as building blocks. At present, these are formed from the corresponding ribonucleotides through the enzymatic action of ribonucleotide reductases. Three classes of enzymes are present in various organisms. There is little sequence similarity among the three classes of reductases. However, enzymic mechanisms and the allosteric behavior of the enzymes from various organisms are strongly conserved, suggesting that the enzymes might have evolved from a common ancestor, with the class III anaerobic Escherichia coli reductase as its closest relative.
Molecular chaperones and proteases monitor the folded state of other proteins. In addition to recognizing non-native conformations, these quality control factors distinguish substrates that can be refolded from those that need to be degraded. To investigate the molecular basis of this process, we have solved the crystal structure of DegP (also known as HtrA), a widely conserved heat shock protein that combines refolding and proteolytic activities. The DegP hexamer is formed by staggered association of trimeric rings. The proteolytic sites are located in a central cavity that is only accessible laterally. The mobile side-walls are constructed by twelve PDZ domains, which mediate the opening and closing of the particle and probably the initial binding of substrate. The inner cavity is lined by several hydrophobic patches that may act as docking sites for unfolded polypeptides. In the chaperone conformation, the protease domain of DegP exists in an inactive state, in which substrate binding in addition to catalysis is abolished.
When Caenorhabditis elegans larvae hatch from the egg case in the absence of food, their development is arrested (L1 arrest), and they show increased stress resistance until food becomes available. To study nutritional control of larval development, we analyzed growth and gene expression profiles during L1 arrest and recovery. Larvae that were fed responded relatively slowly to starvation compared with the rapid response of arrested larvae to feeding. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) followed by deep sequencing showed that during L1 arrest, Pol II continued transcribing starvation-response genes, but the enzyme accumulated on the promoters of growth and development genes. In response to feeding, promoter accumulation decreased, and elongation and messenger RNA levels increased. Therefore, accumulation of Pol II at promoters anticipates nutritionally controlled gene expression during C. elegans development.
HIV-1 integrates into the host chromosome and persists as a provirus flanked by long terminal repeats (LTRs). To date, treatment regimens primarily target the virus enzymes or virus-cell fusion, but not the integrated provirus. We report here the substrate-linked protein evolution of a tailored recombinase that recognizes an asymmetric sequence within an HIV-1 LTR. This evolved recombinase efficiently excised integrated HIV proviral DNA from the genome of infected cells. Although a long way from use in the clinic, we speculate that this type of technology might be adapted in future antiretroviral therapies, among other possible uses.
Binding of Fas ligand or an agonistic anti-Fas antibody induces apoptosis in Fas-bearing cells. The interleukin-1Beta-converting enzyme (ICE) is a cysteine protease that is involved in apoptosis induced by various stimuli, including Fas-mediated apoptosis. Several ICE homologues have been identified, and these are subdivided into three groups (ICE-, CPP32-, and Ich-1-like proteases). We show here that specific inhibitors of ICE- or CPP32-like proteases can inhibit Fas-mediated apoptosis. Transient ICE-like activity was found in the cytosolic fraction of Fas-activated cells, whereas ICE-dependent, CPP32-like activity gradually accumulated in the cytosol. Cell lysates from mouse lymphoma supplemented with either recombinant ICE or CPP32 induced apoptosis of nuclei. The CPP32 inhibitor inhibited ICE- or CPP32-induced apoptosis in the cell-free system, whereas the ICE-inhibitor only inhibited ICE-induced apoptosis. Cell extracts from thymocytes from ICE-null mice induced apoptosis in the cell-free system when it was supplemented with CPP32. These results indicate that Fas sequentially activates ICE- and CPP32-like proteases, and that downstream CPP32, together with a component(s) in the cytoplasm, causes apoptosis of nuclei.
The large ribosomal subunit catalyzes peptide bond formation and binds initiation, termination, and elongation factors. We have determined the crystal structure of the large ribosomal subunit from Haloarcula marismortui at 2.4 angstrom resolution, and it includes 2833 of the subunit's 3045 nucleotides and 27 of its 31 proteins. The domains of its RNAs all have irregular shapes and fit together in the ribosome like the pieces of a three-dimensional jigsaw puzzle to form a large, monolithic structure. Proteins are abundant everywhere on its surface except in the active site where peptide bond formation occurs and where it contacts the small subunit. Most of the proteins stabilize the structure by interacting with several RNA domains, often using idiosyncratically folded extensions that reach into the subunit's interior.
Yeast Sir2 is a heterochromatin component that silences transcription at silent mating loci, telomeres and the ribosomal DNA, and that also suppresses recombination in the rDNA and extends replicative life span. Mutational studies indicate that lysine 16 in the amino-terminal tail of histone H4 and lysines 9, 14 and 18 in H3 are critically important in silencing, whereas lysines 5, 8 and 12 of H4 have more redundant functions. Lysines 9 and 14 of histone H3 and lysines 5, 8 and 16 of H4 are acetylated in active chromatin and hypoacetylated in silenced chromatin, and overexpression of Sir2 promotes global deacetylation of histones, indicating that Sir2 may be a histone deacetylase. Deacetylation of lysine 16 of H4 is necessary for binding the silencing protein, Sir3. Here we show that yeast and mouse Sir2 proteins are nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent histone deacetylases, which deacetylate lysines 9 and 14 of H3 and specifically lysine 16 of H4. Our analysis of two SIR2 mutations supports the idea that this deacetylase activity accounts for silencing, recombination suppression and extension of life span in vivo. These findings provide a molecular framework of NAD-dependent histone deacetylation that connects metabolism, genomic silencing and ageing in yeast and, perhaps, in higher eukaryotes.
Comparative analysis of the sea urchin genome has broad implications for the primitive state of deuterostome host defense and the genetic underpinnings of immunity in vertebrates. The sea urchin has an unprecedented complexity of innate immune recognition receptors relative to other animal species yet characterized. These receptor genes include a vast repertoire of 222 Toll-like receptors, a superfamily of more than 200 NACHT domain-leucine-rich repeat proteins (similar to nucleotide-binding and oligomerization domain (NOD) and NALP proteins of vertebrates), and a large family of scavenger receptor cysteine-rich proteins. More typical numbers of genes encode other immune recognition factors. Homologs of important immune and hematopoietic regulators, many of which have previously been identified only from chordates, as well as genes that are critical in adaptive immunity of jawed vertebrates, also are present. The findings serve to underscore the dynamic utilization of receptors and the complexity of immune recognition that may be basal for deuterostomes and predicts features of the ancestral bilaterian form.
The 21-nucleotide small temporal RNA (stRNA) let-7 regulates developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans and probably in other bilateral animals. We present in vivo and in vitro evidence that in Drosophila melanogaster a developmentally regulated precursor RNA is cleaved by an RNA interference-like mechanism to produce mature let-7 stRNA. Targeted destruction in cultured human cells of the messenger RNA encoding the enzyme Dicer, which acts in the RNA interference pathway, leads to accumulation of the let-7 precursor. Thus, the RNA interference and stRNA pathways intersect. Both pathways require the RNA-processing enzyme Dicer to produce the active small-RNA component that represses gene expression.
The pituitary hormone thyrotropin, or thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), is the main physiological agent that regulates the thyroid gland. The thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) was cloned by selective amplification with the polymerase chain reaction of DNA segments presenting sequence similarity with genes for G protein-coupled receptors. Out of 11 new putative receptor clones obtained from genomic DNA, one had sequence characteristics different from all the others. Although this clone did not hybridize to thyroid transcripts, screening of a dog thyroid complementary DNA (cDNA) library at moderate stringency identified a cDNA encoding a 4.9-kilobase thyroid-specific transcript. The polypeptide encoded by this thyroid-specific transcript consisted of a 398-amino acid residue amino-terminal segment, constituting a putative extracellular domain, connected to a 346-residue carboxyl-terminal domain that contained seven putative transmembrane segments. Expression of the cDNA conferred TSH responsiveness to Xenopus oocytes and Y1 cells and a TSH binding phenotype to COS cells. The TSHR and the receptor for luteinizing hormone-choriogonadotropin constitute a subfamily of G protein-coupled receptors with distinct sequence characteristics.
The actions of many extracellular stimuli are elicited by complexes of cell surface receptors, heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins), and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase complexes. Analysis of haploid yeast cells and their response to peptide mating pheromones has produced important advances in our understanding of G protein and MAP kinase signaling mechanisms. Many of the components, their interrelationships, and their regulators were first identified in yeast. Current analysis of the pheromone response pathway (see the Connections Maps at Science's Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment) will benefit from new and powerful genomic, proteomic, and computational approaches that will likely reveal additional general principles that are applicable to more complex organisms.
Members of the DExH/D superfamily of nucleic acid-activated nucleotide triphosphatases are essential for virtually all aspects of RNA metabolism, including pre-messenger RNA splicing, RNA interference, translation, and nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. Physiological substrates for these enzymes are thought to be regions of double-stranded RNA, because several DExH/D proteins catalyze strand separation in vitro. These "RNA helicases" can also disrupt RNA-protein interactions, but it is unclear whether this activity is coupled to duplex unwinding. Here we demonstrate that two unrelated DExH/D proteins catalyze protein displacement independently of duplex unwinding. Therefore, the essential functions of DExH/D proteins are not confined to RNA duplexes but can be exerted on a wide range of ribonucleoprotein substrates.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) isolates with reduced sensitivity to zidovudine (3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine, AZT) from individuals with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or AIDS-related complex were studied to determine the genetic basis of their resistance. Most were sequential isolates obtained at the initiation of and during therapy. Comparative nucleotide sequence analysis of the reverse transcriptase (RT) coding region from five pairs of sensitive and resistant isolates identified three predicted amino acid substitutions common to all the resistant strains (Asp67----Asn, Lys70----Arg, Thr215----Phe or Tyr) plus a fourth in three isolates (Lys219----Gln). Partially resistant isolates had combinations of these four changes. An infectious molecular clone constructed with these four mutations in RT yielded highly resistant HIV after transfection of T cells. The reproducible nature of these mutations should make it possible to develop rapid assays to predict zidovudine resistance by performing polymerase chain reaction amplification of nucleic acid from peripheral blood lymphocytes, thereby circumventing current lengthy HIV isolation and sensitivity testing.
Cleavage of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate by phospholipase C results in the production of two important second messengers: inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate and 1,2-diacylglycerol. Although several receptors promote this cleavage, the molecular details of phospholipase C activation have remained unresolved. In this study, occupancy of a Ca2+-mobilizing receptor, the oligopeptide chemoattractant receptor on human polymorphonuclear leukocyte plasma membranes, was found to lead to the activation of a guanine nucleotide regulatory (N) protein by guanosine 5'-triphosphate. The activated N protein then stimulated a polyphosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C by reducing the Ca2+ requirement for expression of this activity from superphysiological to normal intracellular concentrations. Therefore, the N protein-mediated activation of phospholipase C may be a key step in the pathway of cellular activation by chemoattractants and certain other hormones.
Clinical and seroepidemiological studies in West Africa indicate that human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) is widespread and associated with immunodeficiency states of variable degree. In this study, an isolate of HIV-2 from a patient in Senegal was molecularly cloned and characterized. This isolate (HIV-2ST) was shown by hybridization and restriction enzyme analysis to be more related to the prototype HIV-2ROD than to other human or primate retroviruses. Cultures of HIV-2ST showed genotypic polymorphism, and clones of the virus had transmembrane envelope glycoproteins of 30 and 42 kilodaltons. Unlike other immunodeficiency viruses, HIV-2ST did not cause cell death or induce cell fusion in peripheral blood lymphocytes or in any of four CD4+ cell lines tested. Although HIV-2ST entered cells by a CD4-dependent mechanism and replicated actively, cell-free transmission of the virus was retarded at the level of cell entry. These findings suggest that immunodeficiency viruses prevalent in West African populations are members of the HIV-2 virus group and that certain strains of this virus have attenuated virulence.
Epigenetic proteins are intently pursued targets in ligand discovery. So far, successful efforts have been limited to chromatin modifying enzymes, or so-called epigenetic 'writers' and 'erasers'. Potent inhibitors of histone binding modules have not yet been described. Here we report a cell-permeable small molecule (JQ1) that binds competitively to acetyl-lysine recognition motifs, or bromodomains. High potency and specificity towards a subset of human bromodomains is explained by co-crystal structures with bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) family member BRD4, revealing excellent shape complementarity with the acetyl-lysine binding cavity. Recurrent translocation of BRD4 is observed in a genetically-defined, incurable subtype of human squamous carcinoma. Competitive binding by JQ1 displaces the BRD4 fusion oncoprotein from chromatin, prompting squamous differentiation and specific antiproliferative effects in BRD4-dependent cell lines and patient-derived xenograft models. These data establish proof-of-concept for targeting protein-protein interactions of epigenetic 'readers', and provide a versatile chemical scaffold for the development of chemical probes more broadly throughout the bromodomain family.
The 7-methylguanosine cap structure at the 5' end of eukaryotic messenger RNAs is a critical determinant of their stability and translational efficiency. It is generally believed that 5'-end capping is a constitutive process that occurs during mRNA maturation and lacks the need for a quality-control mechanism to ensure its fidelity. We recently reported that the yeast Rai1 protein has pyrophosphohydrolase activity towards mRNAs lacking a 5'-end cap. Here we show that, in vitro as well as in yeast cells, Rai1 possesses a novel decapping endonuclease activity that can also remove the entire cap structure dinucleotide from an mRNA. This activity is targeted preferentially towards mRNAs with unmethylated caps in contrast to the canonical decapping enzyme, Dcp2, which targets mRNAs with a methylated cap. Capped but unmethylated mRNAs generated in yeast cells with a defect in the methyltransferase gene are more stable in a rai1-gene-disrupted background. Moreover, rai1D yeast cells with wild-type capping enzymes show significant accumulation of mRNAs with 5'-end capping defects under nutritional stress conditions of glucose starvation or amino acid starvation. These findings provide evidence that 5'-end capping is not a constitutive process that necessarily always proceeds to completion and demonstrates that Rai1 has an essential role in clearing mRNAs with aberrant 5'-end caps. We propose that Rai1 is involved in an as yet uncharacterized quality control process that ensures mRNA 5'-end integrity by an aberrant-cap-mediated mRNA decay mechanism.
Two distinct microbial processes, denitrification and anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox), are responsible for the release of fixed nitrogen as dinitrogen gas (N(2)) to the atmosphere. Denitrification has been studied for over 100 years and its intermediates and enzymes are well known. Even though anammox is a key biogeochemical process of equal importance, its molecular mechanism is unknown, but it was proposed to proceed through hydrazine (N(2)H(4)). Here we show that N(2)H(4) is produced from the anammox substrates ammonium and nitrite and that nitric oxide (NO) is the direct precursor of N(2)H(4). We resolved the genes and proteins central to anammox metabolism and purified the key enzymes that catalyse N(2)H(4) synthesis and its oxidation to N(2). These results present a new biochemical reaction forging an N-N bond and fill a lacuna in our understanding of the biochemical synthesis of the N(2) in the atmosphere. Furthermore, they reinforce the role of nitric oxide in the evolution of the nitrogen cycle.
The expression of the late genes in bacteriophage T4 development is closely connected to viral DNA replication. Three T4-encoded DNA polymerase accessory proteins are shown to stimulate transcription at T4 late promoters in an adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis-requiring process. The properties of the activation resemble those found for enhancers of eukaryotic transcription. However, the nature of the enhancer of T4 late transcription is novel in that it is a structure--a break in the nontranscribed DNA stand--to which the three replication proteins bind, rather than a sequence. Since the three DNA polymerase accessory proteins are carried on the moving replication fork as part of the replisome, we postulate that viral DNA replication forks act, in vivo, as the mobile enhancers of T4 late gene transcription. Whereas Escherichia coli RNA polymerase bearing the T4 gene 55 protein can selectively recognize T4 late promoters, it is only capable of responding to the transcription-enhancing activity of the three replication proteins on acquiring an additional T4-specific modification.
Most genes involved in DNA replication in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are transcribed transiently during late G1 as cells become committed to a new cell cycle at Start. Their promoters all contain one or more versions of an 8-base-pair motif (ACGCGTNA) containing an MluI restriction enzyme site and called the MluI cell-cycle box (MCB). MCBs are both necessary and sufficient for the late G1-specific transcription of the TMP1 thymidylate synthase and POL1 DNA polymerase genes. A different late G1-specific 8-base-pair transcription element called the SCB (CACGAAAA; ref. 5) is bound by a factor containing the Swi4 and Swi6 proteins. We describe here the formation in vitro of complexes on TMP1 MCBs that contain the Swi6 protein and, we suggest, a protein of relative molecular mass 120,000 (p120) that is distinct from Swi4. Transcription due to SCBs and MCBs occurs in the absence of Swi6 but it is no longer correctly regulated in the cell cycle. We suggest that Swi6 is an essential regulatory subunit of two different Start-dependent transcription factors. One factor (SBF) contains Swi4 and binds to SCBs, whereas the other (MBF) contains the protein p120 and binds MCBs.
Adenylyl cyclase (AC) converts adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cyclic adenosine monophosphate, a ubiquitous second messenger that regulates many cellular functions. Recent structural studies have revealed much about the structure and function of mammalian AC but have not fully defined its active site or catalytic mechanism. Four crystal structures were determined of the catalytic domains of AC in complex with two different ATP analogs and various divalent metal ions. These structures provide a model for the enzyme-substrate complex and conclusively demonstrate that two metal ions bind in the active site. The similarity of the active site of AC to those of DNA polymerases suggests that the enzymes catalyze phosphoryl transfer by the same two-metal-ion mechanism and likely have evolved from a common ancestor.
Mammalian cells require non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) for the efficient repair of chromosomal DNA double-strand breaks. A key feature of biological sources of strand breaks is associated nucleotide damage, including base loss (abasic or apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) sites). At single-strand breaks, 5'-terminal abasic sites are excised by the 5'-deoxyribose-5-phosphate (5'-dRP) lyase activity of DNA polymerase beta (pol beta): here we show, in vitro and in cells, that accurate and efficient repair by NHEJ of double-strand breaks with such damage similarly requires 5'-dRP/AP lyase activity. Classically defined NHEJ is moreover uniquely effective at coupling this end-cleaning step to joining in cells, helping to distinguish this pathway from otherwise robust alternative NHEJ pathways. The NHEJ factor Ku can be identified as an effective 5'-dRP/AP lyase. In a similar manner to other lyases, Ku nicks DNA 3' of an abasic site by a mechanism involving a Schiff-base covalent intermediate with the abasic site. We show by using cell extracts that Ku is essential for the efficient removal of AP sites near double-strand breaks and, consistent with this result, that joining of such breaks is specifically decreased in cells complemented with a lyase-attenuated Ku mutant. Ku had previously been presumed only to recognize ends and recruit other factors that process ends; our data support an unexpected direct role for Ku in end-processing steps as well.
Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is a macromolecular complex found in human plasma that combines structural elements from the lipoprotein and blood clotting systems and that is associated with premature coronary heart disease and stroke. It is assembled from low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and a large hydrophilic glycoprotein called apolipoprotein(a) [apo(a)], which is homologous to the protease zymogen plasminogen. Plasma Lp(a) concentrations vary 1000-fold between individuals and represent a continuous quantitative genetic trait with a skewed distribution in Caucasian populations. Variation in the hypervariable apo(a) gene on chromosome 6q2.6-q2.7 and interaction of apo(a) alleles with defective LDL-receptor genes explain a large fraction of the variability of plasma Lp(a) concentrations. Though of high theoretical and practical interest, many aspects of the metabolism, function, evolution, and regulation of plasma concentrations of Lp(a) are presently unknown, controversial, or mysterious.
Electrospray ionization with an ultralow flow rate (</=4 nanoliters per minute) was used to directly couple capillary electrophoresis with tandem mass spectrometry for the analysis and identification of biomolecules in mixtures. A Fourier transform mass spectrometer provided full spectra (>30 kilodaltons) at a resolving power of approximately 60,000 for injections of 0.7 x 10(-18) to 3 x 10(-18) mole of 8- to 29-kilodalton proteins with errors of <1 dalton in molecular mass. Using a crude isolate from human blood, a value of 28,780.6 daltons (calculated, 28,780.4 daltons) was measured for carbonic anhydrase, representing 1 percent by weight of the protein in a single red blood cell. Dissociation of molecular ions from 9 x 10(-18) mole of carbonic anhydrase gave nine sequence-specific fragment ions, more data than required for unique retrieval of this enzyme from the protein database.
The spike protein (S) of SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) attaches the virus to its cellular receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). A defined receptor-binding domain (RBD) on S mediates this interaction. The crystal structure at 2.9 angstrom resolution of the RBD bound with the peptidase domain of human ACE2 shows that the RBD presents a gently concave surface, which cradles the N-terminal lobe of the peptidase. The atomic details at the interface between the two proteins clarify the importance of residue changes that facilitate efficient cross-species infection and human-to-human transmission. The structure of the RBD suggests ways to make truncated disulfide-stabilized RBD variants for use in the design of coronavirus vaccines.
Vertebrate evolution has taken place against a background of constant retrovirus infection, and much of the mammalian genome consists of endogenous retrovirus-like elements. Several host genes have evolved to control retrovirus replication, including Friend-virus-susceptibility-1, Fv1, on mouse chromosome 4 (refs 3, 4). The Fv1 gene acts on murine leukaemia virus at a stage after entry into the target cell but before integration and formation of the provirus. Although restriction is not absolute, Fv1 prevents or delays spontaneous or experimentally induced viral tumours. In vitro, Fv1 restriction leads to an apparent 50-1,000 fold reduction in viral titre. Genetic evidence implicates a direct interaction between the Fv1 gene product and a component of the viral preintegration complex, the capsid protein CA (refs 7-9). We have now cloned Fv1: the gene appears to be derived from the gag region of an endogenous retrovirus unrelated to murine leukaemia virus, implying that the Fv1 protein and its target may share functional similarities despite the absence of nucleotide-sequence homology.
Testing the many hypotheses from genomics and systems biology experiments demands accurate and cost-effective gene and genome synthesis. Here we describe a microchip-based technology for multiplex gene synthesis. Pools of thousands of 'construction' oligonucleotides and tagged complementary 'selection' oligonucleotides are synthesized on photo-programmable microfluidic chips, released, amplified and selected by hybridization to reduce synthesis errors ninefold. A one-step polymerase assembly multiplexing reaction assembles these into multiple genes. This technology enabled us to synthesize all 21 genes that encode the proteins of the Escherichia coli 30S ribosomal subunit, and to optimize their translation efficiency in vitro through alteration of codon bias. This is a significant step towards the synthesis of ribosomes in vitro and should have utility for synthetic biology in general.
Rather than designing specific inhibitors for closely related proteins, researchers are remodeling the proteins to make them uniquely susceptible to inhibition. As described in the 21 September issue of Nature, the technique involves enlarging the active site of an enzyme so that it can bind an inhibitor that won't fit into the active sites of related--but unaltered--enzymes. Researchers can then insert the gene that encodes the modified enzyme into cells or living animals and turn off that enzyme by feeding them the inhibitor--without affecting other, very similar, enzymes. The technique may have some advantages over other approaches to studying the functions of individual proteins, such as mutating or knocking out the genes that encode them, which may disrupt embryonic development, producing abnormal animals or no animals at all.
Familial persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (PHHI), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by unregulated insulin secretion, is linked to chromosome 11p14-15.1. The newly cloned high-affinity sulfonylurea receptor (SUR) gene, a regulator of insulin secretion, was mapped to 11p15.1 by means of fluorescence in situ hybridization. Two separate SUR gene splice site mutations, which segregated with disease phenotype, were identified in affected individuals from nine different families. Both mutations resulted in aberrant processing of the RNA sequence and disruption of the putative second nucleotide binding domain of the SUR protein. Abnormal insulin secretion in PHHI appears to be caused by mutations in the SUR gene.
The extent to which large duplications and deletions contribute to human genetic variation and diversity is unknown. Here, we show that large-scale copy number polymorphisms (CNPs) (about 100 kilobases and greater) contribute substantially to genomic variation between normal humans. Representational oligonucleotide microarray analysis of 20 individuals revealed a total of 221 copy number differences representing 76 unique CNPs. On average, individuals differed by 11 CNPs, and the average length of a CNP interval was 465 kilobases. We observed copy number variation of 70 different genes within CNP intervals, including genes involved in neurological function, regulation of cell growth, regulation of metabolism, and several genes known to be associated with disease.
By recombinant DNA techniques, a disulfide bond was introduced at a specific site in T4 lysozyme, a disulfide-free enzyme. This derivative retained full enzymatic activity and was more stable toward thermal inactivation than the wild-type protein. The derivative, T4 lysozyme (Ile3----Cys), was prepared by substituting a Cys codon for an Ile codon at position 3 in the cloned lysozyme gene by means of oligonucleotide-dependent, site-directed mutagenesis. The new gene was expressed in Escherichia coli under control of the (trp-lac) hybrid tac promoter, and the protein was purified. Mild oxidation generated a disulfide bond between the new Cys3 and Cys97, one of the two unpaired cysteines of the native molecule. Oxidized T4 lysozyme (Ile3----Cys) exhibited specific activity identical to that of the wild-type enzyme when measured at 20 degrees C in a cell-clearing assay. The cross-linked protein was more stable than the wild type during incubation at elevated temperatures as determined by recovered enzymatic activity at 20 degrees C.
Epac proteins are activated by binding of the second messenger cAMP and then act as guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rap proteins. The Epac proteins are involved in the regulation of cell adhesion and insulin secretion. Here we have determined the structure of Epac2 in complex with a cAMP analogue (Sp-cAMPS) and RAP1B by X-ray crystallography and single particle electron microscopy. The structure represents the cAMP activated state of the Epac2 protein with the RAP1B protein trapped in the course of the exchange reaction. Comparison with the inactive conformation reveals that cAMP binding causes conformational changes that allow the cyclic nucleotide binding domain to swing from a position blocking the Rap binding site towards a docking site at the Ras exchange motif domain.
Accumulation of the prion protein PrPSc, a pathological and protease-resistant isoform of the normal host protein PrPC, is a feature of prion disease such as scrapie. It is still unknown whether scrapie pathology comes about by neurotoxicity of PrPSc, acute depletion of PrPC, or some other mechanism. Here we investigate this question by grafting neural tissue overexpressing PrPC into the brain of PrP-deficient mice which are scrapie-resistant and do not propagate infectivity. After intracerebral inoculation with scrapie prions, the grafts accumulated high levels of PrPSc and infectivity and developed the severe histopathological changes characteristic of scrapie. Moreover, substantial amounts of graft-derived PrPSc migrated into the host brain. Even 16 months after inoculation no pathological changes were seen in PrP-deficient tissue, not even in the immediate vicinity of the grafts. Therefore, in addition to being resistant to scrapie infection, brain tissue devoid of PrPC is not damaged by exogenous PrPSc.
Riboswitches are structured RNAs typically located in the 5' untranslated regions of bacterial mRNAs that bind metabolites and control gene expression. Most riboswitches sense one metabolite and function as simple genetic switches. However, we found that the 5' region of the Bacillus clausii metE messenger RNA includes two riboswitches that respond to S-adenosylmethionine and coenzyme B12. This tandem arrangement yields a composite gene control system that functions as a two-input Boolean NOR logic gate. These findings and the discovery of additional tandem riboswitch architectures reveal how simple RNA elements can be assembled to make sophisticated genetic decisions without involving protein factors.
The crystal structure of the DNA repair enzyme endonuclease III, which recognizes and cleaves DNA at damaged bases, has been solved to 2.0 angstrom resolution with an R factor of 0.185. This iron-sulfur [4Fe-4S] enzyme is elongated and bilobal with a deep cleft separating two similarly sized domains: a novel, sequence-continuous, six-helix domain (residues 22 to 132) and a Greek-key, four-helix domain formed by the amino-terminal and three carboxyl-terminal helices (residues 1 to 21 and 133 to 211) together with the [4Fe-4S] cluster. The cluster is bound entirely within the carboxyl-terminal loop with a ligation pattern (Cys-X6-Cys-X2-Cys-X5-Cys) distinct from all other known [4Fe-4S] proteins. Sequence conservation and the positive electrostatic potential of conserved regions identify a surface suitable for binding duplex B-DNA across the long axis of the enzyme, matching a 46 angstrom length of protected DNA. The primary role of the [4Fe-4S] cluster appears to involve positioning conserved basic residues for interaction with the DNA phosphate backbone. The crystallographically identified inhibitor binding region, which recognizes the damaged base thymine glycol, is a seven-residue beta-hairpin (residues 113 to 119). Location and side chain orientation at the base of the inhibitor binding site implicate Glu112 in the N-glycosylase mechanism and Lys120 in the beta-elimination mechanism. Overall, the structure reveals an unusual fold and a new biological function for [4Fe-4S] clusters and provides a structural basis for studying recognition of damaged DNA and the N-glycosylase and apurinic/apyrimidinic-lyase mechanisms.
Environmental light is the 'zeitgeber' (time-giver) of circadian behaviour. Constant darkness is considered a 'free-running' circadian state. Mammals encounter constant darkness during hibernation. Ablation of the master clock synchronizer, the suprachiasmatic nucleus, abolishes torpor, a hibernation-like state, implicating the circadian clock in this phenomenon. Here we report a mechanism by which constant darkness regulates the gene expression of fat catabolic enzymes in mice. Genes for murine procolipase (mClps) and pancreatic lipase-related protein 2 (mPlrp2) are activated in a circadian manner in peripheral organs during 12 h dark:12 h dark (DD) but not light-dark (LD) cycles. This mechanism is deregulated in circadian-deficient mPer1-/-/mPer2m/m mice. We identified circadian-regulated 5'-AMP, which is elevated in the blood of DD mice, as a key mediator of this response. Synthetic 5'-AMP induced torpor and mClps expression in LD animals. Torpor induced by metabolic stress was associated with elevated 5'-AMP levels in DD mice. Levels of glucose and non-esterified fatty acid in the blood are reversed in DD and LD mice. Induction of mClps expression by 5'-AMP in LD mice was reciprocally linked to blood glucose levels. Our findings uncover a circadian metabolic rhythm in mammals.
The transforming protein of Kirsten murine sarcoma virus (Ki-MuSV) is a virally encoded 21-kilodalton protein called p21 kis. The sequences encoding p21 kis were genetically localized to a 1.3-kilobase segment near the 5' end of the viral genome by assaying the capacity of a series of defined deletion mutants of molecularly cloned Ki-MuSV DNA to induce focal transformation of mouse cells. Nucleotide sequencing of a portion of this region has led to the identification of an open reading frame of 567 nucleotides coding for p21 kis protein.
Mitotic spindle disassembly requires major structural alterations in the associated cytoskeletal proteins and mitosis is known to be associated with Ca2+-sequestering phenomena and calcium transients. To examine the possible involvement of a ubiquitous Ca2+-activated protease, calpain II, in the mitotic process, synchronized PtK1 cells were monitored by immunofluorescence for the relocation of calpain II. The plasma membrane was the predominant location of calpain II in interphase. However, as mitosis progressed, calpain II relocated to (i) an association with mitotic chromosomes, (ii) a perinuclear location in anaphase, and (iii) a mid-body location in telophase. Microinjection of calpain II near the nucleus of a PtK1 cell promoted the onset of metaphase. Injection of calpain II at late metaphase promoted a precocious disassembly of the mitotic spindle and the onset of anaphase. These data suggest that calpain II is involved in mitosis.
The effector arm of the cell-death pathway is composed of cysteine proteases belonging to the ICE/CED-3 family. In metazoan cells these exist as inactive polypeptide precursors (zymogens), each composed of a prodomain, which is cleaved to activate the protease, and a large and small catalytic subunit. The coupling of these 'death' proteases to signalling pathways is probably mediated by adaptor molecules that contain protein-protein interaction motifs such as the death domain. Here we describe such an adaptor molecule, RAIDD, which has an unusual bipartite architecture comprising a carboxy-terminal death domain that binds to the homologous domain in RIP, a serine/threonine kinase component of the death pathway. The amino-terminal domain is surprisingly homologous with the sequence of the prodomain of two ICE/CED-3 family members, human ICH-1 (ref. 5) and Caenorhabditis elegans CED-3 (ref. 6). This similar region mediates the binding of RAIDD to ICH-1 and CED-3, serving as a direct link to the death proteases, indicating that the prodomain may, through homophilic interactions, determine the specificity of binding of ICE/CED-3 zymogens to regulatory adaptor molecules. Finally, alternations in the sequence of the N-terminal domain that are equivalent to inactivating mutations in the C. elegans ced-3 gene prevent homophilic binding, highlighting the potentially primordial nature of this interaction.
Molecular mechanisms that mediate signal transduction by growth inhibitory cytokines are poorly understood. Type I (alpha and beta) interferons (IFNs) are potent growth inhibitory cytokines whose biological activities depend on induced changes in gene expression. IFN-alpha induced the transient activation of phospholipase A2 in 3T3 fibroblasts and rapid hydrolysis of [3H]arachidonic acid (AA) from prelabeled phospholipid pools. The phospholipase inhibitor, bromophenacyl bromide (BPB), specifically blocked IFN-induced binding of nuclear factors to a conserved, IFN-regulated enhancer element, the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE). BPB also caused a dose-dependent inhibition of IFN-alpha-induced ISRE-dependent transcription in transient transfection assays. Specific inhibition of AA oxygenation by eicosatetraynoic acid prevented IFN-alpha induction of factor binding to the ISRE. Treatment of intact cells with inhibitors of fatty acid cyclooxygenase or lipoxygenase enzymes resulted in amplification of IFN-alpha-induced ISRE binding and gene expression. Thus, IFN-alpha receptor-coupled AA hydrolysis may function in activation of latent transcription factors by IFN-alpha and provides a system for studying the role of AA metabolism in transduction of growth inhibitory signals.
Helenalin and tenulin injected into CF1 male mice bearing Ehrlich ascites tumors inhibit DNA synthesis and DNA polymerase enzymatic activity in the tumor cells. Helenalin inhibited protein synthesis. Both drugs increased the concentration of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate, and interfered with glycolytic and mitochondrial energy processes. Cholesterol synthesis was also inhibited, resulting in lower serum cholesterol levels in tumor-bearing animals. Data obtained in vitro indicate that the cyclopentenone-bearing sesquiterpene lactone and related compounds do not alkylate puring bases of nucleic acids but rather undergo a Michael-type addition reaction with the sulfhydryl groups of reduced glutathione and l-cysteine. Thus, the inhibition of cellular enzyme activities and metabolism that has been observed with these drugs might be explained by the occurrence of a Michael-type teaction.
Various molecules such as cytokines and anticancer drugs, as well as factor deprivation, rapidly induce apoptosis (programmed cell death), which is morphologically characterized by cell shrinkage and the blebbing of plasma membranes and by nuclear condensation. Caspases, particularly caspase 3, are proteases that are activated during apoptosis and which cleave substrates such as poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, actin, fodrin, and lamin. Apoptosis is also accompanied by the internucleosomal degradation of chromosomal DNA. In the accompanying Article, we have identified and molecularly cloned a caspase-activated deoxyribonuclease (CAD) and its inhibitor (ICAD). Here we show that caspase 3 cleaves ICAD and inactivates its CAD-inhibitory effect. We identified two caspase-3 cleavage sites in ICAD by site-directed mutagenesis. When human Jurkat cells were transformed with ICAD-expressing plasmid, occupation of the receptor Fas, which normally triggers apoptosis, did not result in DNA degradation. The ICAD transformants were also resistant to staurosporine-induced DNA degradation, although staurosporine still killed the cells by activating caspase. Our results indicate that activation of CAD downstream of the caspase cascade is responsible for internucleosomal DNA degradation during apoptosis, and that ICAD works as an inhibitor of this process.
The mechanisms by which eukaryotic cells sense DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in order to initiate checkpoint responses are poorly understood. 53BP1 is a conserved checkpoint protein with properties of a DNA DSB sensor. Here, we solved the structure of the domain of 53BP1 that recruits it to sites of DSBs. This domain consists of two tandem tudor folds with a deep pocket at their interface formed by residues conserved in the budding yeast Rad9 and fission yeast Rhp9/Crb2 orthologues. In vitro, the 53BP1 tandem tudor domain bound histone H3 methylated on Lys 79 using residues that form the walls of the pocket; these residues were also required for recruitment of 53BP1 to DSBs. Suppression of DOT1L, the enzyme that methylates Lys 79 of histone H3, also inhibited recruitment of 53BP1 to DSBs. Because methylation of histone H3 Lys 79 was unaltered in response to DNA damage, we propose that 53BP1 senses DSBs indirectly through changes in higher-order chromatin structure that expose the 53BP1 binding site.
Dopamine receptors are classified into D1 and D2 subtypes on the basis of their pharmacological properties and the intracellular responses they mediate. The cerebral D2 dopamine receptor is the target of drugs used to alleviate the main symptoms of schizophrenia. Although it is considered to be a single molecular entity, there is evidence that multiple D2-receptor subtypes exist. A complementary DNA encoding a D2 receptor has recently been cloned and the deduced 415-amino-acid sequence indicates that it belongs to the large superfamily of receptors coupled to G proteins, and that its topology consists of seven transmembrane domains. In this family, the genes are frequently without introns and each is believed to encode a unique polypeptide product. Here we show that the gene for the D2 receptor produces two receptor isoforms by alternative messenger RNA splicing, providing a route to receptor diversity in this family. One isoform corresponds to the D2(415) receptor, but the second contains an additional sequence encoding a 29-amino-acid fragment, defining a novel D2(444) receptor isoform. Expression of the two isoforms is tissue-specific, and both are regulated by guanyl nucleotides. As the extra sequence is located within a putative cytoplasmic loop that binds to G proteins, the two isoforms might interact with different G proteins and thereby initiate distinct intracellular signals.
The RNA bacteriophage MS2 is a convenient model system for the study of protein-RNA interactions. The MS2 coat protein achieves control of two distinct processes--sequence-specific RNA encapsidation and repression of replicase translation--by binding to an RNA stem-loop structure of 19 nucleotides containing the initiation codon of the replicase gene. The binding of a coat protein dimer to this hairpin shuts off synthesis of the viral replicase, switching the viral replication cycle to virion assembly rather than continued replication. The operator fragment alone can trigger self-assembly of the phage capsid at low protein concentrations and a complex of about 90 RNA operator fragments per protein capsid has been described. We report here the crystal structure at 3.0 A resolution of a complex between recombinant MS2 capsids and the 19-nucleotide RNA fragment. It is the first example of a structure at this resolution for a sequence-specific protein-RNA complex apart from the transfer RNA synthetase complexes. The structure shows sequence-specific interactions between conserved residues on the protein and RNA bases essential for binding.
The functions of serotonin have been assigned through serotonin-receptor-specific drugs and mutants; however, because a constellation of receptors remains when a single receptor subtype is inhibited, the coordinate responses to modulation of serotonin levels may be missed. Here we report the analysis of behavioural and neuroendocrine defects caused by a complete lack of serotonin signalling. Analysis of the C. elegans genome sequence showed that there is a single tryptophan hydroxylase gene (tph-1)-the key enzyme for serotonin biosynthesis. Animals bearing a tph-1 deletion mutation do not synthesize serotonin but are fully viable. The tph-1 mutant shows abnormalities in behaviour and metabolism that are normally coupled with the sensation and ingestion of food: rates of feeding and egg laying are decreased; large amounts of fat are stored; reproductive lifespan is increased; and some animals arrest at the metabolically inactive dauer stage. This metabolic dysregulation is, in part, due to downregulation of transforming growth factor-beta and insulin-like neuroendocrine signals. The action of the C. elegans serotonergic system in metabolic control is similar to mammalian serotonergic input to metabolism and obesity.
The chemokine RANTES induced biphasic mobilization of Ca2+ in T cells. The initial peak, a transient increase in cytosolic Ca2+ mediated by a heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)--coupled pathway, was associated predominantly with chemotaxis. The second peak, Ca2+ release and sustained influx dependent on protein tyrosine kinases, was associated with a spectrum of cellular responses--Ca2+ channel opening, interleukin-2 receptor expression, cytokine release, and T cell proliferation--characteristic of T cell receptor activation. Other chemokines did not produce these responses. Thus, in addition to inducing chemotaxis, RANTES can act as an antigen-independent activator of T cells in vitro.
Germ cells are the only cells that transmit genetic information to the next generation, and they therefore must be prevented from differentiating inappropriately into somatic cells. A common mechanism by which germline progenitors are protected from differentiation-inducing signals is a transient and global repression of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII)-dependent transcription. In both Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans embryos, the repression of messenger RNA transcription during germ cell specification correlates with an absence of phosphorylation of Ser 2 residues in the carboxy-terminal domain of RNAPII (hereafter called CTD), a critical modification for transcriptional elongation. Here we show that, in Drosophila embryos, a small protein encoded by polar granule component (pgc) is essential for repressing CTD Ser 2 phosphorylation in newly formed pole cells, the germline progenitors. Ectopic Pgc expression in somatic cells is sufficient to repress CTD Ser 2 phosphorylation. Furthermore, Pgc interacts, physically and genetically, with positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), the CTD Ser 2 kinase complex, and prevents its recruitment to transcription sites. These results indicate that Pgc is a cell-type-specific P-TEFb inhibitor that has a fundamental role in Drosophila germ cell specification. In C. elegans embryos, PIE-1 protein segregates to germline blastomeres, and is thought to repress mRNA transcription through interaction with P-TEFb. Thus, inhibition of P-TEFb is probably a common mechanism during germ cell specification in the disparate organisms C. elegans and Drosophila.
The endoplasmic reticulum is the principal site of synthesis and initial incorporation of membrane lipids in eukaryotic cells; the enzymes of glycerolipid biosynthesis are exclusively located on its cytoplasmic surface. To maintain a phospholipid bilayer in this organelle, newly synthesized phospholipids must be translocated to the lumenal surface. Consistent with this are measurements indicating that movement of phospholipids across microsomal membranes is rapid, with a half-time less than 5 min (refs 3 and 4). Rapid movement of phospholipids has also been detected across the plasma membrane of Bacillus megaterium, another site of de novo lipid biosynthesis. The rapid transmembrane movement of phosphatidylcholine has not been detected, however, in vesicles prepared from microsomal lipids. These latter data suggest involvement in the endoplasmic reticulum of a phospholipid-translocating protein, as was first proposed by Bretscher who called it 'flippase'. Here we report reconstitution of a phospholipid flippase from rat liver microsomes into lipid vesicles.
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a form of non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) which is characterized by an early age at onset and an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Except for these features, the clinical characteristics of patients with MODY are similar to those with the more common late-onset form(s) of NIDDM. Previously we observed tight linkage between DNA polymorphisms in the glucokinase gene on the short arm of chromosome 7 and NIDDM in a cohort of sixteen French families having MODY. Glucokinase is an enzyme that catalyses the formation of glucose-6-phosphate from glucose and may be involved in the regulation of insulin secretion and integration of hepatic intermediary metabolism. Because the glucokinase gene was a candidate for the site of the genetic lesion in these families, we scanned this gene for mutations. Here we report the identification of a nonsense mutation in the gene encoding glucokinase and its linkage with early-onset diabetes in one family. To our knowledge, this result is the first evidence implicating a mutation in a gene involved in glucose metabolism in the pathogenesis of NIDDM.
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP1) facilitates DNA repair by binding to DNA breaks and attracting DNA repair proteins to the site of damage. Nevertheless, PARP1-/- mice are viable, fertile and do not develop early onset tumours. Here, we show that PARP inhibitors trigger gamma-H2AX and RAD51 foci formation. We propose that, in the absence of PARP1, spontaneous single-strand breaks collapse replication forks and trigger homologous recombination for repair. Furthermore, we show that BRCA2-deficient cells, as a result of their deficiency in homologous recombination, are acutely sensitive to PARP inhibitors, presumably because resultant collapsed replication forks are no longer repaired. Thus, PARP1 activity is essential in homologous recombination-deficient BRCA2 mutant cells. We exploit this requirement in order to kill BRCA2-deficient tumours by PARP inhibition alone. Treatment with PARP inhibitors is likely to be highly tumour specific, because only the tumours (which are BRCA2-/-) in BRCA2+/- patients are defective in homologous recombination. The use of an inhibitor of a DNA repair enzyme alone to selectively kill a tumour, in the absence of an exogenous DNA-damaging agent, represents a new concept in cancer treatment.
A biosensor has been developed based on induced wavelength shifts in the Fabry-Perot fringes in the visible-light reflection spectrum of appropriately derivatized thin films of porous silicon semiconductors. Binding of molecules induced changes in the refractive index of the porous silicon. The validity and sensitivity of the system are demonstrated for small organic molecules (biotin and digoxigenin), 16-nucleotide DNA oligomers, and proteins (streptavidin and antibodies) at pico- and femtomolar analyte concentrations. The sensor is also highly effective for detecting single and multilayered molecular assemblies.
The enzyme alpha1,3-galactosyltransferase (alpha1,3GT or GGTA1) synthesizes alpha1,3-galactose (alpha1,3Gal) epitopes (Galalpha1,3Galbeta1,4GlcNAc-R), which are the major xenoantigens causing hyperacute rejection in pig-to-human xenotransplantation. Complete removal of alpha1,3Gal from pig organs is the critical step toward the success of xenotransplantation. We reported earlier the targeted disruption of one allele of the alpha1,3GT gene in cloned pigs. A selection procedure based on a bacterial toxin was used to select for cells in which the second allele of the gene was knocked out. Sequencing analysis demonstrated that knockout of the second allele of the alpha1,3GT gene was caused by a T-to-G single point mutation at the second base of exon 9, which resulted in inactivation of the alpha1,3GT protein. Four healthy alpha1,3GT double-knockout female piglets were produced by three consecutive rounds of cloning. The piglets carrying a point mutation in the alpha1,3GT gene hold significant value, as they would allow production of alpha1,3Gal-deficient pigs free of antibiotic-resistance genes and thus have the potential to make a safer product for human use.
Antigen-specific T lymphocytes appear to recognize foreign antigens in the form of peptide fragments presented within the antigen-binding groove of class I or class II molecules encoded by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Alloreactive T cells also show specificity for MHC molecules, and various reports suggest that residues of the MHC molecules constitute at least part of the ligand to which alloreactive T-cell receptors bind. The X-ray crystal structure of the human MHC class I molecule, HLA-A2, has provided evidence to strengthen the argument that MHC-bound self-peptide might also contribute to such recognition. We now provide direct evidence for this, showing that at least some alloreactive cytotoxic T lymphocyte clones recognize peptide fragments derived from cytoplasmic proteins. We reasoned that if self-peptides were involved in allorecognition, then the sequence of some of these peptides could vary between species, resulting in species-restricted distribution of the relevant ligand(s). Several alloreactive cytotoxic T lymphocyte clones specific for H-2Kb, expressed by the murine cell line EL4, did not lyse a human-cell transfectant expressing the H-2Kb molecule (Jurkat-Kb cells). However, these clones were able to lyse Jurkat-Kb cells sensitized by preincubation with an EL4 cytoplasmic extract cleaved by cyanogen bromide. The sensitizing activity from this extract was destroyed by protease and appeared to be due to a peptide consisting of 10 to 15 amino acids.
Adaptation to seasonal change is a crucial component of an organism's survival strategy. To monitor seasonal variation, organisms have developed the capacity to measure day length (photoperiodism). Day-length assessment involves the photoperiodic control of flowering in Arabidopsis thaliana, whereby the coincidence of light and high expression of CONSTANS (CO) induces the expression of FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT), leading to flowering in long-day conditions. Although controlling CO expression is clearly a key step in day-length discrimination, the mechanism that generates day-length-dependent CO expression remains unknown. Here we show that the clock-controlled FLAVIN-BINDING, KELCH REPEAT, F-BOX (FKF1) protein has an essential role in generating the diurnal CO peak and that this function is dependent on light. We show that a recombinant FKF1 LIGHT, OXYGEN OR VOLTAGE (LOV) domain binds the chromophore flavin mononucleotide and undergoes light-induced photochemistry, indicating that FKF1 may function as a photoperiodic blue-light receptor. It is likely that the circadian control of FKF1 expression and the light regulation of FKF1 function coincide to control the daytime CO waveform precisely, which in turn is crucial for day-length discrimination by Arabidopsis.
Inhibitors of the conversion of angiotensinogen to the vasoconstrictor angiotensin II have considerable value as antihypertensive agents. For example, captopril and enalapril are clinically useful as inhibitors of angiotensin-converting enzyme. This has encouraged intense activity in the development of inhibitors of kidney renin, which is a very specific aspartic proteinase catalysing the first and rate limiting step in the conversion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin II. The most effective inhibitors such as H-142 and L-363,564 have used non-hydrolysable analogues of the proposed transition state, and partial sequences of angiotensinogen (Table 1). H-142 is effective in lowering blood pressure in humans but has no significant effect on other aspartic proteinases such as pepsin in the human body (Table 1). At present there are no crystal structures available for human or mouse renins although three-dimensional models demonstrate close structural similarity to other spartic proteinases. We have therefore determined by X-ray analysis the three-dimensional structures of H-142 and L-363,564 complexed with the aspartic proteinase endothiapepsin, which binds these inhibitors with affinities not greatly different from those measured against human renin (Table 1). The structures of these complexes and of that between endothiapepsin and the general aspartic proteinase inhibitor, H-256 (Table 1) define the common hydrogen bonding schemes that allow subtle differences in side-chain orientations and in the positions of the transition state analogues with respect to the active-site aspartates.
Riboswitches are metabolite-sensing RNAs, typically located in the non-coding portions of messenger RNAs, that control the synthesis of metabolite-related proteins. Here we describe a 2.05 angstroms crystal structure of a riboswitch domain from the Escherichia coli thiM mRNA that responds to the coenzyme thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP). TPP is an active form of vitamin B1, an essential participant in many protein-catalysed reactions. Organisms from all three domains of life, including bacteria, plants and fungi, use TPP-sensing riboswitches to control genes responsible for importing or synthesizing thiamine and its phosphorylated derivatives, making this riboswitch class the most widely distributed member of the metabolite-sensing RNA regulatory system. The structure reveals a complex folded RNA in which one subdomain forms an intercalation pocket for the 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine moiety of TPP, whereas another subdomain forms a wider pocket that uses bivalent metal ions and water molecules to make bridging contacts to the pyrophosphate moiety of the ligand. The two pockets are positioned to function as a molecular measuring device that recognizes TPP in an extended conformation. The central thiazole moiety is not recognized by the RNA, which explains why the antimicrobial compound pyrithiamine pyrophosphate targets this riboswitch and downregulates the expression of thiamine metabolic genes. Both the natural ligand and its drug-like analogue stabilize secondary and tertiary structure elements that are harnessed by the riboswitch to modulate the synthesis of the proteins coded by the mRNA. In addition, this structure provides insight into how folded RNAs can form precision binding pockets that rival those formed by protein genetic factors.
Heterogeneous nuclear RNAs and specific nuclear proteins form heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein complexes (hnRNPs), one of the most abundant components of the nucleus. In mitosis, as the nuclear envelope breaks down, hnRNPs disperse throughout the cell. At the end of mitosis, hnRNPs dissociate and their proteins are transported into the daughter cell nuclei separately. Some are transported immediately (early group), while others are transported later (late group). Transport of the late group appears to require transcription by RNA polymerase II, in that inhibitors of this polymerase cause the late proteins to remain in the cytoplasm. Thus, there are two modes, transcription-dependent and transcription-independent, for the transport of nuclear proteins.
The ability to respond to light is crucial for most organisms. BLUF is a recently identified photoreceptor protein domain that senses blue light using a FAD chromophore. BLUF domains are present in various proteins from the Bacteria, Euglenozoa and Fungi. Although structures of single-domain BLUF proteins have been determined, none are available for a BLUF protein containing a functional output domain; the mechanism of light activation in this new class of photoreceptors has thus remained poorly understood. Here we report the biochemical, structural and mechanistic characterization of a full-length, active photoreceptor, BlrP1 (also known as KPN_01598), from Klebsiella pneumoniae. BlrP1 consists of a BLUF sensor domain and a phosphodiesterase EAL output domain which hydrolyses cyclic dimeric GMP (c-di-GMP). This ubiquitous second messenger controls motility, biofilm formation, virulence and antibiotic resistance in the Bacteria. Crystal structures of BlrP1 complexed with its substrate and metal ions involved in catalysis or in enzyme inhibition provide a detailed understanding of the mechanism of the EAL-domain c-di-GMP phosphodiesterases. These structures also sketch out a path of light activation of the phosphodiesterase output activity. Photon absorption by the BLUF domain of one subunit of the antiparallel BlrP1 homodimer activates the EAL domain of the second subunit through allosteric communication transmitted through conserved domain-domain interfaces.
Piwi-associated RNAs (piRNAs), a specific class of 24- to 30-nucleotide-long RNAs produced by the Piwi-type of Argonaute proteins, have a specific germline function in repressing transposable elements. This repression is thought to involve heterochromatin formation and transcriptional and post-transcriptional silencing. The piRNA pathway has other essential functions in germline stem cell maintenance and in maintaining germline DNA integrity. Here we uncover an unexpected function of the piRNA pathway in the decay of maternal messenger RNAs and in translational repression in the early embryo. A subset of maternal mRNAs is degraded in the embryo at the maternal-to-zygotic transition. In Drosophila, maternal mRNA degradation depends on the RNA-binding protein Smaug and the deadenylase CCR4, as well as the zygotic expression of a microRNA cluster. Using mRNA encoding the embryonic posterior morphogen Nanos (Nos) as a paradigm to study maternal mRNA decay, we found that CCR4-mediated deadenylation of nos depends on components of the piRNA pathway including piRNAs complementary to a specific region in the nos 3' untranslated region. Reduced deadenylation when piRNA-induced regulation is impaired correlates with nos mRNA stabilization and translational derepression in the embryo, resulting in head development defects. Aubergine, one of the Argonaute proteins in the piRNA pathway, is present in a complex with Smaug, CCR4, nos mRNA and piRNAs that target the nos 3' untranslated region, in the bulk of the embryo. We propose that piRNAs and their associated proteins act together with Smaug to recruit the CCR4 deadenylation complex to specific mRNAs, thus promoting their decay. Because the piRNAs involved in this regulation are produced from transposable elements, this identifies a direct developmental function for transposable elements in the regulation of gene expression.
The worldwide prevalence of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is estimated to be approaching 200 million people. Current therapy relies upon a combination of pegylated interferon-alpha and ribavirin, a poorly tolerated regimen typically associated with less than 50% sustained virological response rate in those infected with genotype 1 virus. The development of direct-acting antiviral agents to treat HCV has focused predominantly on inhibitors of the viral enzymes NS3 protease and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase NS5B. Here we describe the profile of BMS-790052, a small molecule inhibitor of the HCV NS5A protein that exhibits picomolar half-maximum effective concentrations (EC(50)) towards replicons expressing a broad range of HCV genotypes and the JFH-1 genotype 2a infectious virus in cell culture. In a phase I clinical trial in patients chronically infected with HCV, administration of a single 100-mg dose of BMS-790052 was associated with a 3.3 log(10) reduction in mean viral load measured 24 h post-dose that was sustained for an additional 120 h in two patients infected with genotype 1b virus. Genotypic analysis of samples taken at baseline, 24 and 144 h post-dose revealed that the major HCV variants observed had substitutions at amino-acid positions identified using the in vitro replicon system. These results provide the first clinical validation of an inhibitor of HCV NS5A, a protein with no known enzymatic function, as an approach to the suppression of virus replication that offers potential as part of a therapeutic regimen based on combinations of HCV inhibitors.
Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) mediates a wide range of immune and inflammatory responses. The active cytokine is generated by proteolytic cleavage of an inactive precursor. A complementary DNA encoding a protease that carries out this cleavage has been cloned. Recombinant expression in COS-7 cells enabled the cells to process precursor IL-1 beta to the mature form. Sequence analysis indicated that the enzyme itself may undergo proteolytic processing. The gene encoding the protease was mapped to chromosomal band 11q23, a site frequently involved in rearrangement in human cancers.
Changes in intracellular free Ca2+ are involved in the transmembrane signalling of different cells, including lymphocytes. Since calmodulin (CaM) is a primary receptor for Ca2+ (ref. 4), it may mediate the activation of crucial enzymes after antigen-induced increases in cytosolic Ca2+. Using a biotinylated-CaM (Bio-CaM) detection procedure to identify such proteins, we found that a peptide of relative molecular mass 59,000 (59K) was the predominant soluble CaM-binding protein (CaM-BP) in T cells and B lymphocytes from murine spleen; immunoblotting experiments identified it as a subunit of the CaM-dependent phosphatase, 'calcineurin' (CN). Smaller amounts of larger CaM-BPs, thought to be cytoskeletal-binding proteins, were also detected. CaM-BPs were expressed differentially, with B lymphocytes having four times more of the CN-like protein than T lymphocytes, while in thymocytes, a 65K polypeptide was the major CaM-BP. However, limited proteolysis analysis suggested that this thymus-specific peptide may be a precursor of CN. These data suggest that Ca2+-stimulated protein dephosphorylation may be an important and highly regulated function in lymphoid cells.
High mutation rates have driven RNA viruses to shorten their genomes to the minimum possible size. Mammalian (+)-strand RNA viruses and retroviruses have responded by reducing the number of cis-acting regulatory elements, a constraint that has led to the emergence of the polyprotein. Poliovirus is a (+)-stranded picornavirus whose polyprotein, encoded by an open reading frame spanning most of the viral RNA, is processed by virus-encoded proteinases. Despite their genetic austerity, picornaviruses have retained long 5' untranslated regions, which harbour cis-acting elements that promote initiation of translation independently of the uncapped 5' end of the viral messenger RNA. These elements are termed 'internal ribosomal entry sites' and are formed from highly structured RNA segments of at least 400 nucleotides. How these elements function is not known, but special RNA-binding proteins may be involved. The ribosome or its 40S subunit probably binds at or near a YnXmAUG motif (where Y is a pyrimidine and X is a purine) at the 3' border of the internal ribosomal entry site, which either provides the initiating codon or enables the ribosome to translocate to one downstream (E.W. et al., submitted). Initiation from most eukaryotic messenger RNAs usually occurs by ribosomal recognition of the 5' and subsequent scanning to the AUG codon. Here we describe a genetic strategy for the dissection of polyproteins which proves that an internal ribosomal entry site element can initiate translation independently of the 5' end.
The removal of intervening sequences from premessenger RNA is essential for the expression of most eukaryotic genes. The spliceosome ribonucleoprotein complex catalyses intron removal by two sequential phosphotransesterification reactions, but the catalytic mechanisms are unknown. It has been proposed that two divalent metal ions may mediate catalysis of both reaction steps, activating the 2'- or 3'-hydroxyl groups for nucleophilic attack and stabilizing the 3'-oxyanion leaving groups by direct coordination. Here we show that in splicing reactions with a precursor RNA containing a 3'-sulphur substitution at the 5' splice site, interaction between metal ion and leaving group is essential for catalysis of the first reaction step. This establishes that the spliceosome is a metalloenzyme and demonstrates a direct parallel with the catalytic strategy used by the self-splicing group I intron from Tetrahymena. In contrast, 3'-sulphur substitution at the 3' splice site provides no evidence for a metal ion-leaving group interaction in the second reaction step, suggesting that the two steps of splicing proceed by different catalytic mechanisms and therefore in distinct active sites.
Little is known of how plant disease resistance (R) proteins recognize pathogens and activate plant defenses. Rcr3 is specifically required for the function of Cf-2, a Lycopersicon pimpinellifolium gene bred into cultivated tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) for resistance to Cladosporium fulvum. Rcr3 encodes a secreted papain-like cysteine endoprotease. Genetic analysis shows Rcr3 is allelic to the L. pimpinellifolium Ne gene, which suppresses the Cf-2-dependent autonecrosis conditioned by its L. esculentum allele, ne (necrosis). Rcr3 alleles from these two species encode proteins that differ by only seven amino acids. Possible roles of Rcr3 in Cf-2-dependent defense and autonecrosis are discussed.
Transcriptional regulation of eukaryotic genes by cyclic AMP requires a cAMP-dependent protein kinase (A kinase). Two hypotheses have been proposed to explain how the holoenzyme of the A kinase induces transcription. The regulatory subunits of the A kinase, which bind cAMP and DNA, and have amino-acid homology with the Escherichia coli catabolite activator protein could directly stimulate gene expression. Alternatively, phosphorylation by the catalytic subunits could induce transcription by activating proteins involved in gene transcription. To distinguish between these models, we microinjected purified preparations of the catalytic and regulatory subunits of A kinase into tissue culture cells and monitored expression of a stably integrated fusion gene containing a cAMP-responsive human promoter fused to a bacterial reporter gene, or of the endogenous c-fos gene. The catalytic subunit stimulated expression of these genes, whereas the regulatory subunit did not. These results indicate that the catalytic subunit of A kinase is sufficient to induce expression of two cAMP-responsive genes, without increasing levels of cAMP.
Many anti-infectives inhibit the synthesis of bacterial proteins, but none selectively inhibits their degradation. Most anti-infectives kill replicating pathogens, but few preferentially kill pathogens that have been forced into a non-replicating state by conditions in the host. To explore these alternative approaches we sought selective inhibitors of the proteasome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Given that the proteasome structure is extensively conserved, it is not surprising that inhibitors of all chemical classes tested have blocked both eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteasomes, and no inhibitor has proved substantially more potent on proteasomes of pathogens than of their hosts. Here we show that certain oxathiazol-2-one compounds kill non-replicating M. tuberculosis and act as selective suicide-substrate inhibitors of the M. tuberculosis proteasome by cyclocarbonylating its active site threonine. Major conformational changes protect the inhibitor-enzyme intermediate from hydrolysis, allowing formation of an oxazolidin-2-one and preventing regeneration of active protease. Residues outside the active site whose hydrogen bonds stabilize the critical loop before and after it moves are extensively non-conserved. This may account for the ability of oxathiazol-2-one compounds to inhibit the mycobacterial proteasome potently and irreversibly while largely sparing the human homologue.
Transcription and pre-mRNA splicing are tightly coupled gene expression events in eukaryotic cells. An interaction between the carboxy-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase (Pol) II and components of the splicing machinery is postulated to mediate this coupling. Here, we show that splicing factors function directly to promote transcriptional elongation, demonstrating that transcription is more intimately coupled to splicing than previously thought. The spliceosomal U small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) interact with human transcription elongation factor TAT-SF1 (refs 6,7,8,9) and strongly stimulate polymerase elongation when directed to an intron-free human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) template. This effect is likely to be mediated through the binding of TAT-SF1 to elongation factor P-TEFb, a proposed component of the transcription elongation complex. Inclusion of splicing signals in the nascent transcript further stimulates transcription, supporting the notion that the recruitment of U snRNPs near the elongating polymerase is important for transcription. Because the TAT-SF1-U snRNP complex also stimulates splicing in vitro, it may serve as a dual-function factor to couple transcription and splicing and to facilitate their reciprocal activation.
Males with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (XSCID) have defects in the common cytokine receptor gamma chain (gamma c) gene that encodes a shared, essential component of the receptors of interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15. The Janus family tyrosine kinase Jak3 is the only signaling molecule known to be associated with gamma c, so it was hypothesized that defects in Jak3 might cause an XSCID-like phenotype. A girl with immunological features indistinguishable from those of XSCID was therefore selected for analysis. An Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed cell line derived from her lymphocytes had normal gamma c expression but lacked Jak3 protein and had greatly diminished Jak3 messenger RNA. Sequencing revealed a different mutation on each allele: a single nucleotide insertion resulting in a frame shift and premature termination in the Jak3 JH4 domain and a nonsense mutation in the Jak3 JH2 domain. The lack of Jak3 expression correlated with impaired B cell signaling, as demonstrated by the inability of IL-4 to activate Stat6 in the EBV-transformed cell line from the patient. These observations indicate that the functions of gamma c are dependent on Jak3 and that Jak3 is essential for lymphoid development and signaling.
The Na+/K+ pump, a P-type ion-motive ATPase, exports three sodium ions and then imports two potassium ions in each transport cycle. Ions on one side of the membrane bind to sites within the protein and become temporarily occluded (trapped within the protein) before being released to the other side, but details of these occlusion and de-occlusion transitions remain obscure for all P-type ATPases. If it is deprived of potassium ions, the Na+/K+ pump is restricted to sodium translocation steps, at least one involving charge movement through the membrane's electric fields. Changes in membrane potential alter the rate of such electrogenic reactions and so shift the distribution of enzyme conformations. Here we use high-speed voltage jumps to initiate this redistribution and show that the resulting pre-steady-state charge movements relax in three identifiable phases, apparently reflecting de-occlusion and release of the three sodium ions. Reciprocal relationships among the sizes of these three charge components show that the three sodium ions are de-occluded and released to the extracellular solution one at a time, in a strict order.
The 5'-->3' exoribonucleases (XRNs) comprise a large family of conserved enzymes in eukaryotes with crucial functions in RNA metabolism and RNA interference. XRN2, or Rat1 in yeast, functions primarily in the nucleus and also has an important role in transcription termination by RNA polymerase II (refs 7-14). Rat1 exoribonuclease activity is stimulated by the protein Rai1 (refs 15, 16). Here we report the crystal structure at 2.2 A resolution of Schizosaccharomyces pombe Rat1 in complex with Rai1, as well as the structures of Rai1 and its murine homologue Dom3Z alone at 2.0 A resolution. The structures reveal the molecular mechanism for the activation of Rat1 by Rai1 and for the exclusive exoribonuclease activity of Rat1. Biochemical studies confirm these observations, and show that Rai1 allows Rat1 to degrade RNAs with stable secondary structure more effectively. There are large differences in the active site landscape of Rat1 compared to related and PIN (PilT N terminus) domain-containing nucleases. Unexpectedly, we identified a large pocket in Rai1 and Dom3Z that contains highly conserved residues, including three acidic side chains that coordinate a divalent cation. Mutagenesis and biochemical studies demonstrate that Rai1 possesses pyrophosphohydrolase activity towards 5' triphosphorylated RNA. Such an activity is important for messenger RNA degradation in bacteria, but this is, to our knowledge, the first demonstration of this activity in eukaryotes and suggests that Rai1/Dom3Z may have additional important functions in RNA metabolism.
The variant form of the human syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum (XPV) is caused by a deficiency in DNA polymerase eta (Poleta), a DNA polymerase that enables replication through ultraviolet-induced pyrimidine dimers. Here we report high-resolution crystal structures of human Poleta at four consecutive steps during DNA synthesis through cis-syn cyclobutane thymine dimers. Poleta acts like a 'molecular splint' to stabilize damaged DNA in a normal B-form conformation. An enlarged active site accommodates the thymine dimer with excellent stereochemistry for two-metal ion catalysis. Two residues conserved among Poleta orthologues form specific hydrogen bonds with the lesion and the incoming nucleotide to assist translesion synthesis. On the basis of the structures, eight Poleta missense mutations causing XPV can be rationalized as undermining the molecular splint or perturbing the active-site alignment. The structures also provide an insight into the role of Poleta in replicating through D loop and DNA fragile sites.
Calpains are non-lysosomal calcium-dependent cysteine proteinases that selectively cleave proteins in response to calcium signals and thereby control cellular functions such as cytoskeletal remodelling, cell cycle progression, gene expression and apoptotic cell death. In mammals, the two best-characterized members of the calpain family, calpain 1 and calpain 2 (micro-calpain and m-calpain, respectively), are ubiquitously expressed. The activity of calpains is tightly controlled by the endogenous inhibitor calpastatin, which is an intrinsically unstructured protein capable of reversibly binding and inhibiting four molecules of calpain, but only in the presence of calcium. To date, the mechanism of inhibition by calpastatin and the basis for its absolute specificity have remained speculative. It was not clear how this unstructured protein inhibits calpains without being cleaved itself, nor was it known how calcium induced changes that facilitated the binding of calpastatin to calpain. Here we report the 2.4-A-resolution crystal structure of the calcium-bound calpain 2 heterodimer bound by one of the four inhibitory domains of calpastatin. Calpastatin is seen to inhibit calpain by occupying both sides of the active site cleft. Although the inhibitor passes through the active site cleft it escapes cleavage in a novel manner by looping out and around the active site cysteine. The inhibitory domain of calpastatin recognizes multiple lower affinity sites present only in the calcium-bound form of the enzyme, resulting in an interaction that is tight, specific and calcium dependent. This crystal structure, and that of a related complex, also reveal the conformational changes that calpain undergoes on binding calcium, which include opening of the active site cleft and movement of the domains relative to each other to produce a more compact enzyme.
The requirement of protein and messenger RNA synthesis for long-term memory suggests that neural activity induced by learning initiates a cascade of gene expression. Here we use differential screening to identify five immediate-early genes induced by neuronal activity. One of these is tissue-plasminogen activator (tPA), an extracellular serine protease, which is induced with different spatial patterns in the brain by three activity-dependent events: (1) convulsive seizure increases expression of tPA in the whole brain; (2) stimulation of the perforant path produces an epileptiform after-discharge that ultimately leads to kindling increases the levels of tPA throughout the hippocampus bilaterally; and (3) brief high-frequency stimulation of the perforant path that produces long-term potentiation (LTP) causes an NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor-mediated increase in the levels of tPA mRNA which is restricted to the granule cells of the ipsilateral dentate gyrus. As release of tPA is correlated with morphological differentiation, the increased expression of tPA may play a role in the structural changes that accompany activity-dependent plasticity.
The nucleotide sequence of the genome of HTLV-III, the infectious agent etiologically associated with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome, predicts a small open reading frame, termed sor, located between the pol and env genes. A DNA segment containing 82 percent of the sor region was inserted into a prokaryotic expression vector, pJL6, to determine whether sor encodes a viral protein and to gain some insight into its possible function. The bacterially synthesized sor protein reacted with sera from individuals infected with HTLV-III, indicating that sor is expressed as a protein product or products that are immunogenic in vivo. Antibodies to the purified, bacterially synthesized sor protein were found to react specifically with the same protein and also with a protein of molecular weight 23,000 (23K) in HTLV-III-infected H9 cell extracts. The 23K protein comigrated with a protein immunoprecipitated by the serum of a hemophiliac patient with antibodies to HTLV-III, suggesting that this protein is probably the sor gene product.
Several complementary DNAs (cDNAs) coding for sphingolipid activator protein-2 (SAP-2) were isolated from a lambda gt-11 human hepatoma library by means of polyclonal antibodies. The nucleotide sequence of the largest cDNA was colinear with the derived amino acid sequence of SAP-2 and with the nucleotide sequence of the cDNA coding for the 70-kilodalton precursor of SAP-1 (SAP precursor cDNA). The coding sequence for mature SAP-2 was located 3' to that coding for SAP-1 in the SAP precursor cDNA. Both SAP-1 and SAP-2 appeared to be derived by proteolytic processing from a common precursor that is coded by a genetic locus on human chromosome 10. Two other domains similar to SAP-1 and SAP-2 were also identified in SAP precursor protein. Each of the four domains was approximately 80 amino acid residues long, had nearly identical placement of cysteine residues, potential glycosylation sites, and proline residues. Each domain also contained internal amino acid sequences capable of forming amphipathic helices separated by helix breakers to give a cylindrical hydrophobic domain that is probably stabilized by disulfide bridges. Protein immunoblotting experiments indicated that SAP precursor protein (70 kilodaltons) as well as immunoreactive SAP-like proteins of intermediate sizes (65, 50, and 31 kilodaltons) are present in most human tissues.
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is the nitric oxide synthase isoform responsible for maintaining systemic blood pressure, vascular remodelling and angiogenesis. eNOS is phosphorylated in response to various forms of cellular stimulation, but the role of phosphorylation in the regulation of nitric oxide (NO) production and the kinase(s) responsible are not known. Here we show that the serine/threonine protein kinase Akt (protein kinase B) can directly phosphorylate eNOS on serine 1179 and activate the enzyme, leading to NO production, whereas mutant eNOS (S1179A) is resistant to phosphorylation and activation by Akt. Moreover, using adenovirus-mediated gene transfer, activated Akt increases basal NO release from endothelial cells, and activation-deficient Akt attenuates NO production stimulated by vascular endothelial growth factor. Thus, eNOS is a newly described Akt substrate linking signal transduction by Akt to the release of the gaseous second messenger NO.
Kinesins are microtubule-based motor proteins that power intracellular transport. Most kinesin motors, exemplified by Kinesin-1, move towards the microtubule plus end, and the structural changes that govern this directional preference have been described. By contrast, the nature and timing of the structural changes underlying the minus-end-directed motility of Kinesin-14 motors (such as Drosophila Ncd) are less well understood. Using cryo-electron microscopy, here we demonstrate that a coiled-coil mechanical element of microtubule-bound Ncd rotates approximately 70 degrees towards the minus end upon ATP binding. Extending or shortening this coiled coil increases or decreases velocity, respectively, without affecting ATPase activity. An unusual Ncd mutant that lacks directional preference shows unstable nucleotide-dependent conformations of its coiled coil, underscoring the role of this mechanical element in motility. These results show that the force-producing conformational change in Ncd occurs on ATP binding, as in other kinesins, but involves the swing of a lever-arm mechanical element similar to that described for myosins.
The transverse electrical impedance of thin lipid films separating two aqueous saline solutions containing a small concentration of antibodies or enzymes decreases markedly and reversibly after immunological and enzymatic reactions involving such protein molecules, which presumably are adsorbed to the lipid-water interface.
Lactacystin is a Streptomyces metabolite that inhibits cell cycle progression and induces neurite outgrowth in a murine neuroblastoma cell line. Tritium-labeled lactacystin was used to identify the 20S proteasome as its specific cellular target. Three distinct peptidase activities of this enzyme complex (trypsin-like, chymotrypsin-like, and peptidylglutamyl-peptide hydrolyzing activities) were inhibited by lactacystin, the first two irreversibly and all at different rates. None of five other proteases were inhibited, and the ability of lactacystin analogs to inhibit cell cycle progression and induce neurite outgrowth correlated with their ability to inhibit the proteasome. Lactacystin appears to modify covalently the highly conserved amino-terminal threonine of the mammalian proteasome subunit X (also called MB1), a close homolog of the LMP7 proteasome subunit encoded by the major histocompatibility complex. This threonine residue may therefore have a catalytic role, and subunit X/MB1 may be a core component of an amino-terminal-threonine protease activity of the proteasome.
The recA protein catalyses the ATP-driven homologous pairing and strand exchange of DNA molecules. It is an allosteric enzyme: the ATPase activity is DNA-dependent, and ATP-bound recA protein has a high affinity for DNA, whereas the ADP-bound form has a low affinity. In the absence of ATP hydrolysis, recA protein can still promote homologous pairing, apparently through the formation of a triple-stranded intermediate. The exact role of ATP hydrolysis is not clear, but it presumably drives the triplex intermediate towards products. Here we determine the position of bound ADP diffused into the recA crystal. We show that only the phosphates are bound in the same way as in other NTPases containing the G/AXXXXGKT/S motif. We propose that recA protein may change its conformation upon ATP hydrolysis in a manner analogous to one such protein, the p21 protein from the ras oncogene. A model is presented to account for the allosteric stimulation of DNA binding by ATP. The mechanism by which nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis is coupled to the binding of another ligand in recA protein and p21 may be typical of the large class of NTPases containing this conserved motif.
Circadian rhythms are controlled by endogenous oscillators or clocks. These clocks exhibit a persistent period of approximately 24 h in constant conditions, a specific phase relationship to a periodic cue (zeitgeber) in the external environment, and plasticity in that the phase of the clock may be altered in response to a phase change in the zeitgeber. Although many processes exhibit circadian rhythmicity, the nature and location of endogenous clocks remain poorly defined. Recent evidence in vertebrates suggests that the mammalian suprachiasmatic nucleus and the avian pineal gland contain clocks that affect the rhythmicity of indoleamine metabolism. The vertebrate retina also exhibits a circadian rhythm of serotonin N-acetytransferase activity (NAT, EC 2.1.1.4), a key enzyme controlling melatonin synthesis, and of photoreceptor disk shedding. The latter process may be regulated by melatonin, and the immediate cellular events seem to be controlled locally within the eye. Although sustained oscillation and entrainment were not demonstrated, data suggesting that an ocular circadian clock influences disk shedding have been reported. We sought evidence for an ocular clock by studying retinal NAT activity in Xenopus eye cups maintained in culture and report here both sustained oscillation and entrainment of the in vitro system. The data indicate that in addition to the suprachiasmatic nucleus and pineal gland, the eye itself must be regarded as the locus of a circadian clock in vertebrates.
THE cyclins were first identified by their cell-cycle-dependent synthesis and destruction and have a key role in the control of mitosis in Xenopus embryonic cell cycles. All higher eukaryotes have at least two types of cyclins, the A- and B-type, which can be distinguished by sequence motifs and the timing of their destruction in the cell cycle. The degradation of both cyclins is required for exit from mitosis, but the activation and destruction of cyclin A occur earlier in the cell cycle than with the B-type cyclins. This suggests that cyclin A has a distinct role in cell-cycle progression. We have used an antisense oligodeoxy-nucleotide directed against cyclin A to investigate this role. Ablation of cyclin A messenger RNA in cytostatic factor/metaphase-arrested extracts of Xenopus eggs, followed by in vitro progression into interphase, resulted in the premature appearance of cyclin B-cdc2-associated H1 kinase activity and premature entry into mitosis. Although cyclin A-ablated extracts could initiate DNA synthesis during interphase, S phase was not completed before entry into mitosis. The effects of cyclin A ablation were reversed by the addition of cyclin A mRNA or cyclin A protein to the extracts.
In bacteriophage lambda, genes C and Nu3, two of the four cistrons which are essential for normal prohead formation, have overlapping nucleotide sequences. These genes are translated in the same reading frame so that the Nu3 protein is identical to the COOH-terminal one-third of the C protein. This structural relationship may provide for the functional interaction of the C and Nu3 proteins through their regions of structural homology during prohead assembly. The in-phase overlapping organisation of genes may constitute a general strategy to facilitate the mutual interaction of a pair of proteins through their common structural domains.
Simple methods have been developed for encapsulating aqueous solutions of protein within polymer membranes. Stable microcapsules 1 to 100 micro in diameter, with semipermeable membranes, can be made by depositing polymer around emulsified aqueous droplets, either by interfacial coacervation or by interfacial polycondensation. Aqueous suspensions of enzyme-loaded microcapsules act well on small-molecular substrates both in vitro and in vivo.
Apolipoprotein AI (apoAI) is a lipid-binding protein that participates in the transport of cholesterol and other lipids in the plasma. A complementary DNA clone for a protein that bound to regulatory elements of the apoAI gene was isolated. This protein, designated apoAI regulatory protein-1 (ARP-1), is a novel member of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily. ARP-1 bound to DNA as a dimer, and its dimerization domain was localized to the COOH-terminal region. ARP-1 also bound to a thyroid hormone-responsive element and to regulatory regions of the apoB, apoCIII, insulin, and ovalbumin genes. In cotransfection experiments, ARP-1 downregulated the apoAI gene. The involvement of ARP-1 in the regulation of apoAI gene expression suggests that it may participate in lipid metabolism and cholesterol homeostasis.
Globin genes are regulated in a tissue-specific and developmental stage-specific manner, with the beta-globin gene being the last to be activated in the beta-gene cluster. CACCC-nucleotide sequences, which bind multiple nuclear proteins, including ubiquitously expressed Sp1 and erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF), are among the cis-regulatory sequences critical for transcription of globin and non-globin erythroid-expressed genes. To determine the function of EKLF in vivo, we created mice deficient in EKLF by gene targeting. These embryos die of anaemia during fetal liver erythropoiesis and show the molecular and haematological features of beta-globin deficiency, found in beta-thalassaemia. Although it is expressed at all stages, EKLF is not required for yolk sac erythropoiesis, erythroid commitment or expression of other potential target genes. Its stage-specific and beta-globin-gene-specific requirement suggests that EKLF may facilitate completion of the fetal-to-adult (haemoglobin gamma to beta) switch in humans.
Tumour-necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) is a cytokine that contributes to a variety of inflammatory disease states. The protein exists as a membrane-bound precursor of relative molecular mass 26K which can be processed by a TNF-alpha-converting enzyme (TACE), to generate secreted 17K mature TNF-alpha. We have purified TACE and cloned its complementary DNA. TACE is a membrane-bound disintegrin metalloproteinase. Structural comparisons with other disintegrin-containing enzymes indicate that TACE is unique, with noteable sequence identity to MADM, an enzyme implicated in myelin degradation, and to KUZ, a Drosophila homologue of MADM important for neuronal development. The expression of recombinant TACE (rTACE) results in the production of functional enzyme that correctly processes precursor TNF-alpha to the mature form. The rTACE provides a readily available source of enzyme to help in the search for new anti-inflammatory agents that target the final processing stage of TNF-alpha production.
The phagocyte respiratory burst oxidase is a flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-dependent dehydrogenase and an electron transferase that reduces molecular oxygen to superoxide anion, a precursor of microbicidal oxidants. Several proteins required for assembly of the oxidase have been characterized, but the identity of its flavin-binding component has been unclear. Oxidase activity was reconstituted in vitro with only the purified oxidase proteins p47phox, p67phox, Rac-related guanine nucleotide (GTP)-binding proteins, and membrane-bound cytochrome b558. The reconstituted oxidase required added FAD, and FAD binding was localized to cytochrome b558. Alignment of the amino acid sequence of the beta subunit of cytochrome b558 (gp91phox) with other flavoproteins revealed similarities to the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (reduced) (NADPH)-binding domains. Thus flavocytochrome b558 is the only obligate electron transporting component of the NADPH oxidase.
Escherichia coli GlpG is an integral membrane protein that belongs to the widespread rhomboid protease family. Rhomboid proteases, like site-2 protease (S2P) and gamma-secretase, are unique in that they cleave the transmembrane domain of other membrane proteins. Here we describe the 2.1 A resolution crystal structure of the GlpG core domain. This structure contains six transmembrane segments. Residues previously shown to be involved in catalysis, including a Ser-His dyad, and several water molecules are found at the protein interior at a depth below the membrane surface. This putative active site is accessible by substrate through a large 'V-shaped' opening that faces laterally towards the lipid, but is blocked by a half-submerged loop structure. These observations indicate that, in intramembrane proteolysis, the scission of peptide bonds takes place within the hydrophobic environment of the membrane bilayer. The crystal structure also suggests a gating mechanism for GlpG that controls substrate access to its hydrophilic active site.
Methylation of CpG dinucleotides is generally associated with epigenetic silencing of transcription and is maintained through cellular division. Multiple CpG sequences are rare in mammalian genomes, but frequently occur at the transcriptional start site of active genes, with most clusters of CpGs being hypomethylated. We reported previously that the proximal region of the trefoil factor 1 (TFF1, also known as pS2) and oestrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) promoters could be partially methylated by treatment with deacetylase inhibitors, suggesting the possibility of dynamic changes in DNA methylation. Here we show that cyclical methylation and demethylation of CpG dinucleotides, with a periodicity of around 100 min, is characteristic for five selected promoters, including the oestrogen (E2)-responsive pS2 gene, in human cells. When the pS2 gene is actively transcribed, DNA methylation occurs after the cyclical occupancy of ERalpha and RNA polymerase II (polII). Moreover, we report conditions that provoke methylation cycling of the pS2 promoter in cell lines in which pS2 expression is quiescent and the proximal promoter is methylated. This coincides with a low-level re-expression of ERalpha and of pS2 transcripts.
The influenza virus neuraminidase glycoprotein is a tetramer with a box-shaped head, 100 X 100 X 60 A, attached to a slender stalk. The three-dimensional structure of neuraminidase heads shows that each monomer is composed of six topologically identical beta-sheets arranged in a propeller formation. The tetrameric enzyme has circular 4-fold symmetry stabilized in part by metal ions bound on the symmetry axis. Sugar residues are attached to four of the five potential glycosylation sequences, and in one case contribute to the interaction between subunits in the tetramer.
The characterization of genetic variation at the DNA level has generated significant advances in gene and disease mapping, and in the forensic identification of individuals. The most common method of DNA analysis, that of restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), requires microgram amounts of relatively undegraded DNA for multi-locus typing, and hundreds of nanograms for single-locus comparisons. Such DNA frequently cannot be obtained from forensic samples such as single hairs and blood stains, or from anthropological, genetic or zoological samples collected in the field. To detect polymorphic DNA sequences from single human hairs, we have used the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), in which specific short regions of a gene can be greatly amplified in vitro from as little as a single molecule of DNA. We have detected genetically variable mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences from the root region of shed, as well as freshly-plucked, single hairs; mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences have been detected in a sample from a single hair shaft. We have used three different means of DNA typing on these samples: the determination of amplified DNA fragment length differences, hybridization with allele-specific oligonucleotide probes, and direct DNA sequencing.
Protein farnesyltransferase (FTase) catalyses the attachment of a farnesyl lipid group to numerous essential signal transduction proteins, including members of the Ras superfamily. The farnesylation of Ras oncoproteins, which are associated with 30% of human cancers, is essential for their transforming activity. FTase inhibitors are currently in clinical trials for the treatment of cancer. Here we present a complete series of structures representing the major steps along the reaction coordinate of this enzyme. From these observations can be deduced the determinants of substrate specificity and an unusual mechanism in which product release requires binding of substrate, analogous to classically processive enzymes. A structural model for the transition state consistent with previous mechanistic studies was also constructed. The processive nature of the reaction suggests the structural basis for the successive addition of two prenyl groups to Rab proteins by the homologous enzyme geranylgeranyltransferase type-II. Finally, known FTase inhibitors seem to differ in their mechanism of inhibiting the enzyme.
Proteolytic activity accompanies myosin through three reprecipitations. The fact that this activity can be potentiated by very small doses of 1-adrenaline supports the view that adrenaline receptors are protein in nature and that adrenaline-like compounds exert their action through modification of the activity of enzymes.
The 2,160,837-base pair genome sequence of an isolate of Streptococcus pneumoniae, a Gram-positive pathogen that causes pneumonia, bacteremia, meningitis, and otitis media, contains 2236 predicted coding regions; of these, 1440 (64%) were assigned a biological role. Approximately 5% of the genome is composed of insertion sequences that may contribute to genome rearrangements through uptake of foreign DNA. Extracellular enzyme systems for the metabolism of polysaccharides and hexosamines provide a substantial source of carbon and nitrogen for S. pneumoniae and also damage host tissues and facilitate colonization. A motif identified within the signal peptide of proteins is potentially involved in targeting these proteins to the cell surface of low-guanine/cytosine (GC) Gram-positive species. Several surface-exposed proteins that may serve as potential vaccine candidates were identified. Comparative genome hybridization with DNA arrays revealed strain differences in S. pneumoniae that could contribute to differences in virulence and antigenicity.
Rational design of enzymes is a stringent test of our understanding of protein chemistry and has numerous potential applications. Here, we present and experimentally validate the computational design of enzyme activity in proteins of known structure. We have predicted mutations that introduce triose phosphate isomerase activity into ribose-binding protein, a receptor that normally lacks enzyme activity. The resulting designs contain 18 to 22 mutations, exhibit 10(5)- to 10(6)-fold rate enhancements over the uncatalyzed reaction, and are biologically active, in that they support the growth of Escherichia coli under gluconeogenic conditions. The inherent generality of the design method suggests that many enzymes can be designed by this approach.
Cleland and Kreevoy recently advanced the idea that a special type of hydrogen bond (H-bond), termed a low-barrier hydrogen bond (LBHB), may account for the "missing" transition state stabilization underlying the catalytic power of many enzymes, and Frey et al. have proposed that the H-bond between aspartic acid 102 and histidine 57 in the catalytic triad of serine proteases is an example of a catalytically important LBHB. Experimental facts are here considered regarding the aspartic acid-histidine and cis-urocanic H-bonds that are inconsistent with fundamental tenets of the LBHB hypothesis. The inconsistencies between theory and experiment in these paradigm systems cast doubt on the existence of LBHBs, as currently defined, within enzyme active sites.
The plant hormone auxin is transported in a polar manner along the shoot-root axis, which requires efflux carriers such as PIN1. Asymmetric localization of PIN1 develops from a random distribution in Arabidopsis early embryogenesis. Coordinated polar localization of PIN1 is defective in gnom embryos. GNOM is a membrane-associated guanine-nucleotide exchange factor on ADP-ribosylation factor G protein (ARF GEF). Thus, GNOM-dependent vesicle trafficking may establish cell polarity, resulting in polar auxin transport.
Deficiency of ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC; EC 2.1.3.3), a hepatic mitochondrial enzyme involved in the detoxification of ammonia, is a severe inborn error of metabolism. It is an X-linked disorder which results characteristically in ammonia intoxication, protein intolerance and mental retardation. Early death of affected hemizygous male infants is common, while clinical manifestations in heterozygous females are variable due to random X-chromosome inactivation. Prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis has not been feasible because OTC is not expressed in amniocytes and because no unusual metabolites can be detected in amniotic fluid. Fetal liver biopsy has been performed for some families at risk, but the dangers inherent in this procedure severely limit its usefulness. In this report, we describe the use of a nearly full-length cloned human cDNA to begin to characterize normal and mutant human OTC genes. One of 15 affected males was found to have a partial deletion of the OTC gene. Two distinct restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) were identified at the OTC locus using the restriction endonuclease MspI; 69% of women tested were heterozygous for one or both polymorphisms. Identification of these common polymorphisms makes it possible to offer prenatal diagnosis to a large fraction of obligate carriers and to provide information on carrier status to some females at risk.
Since the discovery of insulin nearly 70 years ago, there has been no problem more fundamental to diabetes research than understanding how insulin works at the cellular level. Insulin binds to the alpha subunit of the insulin receptor which activates the tyrosine kinase in the beta subunit, but the molecular events linking the receptor kinase to insulin-sensitive enzymes and transport processes are unknown. Our discovery that insulin stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of a protein of relative molecular mass between 165,000 and 185,000, collectively called pp185, showed that the insulin receptor kinase has specific cellular substrates. The pp185 is a minor cytoplasmic phosphoprotein found in most cells and tissues; its phosphorylation is decreased in cells expressing mutant receptors defective in signalling. We have now cloned IRS-1, which encodes a component of the pp185 band. IRS-1 contains over ten potential tyrosine phosphorylation sites, six of which are in Tyr-Met-X-Met motifs. During insulin stimulation, the IRS-1 protein undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation and binds phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, suggesting that IRS-1 acts as a multisite 'docking' protein to bind signal-transducing molecules containing Src-homology 2 and Src-homology-3 domains. Thus IRS-1 may link the insulin receptor kinase and enzymes regulating cellular growth and metabolism.
DNA lesions can often block DNA replication, so cells possess specialized low-fidelity, and often error-prone, DNA polymerases that can bypass such lesions and promote replication of damaged DNA. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae RAD30 and human hRAD30A encode Pol eta, which bypasses a cis-syn thymine-thymine dimer efficiently and accurately. Here we show that a related human gene, hRAD30B, encodes the DNA polymerase Pol iota, which misincorporates deoxynucleotides at a high rate. To bypass damage, Pol iota specifically incorporates deoxynucleotides opposite highly distorting or non-instructional DNA lesions. This action is combined with that of DNA polymerase Pol zeta, which is essential for damage-induced mutagenesis, to complete the lesion bypass. Pol zeta is very inefficient in inserting deoxynucleotides opposite DNA lesions, but readily extends from such deoxynucleotides once they have been inserted. Thus, in a new model for mutagenic bypass of DNA lesions in eukaryotes, the two DNA polymerases act sequentially: Pol iota incorporates deoxynucleotides opposite DNA lesions, and Pol zeta functions as a mispair extender.
Stimulation of T lymphocytes results in a rapid increase in intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i) that parallels the activation of Ca2+-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMKIV), a nuclear enzyme that can phosphorylate and activate the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB). However, inactivation of CaMKIV occurs despite the sustained increase in [Ca2+]i that is required for T cell activation. A stable and stoichiometric complex of CaMKIV with protein serine-threonine phosphatase 2A (PP2A) was identified in which PP2A dephosphorylates CaMKIV and functions as a negative regulator of CaMKIV signaling. In Jurkat T cells, inhibition of PP2A activity by small t antigen enhanced activation of CREB-mediated transcription by CaMKIV. These findings reveal an intracellular signaling mechanism whereby a protein serine-threonine kinase (CaMKIV) is regulated by a tightly associated protein serine-threonine phosphatase (PP2A).
The complement system comprises a complex array of enzymes and non-enzymatic proteins that is essential for the operation of the innate as well as the adaptive immune defence. The complement system can be activated in three ways: by the classical pathway which is initiated by antibody-antigen complexes, by the alternative pathway initiated by certain structures on microbial surfaces, and by an antibody-independent pathway that is initiated by the binding of mannan-binding lectin (MBL; first described as mannan-binding protein) to carbohydrates. MBL is structurally related to the complement C1 subcomponent, C1q, and seems to activate the complement system through an associated serine protease known as MASP (ref. 4) or p100 (ref. 5), which is similar to C1r and C1s of the classical pathway. MBL binds to specific carbohydrate structures found on the surface of a range of microorganisms, including bacteria, yeasts, parasitic protozoa and viruses, and exhibits antibacterial activity through killing mediated by the terminal, lytic complement components or by promoting phagocytosis. The level of MBL in plasma is genetically determined, and deficiency is associated with frequent infections in childhood, and possibly also in adults (for review, see ref. 6). We have now identified a new MBL-associated serine protease (MASP-2) which shows a striking homology with the previously reported MASP (MASP-1) and the two C1q-associated serine proteases C1r and C1s. Thus complement activation through MBL, like the classical pathway, involves two serine proteases and may antedate the development of the specific immune system of vertebrates.
Oligonucleotides that bind to duplex DNA in a sequence-specific manner by triple helix formation offer an approach to the experimental manipulation of sequence-specific protein binding. Micromolar concentrations of pyrimidine oligodeoxyribonucleotides are shown to block recognition of double helical DNA by prokaryotic modifying enzymes and a eukaryotic transcription factor at a homopurine target site. Inhibition is sequence-specific. Oligonucleotides containing 5-methylcytosine provide substantially more efficient inhibition than oligonucleotides containing cytosine. The results have implications for gene-specific repression by oligonucleotides or their analogs.
Transcription by RNA polymerase (pol) III is under cell-cycle control, being higher in S and G2 than in G0 and early G1 phases. Many transformed cell types have elevated pol III activity, presumably to sustain sufficient protein synthesis for unrestrained growth. The retinoblastoma tumour-suppressor protein (Rb) restricts cellular proliferation, and is often found mutated in transformed cells. Here we demonstrate that Rb can repress the level of transcription from pol III templates both in vitro and vivo. Analysis of Rb-deficient SAOS2 cells and primary fibroblasts from Rb-/- mice demonstrates elevated levels of pol III activity in the absence of functional Rb protein. Rb-induced repression of pol III activity is alleviated by mutations in the Rb pocket domain that occur naturally in tumours, and by viral transforming proteins that bind and inactivate Rb. These results implicate repression of pol III transcription as a mechanism for Rb-induced growth arrest, and suggest that restraining protein biosynthesis may be important in the prevention of tumour development.
The Rac guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins regulate oxidant production by phagocytic leukocytes. Two Ste20-related p21-activated kinases (PAKs) were identified as targets of Rac in human neutrophils. Activity of the approximately 65- and approximately 68-kilodalton PAKs was rapidly stimulated by chemoattractants acting through pertussis toxin-sensitive heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G proteins). Native and recombinant PAKs phosphorylated the p47phox reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase component in a Rac-GTP-dependent manner. The action of PAKs during phagocyte activation by G protein-coupled pathways may contribute to regulation of NADPH oxidase activity.
The hairpin ribozyme catalyzes sequence-specific cleavage of RNA through transesterification of the scissile phosphate. Vanadate has previously been used as a transition state mimic of protein enzymes that catalyze the same reaction. Comparison of the 2.2 angstrom resolution structure of a vanadate-hairpin ribozyme complex with structures of precursor and product complexes reveals a rigid active site that makes more hydrogen bonds to the transition state than to the precursor or product. Because of the paucity of RNA functional groups capable of general acid-base or electrostatic catalysis, transition state stabilization is likely to be an important catalytic strategy for ribozymes.
In animals, the sphingolipid metabolite sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) functions as both an intracellular messenger and an extracellular ligand for G-protein-coupled receptors of the S1P receptor family, regulating diverse biological processes ranging from cell proliferation to apoptosis. Recently, it was discovered in plants that S1P is a signalling molecule involved in abscisic acid (ABA) regulation of guard cell turgor. Here we report that the enzyme responsible for S1P production, sphingosine kinase (SphK), is activated by ABA in Arabidopsis thaliana, and is involved in both ABA inhibition of stomatal opening and promotion of stomatal closure. Consistent with this observation, inhibition of SphK attenuates ABA regulation of guard cell inward K(+) channels and slow anion channels, which are involved in the regulation of stomatal pore size. Surprisingly, S1P regulates stomatal apertures and guard cell ion channel activities in wild-type plants, but not in knockout lines of the sole prototypical heterotrimeric G-protein alpha-subunit gene, GPA1 (refs 5, 6, 7-8). Our results implicate heterotrimeric G proteins as downstream elements in the S1P signalling pathway that mediates ABA regulation of stomatal function, and suggest that the interplay between S1P and heterotrimeric G proteins represents an evolutionarily conserved signalling mechanism.
Sour taste is initiated by protons acting at receptor proteins or channels. In vertebrates, transduction of this taste quality involves several parallel pathways. Here we examine the effects of sour stimuli on taste cells in slices of vallate papilla from rat. From a subset of cells, we identified a hyperpolarization-activated current that was enhanced by sour stimulation at the taste pore. This current resembled Ih found in neurons and cardio-myocytes, a current carried by members of the family of hyperpolarization-activated and cyclic-nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels. We show by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry that HCN1 and HCN4 are expressed in a subset of taste cells. By contrast, gustducin, the G-protein involved in bitter and sweet taste, is not expressed in these cells. Lowering extracellular pH causes a dose-dependent flattening of the activation curve of HCN channels and a shift in the voltage of half-maximal activation to more positive voltages. Our results indicate that HCN channels are gated by extracellular protons and may act as receptors for sour taste.
Chaperonins are ring-shaped protein complexes that are essential in the cell, mediating ATP-dependent polypeptide folding in a variety of compartments. Recent studies suggest that they function through multiple rounds of binding and release of non-native proteins: with each round of ATP-driven release into the bulk solution, a substrate protein kinetically partitions between folding to the native state or rebinding to another chaperonin molecule. To gain further insight into the mechanism of polypeptide binding and release by the chaperonin GroEL from Escherichia coli, we have undertaken a mutational analysis that relates the functional properties of GroEL to its crystal structure. Our functional tests identify a putative polypeptide-binding site on the inside surface of the apical domain, facing the central channel, consisting of hydrophobic residues. These same residues are essential for binding of the co-chaperonin GroES, which is required for productive polypeptide release. A highly conserved residue, Asp 87, positioned within a putative nucleotide-binding pocket in the top of the equatorial domain, is essential for ATP hydrolysis and polypeptide release.
Antagonistic activities of glucagon and insulin control metabolism in mammals, and disruption of this balance underlies diabetes pathogenesis. Insulin-producing cells (IPCs) in the brain of insects such as Drosophila also regulate serum glucose, but it remains unclear whether insulin is the sole hormonal regulator of glucose homeostasis and whether mechanisms of glucose-sensing and response in IPCs resemble those in pancreatic islets. Here we show, by targeted cell ablation, that Drosophila corpora cardiaca (CC) cells of the ring gland are also essential for larval glucose homeostasis. Unlike IPCs, CC cells express Drosophila cognates of sulphonylurea receptor (Sur) and potassium channel (Ir), proteins that comprise ATP-sensitive potassium channels regulating hormone secretion by islets and other mammalian glucose-sensing cells. They also produce adipokinetic hormone, a polypeptide with glucagon-like functions. Glucose regulation by CC cells is impaired by exposure to sulphonylureas, drugs that target the Sur subunit. Furthermore, ubiquitous expression of an akh transgene reverses the effect of CC ablation on serum glucose. Thus, Drosophila CC cells are crucial regulators of glucose homeostasis and they use glucose-sensing and response mechanisms similar to islet cells.
The molecular clock hypothesis postulates that the rate of molecular evolution is approximately constant over time. Although this hypothesis has been highly controversial in the past, it is now widely accepted. The assumption of rate constancy has often been taken as a basis for reconstructing the phylogenetic relationships among organisms or genes and for dating evolutionary events. Further, it has been taken as strong support for the neutral mutation hypothesis, which postulates that the majority of molecular changes in evolution are due to neutral or nearly neutral mutations. For these reasons, the validity of the rate constancy assumption is a vital issue in molecular evolution. Recent studies using DNA sequence data have raised serious doubts about the hypothesis. These studies provided support for the suggestion made from immunological distance and protein sequence data that a rate slowdown has occurred in hominoid evolution, and showed, in agreement with DNA hybridization studies, that rates of nucleotide substitution are significantly higher in rodents than in man. Here, rates of nucleotide substitution in rodents are estimated to be 4-10 times higher than those in higher primates and 2-4 times higher than those in artiodactyls. Further, this study provides strong evidence for the hominoid slowdown hypothesis and suggests a further rate-slowdown in hominoid evolution. Our results suggest that the variation in rate among mammals is primarily due to differences in generation time rather than changes in DNA repair mechanisms. We also propose a method for estimating the divergence times between species when the rate constancy assumption is violated.
Substantial negative heat capacity changes (delta C0p' s) have frequently been observed to accompany the formation of protein-ligand complexes. Glutamate dehydrogenase and horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase, however, have been reported to form binary complexes with coenzyme with negligible delta H0p' and only small delta C0p' s. Although many intriguing mechanisms have been proposed to account for the observed phenomena, there is little direct experimental evidence available which might provide a basis for evaluating the contributions of delta C0p' s of complex formation from the various mechanistic sources or even for distinguishing between them. However, if, as Eftink and Biltonen have suggested, a shift in equilibrium between macrostates contributes significantly to an observed delta C0p' s for a given reaction, it should be possible to characterize such a system by measuring the temperature dependence of the delta C0p'. Despite this, few studies have determined delta H0' values at more than two temperatures. We have now measured the temperature dependence of the delta H0' (and, thereby, that of the delta C0p') of the formation of an enzyme-reduced coenzyme complex in an attempt to provide such a basis and have found that the entire delta C0p' of complex formation is accounted for by a temperature-induced shift of an equilibrium between the different forms of the free enzyme.
To act as guides in the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway, small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) must be unwound into their component strands, then assembled with proteins to form the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which catalyzes target messenger RNA cleavage. Thermodynamic differences in the base-pairing stabilities of the 5' ends of the two approximately 21-nucleotide siRNA strands determine which siRNA strand is assembled into the RISC. We show that in Drosophila, the orientation of the Dicer-2/R2D2 protein heterodimer on the siRNA duplex determines which siRNA strand associates with the core RISC protein Argonaute 2. R2D2 binds the siRNA end with the greatest double-stranded character, thereby orienting the heterodimer on the siRNA duplex. Strong R2D2 binding requires a 5'-phosphate on the siRNA strand that is excluded from the RISC. Thus, R2D2 is both a protein sensor for siRNA thermodynamic asymmetry and a licensing factor for entry of authentic siRNAs into the RNAi pathway.
Many of the intricate pathways of apoptosis that instruct a cell to kill itself involve the convergence of key proteins on the membranes of mitochondria. Such proteins induce the permeabilization of mitochondrial membranes and the release of caspase enzymes and nuclease activators that set in motion the final stages of programmed cell death. Now, as Brenner and Kroemer discuss in their Perspective, a proapoptotic transcription factor called TR3 has been found to move from its normal location in the nucleus to the mitochondria and to promote release of cytochrome c, a key event in apoptosis (Li et al.)
The aminoacylation specificity ("acceptor identity") of transfer RNAs (tRNAs) has previously been associated with the position of particular nucleotides, as opposed to distinctive elements of three-dimensional structure. The contribution of a G.U wobble pair in the acceptor helix of tRNA(Ala) to acceptor identity was examined with synthetic amber suppressor tRNAs in Escherichia coli. The acceptor identity was not affected by replacing the G.U wobble pair in tRNA(Ala) with a G.A, C.A, or U.U wobble pair. Furthermore, a tRNA(Ala) acceptor identity was conferred on tRNA(Lys) when the same site in the acceptor helix was replaced with any of several wobble pairs. Additional data with tRNA(Ala) show that a substantial acceptor identity was retained when the G.U wobble pair was translocated to another site in the acceptor helix. These results suggest that the G.U wobble pair induces an irregularity in the acceptor helix of tRNA(Ala) to match a complementary structure in the aminoacylating enzyme.
The influenza virus polymerase, a heterotrimer composed of three subunits, PA, PB1 and PB2, is responsible for replication and transcription of the eight separate segments of the viral RNA genome in the nuclei of infected cells. The polymerase synthesizes viral messenger RNAs using short capped primers derived from cellular transcripts by a unique 'cap-snatching' mechanism. The PB2 subunit binds the 5' cap of host pre-mRNAs, which are subsequently cleaved after 10-13 nucleotides by the viral endonuclease, hitherto thought to reside in the PB2 (ref. 5) or PB1 (ref. 2) subunits. Here we describe biochemical and structural studies showing that the amino-terminal 209 residues of the PA subunit contain the endonuclease active site. We show that this domain has intrinsic RNA and DNA endonuclease activity that is strongly activated by manganese ions, matching observations reported for the endonuclease activity of the intact trimeric polymerase. Furthermore, this activity is inhibited by 2,4-dioxo-4-phenylbutanoic acid, a known inhibitor of the influenza endonuclease. The crystal structure of the domain reveals a structural core closely resembling resolvases and type II restriction endonucleases. The active site comprises a histidine and a cluster of three acidic residues, conserved in all influenza viruses, which bind two manganese ions in a configuration similar to other two-metal-dependent endonucleases. Two active site residues have previously been shown to specifically eliminate the polymerase endonuclease activity when mutated. These results will facilitate the optimisation of endonuclease inhibitors as potential new anti-influenza drugs.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae contains a protein which is functionally similar to the mammalian TATA element-binding transcription factor, TFIID. The yeast factor substitutes for TFIID in a mammalian RNA polymerase II in vitro transcription system, forms a stable preinitiation complex on the Adenovirus-2 major late promoter, and binds specifically to the TATA boxes of the viral promoter and the yeast CYC1 promoter. Interestingly, the yeast factor promotes initiation at a distance from the TATA element typical of a mammalian system.
Purified outer segments of bovine rods exhibit phosphodiesterase activity against adenosine and guanosine cyclic 3',5'-monophosphates (cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP). The enzyme hydrolyzed cyclic GMP more rapidly than cyclic AMP at low substrate concentrations. The presence of high phosphodiesterase activity in this highly specialized organelle suggests that this enzyme may function in control of cyclic nucleotide concentration during visual excitation or adaptation.
The histidine triad (HIT) protein family is among the most ubiquitous and highly conserved in nature, but a biological activity has not yet been identified for any member of the HIT family. Fragile histidine triad protein (FHIT) and protein kinase C interacting protein (PKCI) were used in a structure-based approach to elucidate characteristics of in vivo ligands and reactions. Crystallographic structures of apo, substrate analog, pentacovalent transition-state analog, and product states of both enzymes reveal a catalytic mechanism and define substrate characteristics required for catalysis, thus unifying the HIT family as nucleotidyl hydrolases, transferases, or both. The approach described here may be useful in identifying structure-function relations between protein families identified through genomics.
Cyclic AMP is a ubiquitous second messenger that transduces signals from a variety of cell surface receptors to regulate diverse cellular functions, including secretion, metabolism and gene transcription. In pancreatic beta-cells, cAMP potentiates Ca2+-dependent exocytosis and mediates the stimulation of insulin release exerted by the hormones glucagon and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) (refs 4, 5-6). Whereas Ca2+ signals have been extensively characterized and shown to involve oscillations important for the temporal control of insulin secretion, the kinetics of receptor-triggered cAMP signals is unknown. Here we introduce a new ratiometric evanescent-wave-microscopy approach to measure cAMP concentration beneath the plasma membrane, and show that insulin-secreting beta-cells respond to glucagon and GLP-1 with marked cAMP oscillations. Simultaneous measurements of intracellular Ca2+ concentration revealed that the two messengers are interlinked and reinforce each other. Moreover, cAMP oscillations are capable of inducing rapid on-off Ca2+ responses, but only sustained elevation of cAMP concentration induces nuclear translocation of the catalytic subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Our results establish a new signalling mode for cAMP and indicate that temporal encoding of cAMP signals might constitute a basis for differential regulation of downstream cellular targets.
Mice deficient in the Polycomb repressor Bmi1 develop numerous abnormalities including a severe defect in stem cell self-renewal, alterations in thymocyte maturation and a shortened lifespan. Previous work has implicated de-repression of the Ink4a/Arf (also known as Cdkn2a) locus as mediating many of the aspects of the Bmi1(-/-) phenotype. Here we demonstrate that cells derived from Bmi1(-/-) mice also have impaired mitochondrial function, a marked increase in the intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species and subsequent engagement of the DNA damage response pathway. Furthermore, many of the deficiencies normally observed in Bmi1(-/-) mice improve after either pharmacological treatment with the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine or genetic disruption of the DNA damage response pathway by Chk2 (also known as Chek2) deletion. These results demonstrate that Bmi1 has an unexpected role in maintaining mitochondrial function and redox homeostasis and indicate that the Polycomb family of proteins can coordinately regulate cellular metabolism with stem and progenitor cell function.
Removal of introns from eukaryotic nuclear messenger RNA precursors is catalysed by a large ribonucleoprotein complex called the spliceosome, which consists of four small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (U1, U2, U5, and U4/U6 snRNPs) and auxiliary protein factors. We have begun a genetic analysis of mammalian U2 snRNA by making second-site mutations in a suppressor U2 snRNA. Here we find that several mutations in the 5' end of U2 (nucleotides 3-8) are deleterious and that one of these can be rescued by compensatory base changes in the 3' end of U6 (nucleotides 92-95). The results demonstrate genetically that the base-pairing interaction between U2 (nucleotides 3-11) and U6 snRNA (nucleotides 87-95), originally proposed on the basis of psoralen photocrosslinking experiments, can influence the efficiency of mRNA splicing in mammals. The U2/U6 interaction in yeast, however, is fairly tolerant to mutation (D.J. Field and J.D. Friesen, personal communication), emphasizing the potential for facultative RNA interactions within the spliceosome.
Plasma membrane receptors for hormones, drugs, neurotransmitters and sensory stimuli are coupled to guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins. Recent cloning of the genes and/or cDNAs for several of these receptors including the visual pigment rhodopsin, the adenylate-cyclase stimulatory beta-adrenergic receptor and two subtypes of muscarinic cholinergic receptors has suggested that these are homologous proteins with several conserved structural and functional features. Whereas the rhodopsin gene consists of five exons interrupted by four introns, surprisingly the human and hamster beta-adrenergic receptor genes contain no introns in either their coding or untranslated sequences. We have cloned and sequenced a DNA fragment in the human genome which cross-hybridizes with a full-length beta 2-adrenergic receptor probe at reduced stringency. Like the beta 2-adrenergic receptor this gene appears to be intronless, containing an uninterrupted long open reading frame which encodes a putative protein with all the expected structural features of a G-protein-coupled receptor.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) research has shown that patients with an inherited form of the disease carry mutations in the presenilin proteins or the amyloid precursor protein (APP). These disease-linked mutations result in increased production of the longer form of amyloid-beta (the primary component of the amyloid deposits found in AD brains). However, it is not clear how the presenilins contribute to this increase. New findings now show that the presenilins affect APP processing through their effects on gamma-secretase, an enzyme that cleaves APP. Also, it is known that the presenilins are involved in the cleavage of the Notch receptor, hinting that they either directly regulate gamma-secretase activity or themselves are protease enzymes. These findings suggest that the presenilins may prove to be valuable molecular targets for the development of drugs to combat AD.
In double-stranded-RNA (dsRNA) viruses found in animals, bacteria and yeast, the genome is transcribed within the structurally intact core of the virion with extraordinary efficiency. The structural organization of the genome and the enzymes involved in the transcription inside any of these viruses, critical for understanding this process, is not known. Here we report what we believe is the first three-dimensional characterization of the viral genome and the transcription complex in a prototypical dsRNA virus. Rotavirus is a large (diameter 1,000 A) icosahedral virus composed of three capsid protein layers and 11 dsRNA segments. It is the most important cause of gastroenteritis in children, accounting for over a million deaths annually. We show that viral dsRNA forms a dodecahedral structure in which the RNA double helices, interacting closely with the inner capsid layer, are packed around the enzyme complex located at the icosahedral 5-fold axes. The ordered RNA accounts for about 4,500 out of a total 18,525 base pairs in the genome, the largest amount of icosahedrally ordered RNA observed in any virus structure to date. We propose that the observed organization of the dsRNA is conducive for an orchestrated movement of the RNA relative to the enzyme complex during transcription.
Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer death worldwide, with over one million cases annually. To identify genetic factors that modify disease risk, we conducted a genome-wide association study by analysing 317,139 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 1,989 lung cancer cases and 2,625 controls from six central European countries. We identified a locus in chromosome region 15q25 that was strongly associated with lung cancer (P = 9 x 10(-10)). This locus was replicated in five separate lung cancer studies comprising an additional 2,513 lung cancer cases and 4,752 controls (P = 5 x 10(-20) overall), and it was found to account for 14% (attributable risk) of lung cancer cases. Statistically similar risks were observed irrespective of smoking status or propensity to smoke tobacco. The association region contains several genes, including three that encode nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits (CHRNA5, CHRNA3 and CHRNB4). Such subunits are expressed in neurons and other tissues, in particular alveolar epithelial cells, pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and lung cancer cell lines, and they bind to N'-nitrosonornicotine and potential lung carcinogens. A non-synonymous variant of CHRNA5 that induces an amino acid substitution (D398N) at a highly conserved site in the second intracellular loop of the protein is among the markers with the strongest disease associations. Our results provide compelling evidence of a locus at 15q25 predisposing to lung cancer, and reinforce interest in nicotinic acetylcholine receptors as potential disease candidates and chemopreventative targets.
The optimization of cultural conditions for Beta-glucanase production by Bacillus subtilis ZJF-1A5 was investigated in flask trials. Temperature had great effect on Beta-glucanase production which maximized at optimal temperature of 37 degrees C and decreased significantly when temperature was over 37 degrees C. Charge quantity affected Beta-glucanase production significantly. Adding oxygen vector N-dodecane or acetic ether benefited Beta-glucanase production, but it depended on the concentration and charge quantity. The results of fractional factorial design showed that age and size of inoculum and shaking speed were the key factors affecting Beta-glucanase production and the cultivation time span to reach the highest Beta-glucanase activity. The optimal cultural conditions for Beta-glucanase production obtained with CCD were as follows: inoculum age and size (16 h, 3.82%(v/v)), shaking speed 210 r/min, charge quantity of 30 mL in 250 mL flask and initial pH 7.0, cultured at 37 degrees C for 50 h. Repeated experimental results accorded with those predicted by a second-order polynomial model. The amount of Beta-glucanase, Alpha-amylase and neutral protease produced by B subtilis ZJF-1A5 was associated partially with cell growth. Those three enzymes' activities increased following the cell growth and increased significantly when cells entered the stationary phase.
The beta-adrenergic receptor kinase (beta-ARK), which specifically phosphorylates only the agonist-occupied form of the beta-adrenergic and closely related receptors, appears to be important in mediating rapid agonist-specific (homologous) desensitization. The structure of this enzyme was elucidated by isolating clones from a bovine brain complementary DNA library through the use of oligonucleotide probes derived from partial amino acid sequence. The beta-ARK cDNA codes for a protein of 689 amino acids (79.7 kilodaltons) with a protein kinase catalytic domain that bears greatest sequence similarity to protein kinase C and the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP)--dependent protein kinase. When this clone was inserted into a mammalian expression vector and transfected into COS-7 cells, a protein that specifically phosphorylated the agonist-occupied form of the beta 2-adrenergic receptor and phosphorylated, much more weakly, the light-bleached form of rhodopsin was expressed. RNA blot analysis revealed a messenger RNA of four kilobases with highest amounts in brain and spleen. Genomic DNA blot analysis also suggests that beta-ARK may be the first sequenced member of a multigene family of receptor kinases.
Many metalloenzymes exhibit distinctive spectral features that are now becoming well understood. These reflect active site electronic structures that can make significant contributions to catalysis. Copper proteins provide well-characterized examples in which the unusual electronic structures of their active sites contribute to rapid, long-range electron transfer reactivity, oxygen binding and activation, and the multielectron reduction of dioxygen to water.
Potassium channels that are ATP-sensitive (KATP) couple membrane potential to the metabolic status of the cell. KATP channels are inhibited by intracellular ATP and are stimulated by intracellular nucleotide diphosphates. KATP channels are important regulators of secretory processes and muscle contraction, and are targets for therapeutic treatment of type II diabetes by the inhibitory sulphonylureas and for hypertension by activators such as pinacidil. In cardiac tissue, KATP channels are central regulators of post-ischaemic cardioprotection. Electrophysiological and pharmacological characteristics vary among KATP channels recorded from diverse tissues suggesting extensive molecular heterogeneity. A complementary DNA encoding a KATP channel was isolated from rat heart using the polymerase chain reaction. We report here that the expressed channels possess all of the essential features of native cardiac KATP channels, including sensitivity to intracellular nucleotides. In addition the cloned channels are activated by the potassium channel opener, pinacidil, but are not inhibited by the sulphonylurea, glibenclamide.
Apoptosis is an evolutionarily conserved cell suicide process executed by cysteine proteases (caspases) and regulated by the opposing factions of the Bcl-2 protein family. Mammalian caspase-9 and its activator Apaf-1 were thought to be essential, because mice lacking either of them display neuronal hyperplasia and their lymphocytes and fibroblasts seem resistant to certain apoptotic stimuli. Because Apaf-1 requires cytochrome c to activate caspase-9, and Bcl-2 prevents mitochondrial cytochrome c release, Bcl-2 is widely believed to inhibit apoptosis by safeguarding mitochondrial membrane integrity. Our results suggest a different, broader role, because Bcl-2 overexpression increased lymphocyte numbers in mice and inhibited many apoptotic stimuli, but the absence of Apaf-1 or caspase-9 did not. Caspase activity was still discernible in cells lacking Apaf-1 or caspase-9, and a potent caspase antagonist both inhibited apoptosis and retarded cytochrome c release. We conclude that Bcl-2 regulates a caspase activation programme independently of the cytochrome c/Apaf-1/caspase-9 'apoptosome', which seems to amplify rather than initiate the caspase cascade.
The social amoebae are exceptional in their ability to alternate between unicellular and multicellular forms. Here we describe the genome of the best-studied member of this group, Dictyostelium discoideum. The gene-dense chromosomes of this organism encode approximately 12,500 predicted proteins, a high proportion of which have long, repetitive amino acid tracts. There are many genes for polyketide synthases and ABC transporters, suggesting an extensive secondary metabolism for producing and exporting small molecules. The genome is rich in complex repeats, one class of which is clustered and may serve as centromeres. Partial copies of the extrachromosomal ribosomal DNA (rDNA) element are found at the ends of each chromosome, suggesting a novel telomere structure and the use of a common mechanism to maintain both the rDNA and chromosomal termini. A proteome-based phylogeny shows that the amoebozoa diverged from the animal-fungal lineage after the plant-animal split, but Dictyostelium seems to have retained more of the diversity of the ancestral genome than have plants, animals or fungi.
Measurements of the abundance of common metabolites in cultured embryonic stem (ES) cells revealed an unusual state with respect to one-carbon metabolism. These findings led to the discovery of copious expression of the gene encoding threonine dehydrogenase (TDH) in ES cells. TDH-mediated catabolism of threonine takes place in mitochondria to generate glycine and acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA), with glycine facilitating one-carbon metabolism via the glycine cleavage system and acetyl-CoA feeding the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Culture media individually deprived of each of the 20 amino acids were applied to ES cells, leading to the discovery that ES cells are critically dependent on one amino acid--threonine. These observations show that ES cells exist in a high-flux backbone metabolic state comparable to that of rapidly growing bacterial cells.
The ABC transporters are ubiquitous membrane proteins that couple adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis to the translocation of diverse substrates across cell membranes. Clinically relevant examples are associated with cystic fibrosis and with multidrug resistance of pathogenic bacteria and cancer cells. Here, we report the crystal structure at 3.2 angstrom resolution of the Escherichia coli BtuCD protein, an ABC transporter mediating vitamin B12 uptake. The two ATP-binding cassettes (BtuD) are in close contact with each other, as are the two membrane-spanning subunits (BtuC); this arrangement is distinct from that observed for the E. coli lipid flippase MsbA. The BtuC subunits provide 20 transmembrane helices grouped around a translocation pathway that is closed to the cytoplasm by a gate region whereas the dimer arrangement of the BtuD subunits resembles the ATP-bound form of the Rad50 DNA repair enzyme. A prominent cytoplasmic loop of BtuC forms the contact region with the ATP-binding cassette and appears to represent a conserved motif among the ABC transporters.
Phylogenetic analysis reveals that the use of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) by prokaryotic isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) arose around the time eukaryotic mitochondria first appeared, about 3.5 billion years ago. We replaced the wild-type gene that encodes the NADP-dependent IDH of Escherichia coli with an engineered gene that possesses the ancestral NAD-dependent phenotype. The engineered enzyme is disfavored during competition for acetate. The selection intensifies in genetic backgrounds where other sources of reduced NADP have been removed. A survey of sequenced prokaryotic genomes reveals that those genomes that encode isocitrate lyase, which is essential for growth on acetate, always have an NADP-dependent IDH. Those with only an NAD-dependent IDH never have isocitrate lyase. Hence, the NADP dependence of prokaryotic IDH is an ancient adaptation to anabolic demand for reduced NADP during growth on acetate.
Acetylation, phosphorylation and methylation of the amino-terminal tails of histones are thought to be involved in the regulation of chromatin structure and function. With just one exception, the enzymes identified in the methylation of specific lysine residues on histones (histone methyltransferases) belong to the SET family. The high-resolution crystal structure of a ternary complex of human SET7/9 with a histone peptide and cofactor reveals that the peptide substrate and cofactor bind on opposite surfaces of the enzyme. The target lysine accesses the active site of the enzyme and the S-adenosyl-l-methionine (AdoMet) cofactor by inserting its side chain into a narrow channel that runs through the enzyme, connecting the two surfaces. Here we show from the structure and from solution studies that SET7/9, unlike most other SET proteins, is exclusively a mono-methylase. The structure indicates the molecular basis of the specificity of the enzyme for the histone target, and allows us to propose a model for the methylation reaction that accounts for the role of many of the residues that are invariant across the SET family.
The most important product of the sequencing of a genome is a complete, accurate catalogue of genes and their products, primarily messenger RNA transcripts and their cognate proteins. Such a catalogue cannot be constructed by computational annotation alone; it requires experimental validation on a genome scale. Using 'exon' and 'tiling' arrays fabricated by ink-jet oligonucleotide synthesis, we devised an experimental approach to validate and refine computational gene predictions and define full-length transcripts on the basis of co-regulated expression of their exons. These methods can provide more accurate gene numbers and allow the detection of mRNA splice variants and identification of the tissue- and disease-specific conditions under which genes are expressed. We apply our technique to chromosome 22q under 69 experimental condition pairs, and to the entire human genome under two experimental conditions. We discuss implications for more comprehensive, consistent and reliable genome annotation, more efficient, full-length complementary DNA cloning strategies and application to complex diseases.
The human retinoblastoma gene (RB1) encodes a protein (Rb) of 105 kilodaltons that can be phosphorylated. Analysis of Rb metabolism has shown that the protein has a half-life of more than 10 hours and is synthesized at all phases of the cell cycle. Newly synthesized Rb is not extensively phosphorylated (it is "underphosphorylated") in cells in the G0 and G1 phases but is phosphorylated at multiple sites at the G1/S boundary and in S phase. HL-60 cells that were induced to terminally differentiate by various chemicals lost their ability to phosphorylate newly synthesized Rb at multiple sites when cell growth was arrested. These findings suggest that underphosphorylated Rb may restrict cell proliferation.
RNA polymerase (RNAP) is the central enzyme of gene expression. Despite availability of crystal structures, details of its nucleotide addition cycle remain obscure. We describe bacterial RNAP inhibitors (the CBR703 series) whose properties illuminate this mechanism. These compounds inhibit known catalytic activities of RNAP (nucleotide addition, pyrophosphorolysis, and Gre-stimulated transcript cleavage) but not translocation of RNA or DNA when translocation is uncoupled from catalysis. CBR703-resistance substitutions occur on an outside surface of RNAP opposite its internal active site. We propose that CBR703 compounds inhibit nucleotide addition allosterically by hindering movements of active site structures that are linked to the CBR703 binding site through a bridge helix.
Kinesin is a double-headed motor protein that moves along microtubules in 8-nanometer steps. Two broad classes of model have been invoked to explain kinesin movement: hand-over-hand and inchworm. In hand-over-hand models, the heads exchange leading and trailing roles with every step, whereas no such exchange is postulated for inchworm models, where one head always leads. By measuring the stepwise motion of individual enzymes, we find that some kinesin molecules exhibit a marked alternation in the dwell times between sequential steps, causing these motors to "limp" along the microtubule. Limping implies that kinesin molecules strictly alternate between two different conformations as they step, indicative of an asymmetric, hand-over-hand mechanism.
Post-translational modification of chromatin has profound effects on many biological processes including transcriptional regulation, heterochromatin organization, and X-chromosome inactivation. Recent studies indicate that methylation on specific histone lysine (K) residues participates in many of these processes. Lysine methylation occurs in three distinct states, having either one (me1), two (me2) or three (me3) methyl groups attached to the amine group of the lysine side chain. These differences in modification state have an important role in defining how methylated chromatin is recognized and interpreted. Until recently, histone lysine methylation was considered a stable modification, but the identification of histone demethylase enzymes has demonstrated the reversibility of this epigenetic mark. So far, all characterized histone demethylases show enzymatic activity towards lysine residues modified in the me1 or me2 state, leaving open the possibility that me3 constitutes an irreversible modification. Here we demonstrate that JHDM3A (jumonji C (JmjC)-domain-containing histone demethylase 3A; also known as JMJD2A) is capable of removing the me3 group from modified H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and H3 lysine 36 (H3K36). Overexpression of JHDM3A abrogates recruitment of HP1 (heterochromatin protein 1) to heterochromatin, indicating a role for JHDM3A in antagonizing methylated H3K9 nucleated events. siRNA-mediated knockdown of JHDM3A leads to increased levels of H3K9 methylation and upregulation of a JHDM3A target gene, ASCL2, indicating that JHDM3A may function in euchromatin to remove histone methylation marks that are associated with active transcription.
The accumulation in brain of senile plaques containing beta-amyloid protein (A beta) is a defining feature of Alzheimer's disease. The amyloid precursor protein (APP)4 from which A beta is derived is subject to several genetic mutations which segregate with rare familial forms of the disease, resulting in early onset of dementia and plaque formation, suggesting that APP metabolism plays a causal role in the disease. Various cell types have been shown to release a soluble form of A beta, thus allowing for the in vitro study of A beta generation. We report here evidence that a substantial portion of the APP secreted by human mixed brain cell cultures, as well as that present in cerebrospinal fluid, is of a novel form cleaved precisely at the amino terminus of A beta, suggesting that a secretory pathway is involved in A beta genesis.
Escherichia coli strains have been constructed in which lacZ, the gene for the cytoplasmic enzyme beta-galactosidase, is fused to lamB, the gene for an outer membrane protein. One such strain produces a beta-galactosidase which remains cytoplasmic even though it possesses the complete signal sequence of the lamB protein precursor at the amino-terminal end.
Nucleotide sequencing has revealed a common genetic organization for three papillomaviruses: BPV-1 (bovine papillomavirus type 1), HPV-1 (human papillomavirus type 1a) and HPV-6 (human papillomavirus type 6b). Several open reading frames, corresponding to as yet uncharacterized proteins, were observed in these genomes in the region that is required for oncogenic transformation by BPV-1 and for plasmidial maintenance of its genome. The longest of these frames, E1, is also the most conserved between the three viruses; we have compared the amino acid sequence of its putative product ('E1 protein') with those of the large-T proteins of three polyoma viruses and report here significant homologies in their carboxy-terminal halves, extending for over 200 amino acids. Moreover, similar secondary structures were predicted in this region, especially in two blocks of homologous residues, which correspond in the large-T proteins of polyoma and simian virus 40 (SV40) viruses to sites involved in the ATPase and nucleotide-binding activities. These observations suggest that the papillomavirus E1 proteins might have a function in common with the polyoma virus large-T proteins (which are required for the initiation of viral DNA replication). As it was suggested recently that the E1 gene product is involved in maintaining the BPV-1 genome as a plasmid in transformed cells, we speculate that the structural features conserved in these otherwise very different viruses are general characteristics of eukaryotic proteins involved in the control of DNA replication.
All retroviruses specifically package two copies of their genomes during virus assembly, a requirement for strand-transfer-mediated recombination during reverse transcription. Genomic RNA exists in virions as dimers, and the overlap of RNA elements that promote dimerization and encapsidation suggests that these processes may be coupled. Both processes are mediated by the nucleocapsid domain (NC) of the retroviral Gag polyprotein. Here we show that dimerization-induced register shifts in base pairing within the Psi-RNA packaging signal of Moloney murine leukaemia virus (MoMuLV) expose conserved UCUG elements that bind NC with high affinity (dissociation constant = 75 +/- 12 nM). These elements are base-paired and do not bind NC in the monomeric RNA. The structure of the NC complex with a 101-nucleotide 'core encapsidation' segment of the MoMuLV Psi site reveals a network of interactions that promote sequence- and structure-specific binding by NC's single CCHC zinc knuckle. Our findings support a structural RNA switch mechanism for genome encapsidation, in which protein binding sites are sequestered by base pairing in the monomeric RNA and become exposed upon dimerization to promote packaging of a diploid genome.
Wild-type reverse transcriptase has evolved for the survival of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) by natural selection. In contrast, therapy relying on inhibitors of reverse transcriptase by nucleosides like zidovudine (AZT) or dideoxyinosine (ddI), and by non-nucleosides like pyridinones or nevirapine, may exert different selection pressures on this enzyme. Therefore the acquisition of resistance to reverse transcriptase inhibitors by selection of mutations in the pol gene may require compromises in enzyme function that affect viral replication. As single mutations are unlikely to confer broad resistance when combinations of reverse transcriptase inhibitors are used, multiple mutations may occur that result in further compromises. Certain drug combinations may prevent the co-existence of adequate reverse transcription function and multi-drug resistance (MDR). Unlike bacterial or eukaryotic drug resistance, retroviral drug resistance is conferred only by mutations in its own genome and is limited by genome size. Combining drugs directed against the same essential viral protein may thus prevent HIV-1 MDR, whereas the conventional approach of targeting different HIV-1 proteins for combination therapy may not, because genomes with resistance mutations in different HIV-1 genes might recombine to develop MDR. Here we show that several mutations in the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase gene that confer resistance to inhibitors of this enzyme can attenuate viral replication. We tested whether combinations of mutations giving rise to single-agent resistance might further compromise or even abolish viral replication, and if multidrug-resistant viruses could be constructed. Certain combinations of mutations conferring resistance to AZT, ddI and pyridinone are incompatible with viral replication. These results indicate that evolutionary limitations exist to restrict development of MDR. Furthermore, a therapeutic strategy exploiting these limitations by using selected multidrug regimens directed against the same target may prevent development of MDR. This approach, which we call convergent combination therapy, eliminated HIV-1 replication and virus breakthrough in vitro, and may be applicable to other viral targets. Moreover, elimination of reverse transcription by convergent combination therapy may also limit MDR.
Visual excitation in retinal rod cells is mediated by a cascade that leads to the amplified hydrolysis of cyclic GMP (cGMP) and the consequent closure of cGMP-activated cation-specific channels in the plasma membrane. Recovery of the dark state requires the resynthesis of cGMP, which is catalysed by guanylate cyclase, an axoneme-associated enzyme. The lowering of the cytosolic calcium concentration (Cai) following illumination is thought to be important in stimulating cyclase activity. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that the cGMP content of rod outer segments increases several-fold when Cai is lowered to less than 10 nM. It is evident that cGMP and Cai levels are reciprocally controlled by negative feedback. Guanylate cyclase from toad ROS is strongly stimulated when the calcium level is lowered from 10 microM to 10 nM, but only if they are excited by light. We show here that the guanylate cyclase activity of unilluminated bovine rod outer segments increases markedly (5 to 20-fold) when the calcium level is lowered from 200 nM to 50 nM. This steep dependence of guanylate cyclase activity on the calcium level in the physiological range has a Hill coefficient of 3.9. Stimulation at low calcium levels is mediated by a protein that can be released from the outer segment membranes by washing with a low salt buffer. Calcium sensitivity is partially restored by adding the soluble extract back to the washed membranes. The highly cooperative activation of guanylate cyclase by the light-induced lowering of Cai is likely to be a key event in restoring the dark current after excitation.
Oligonucleotide and complementary DNA microarrays are being used to subclassify histologically similar tumours, monitor disease progress, and individualize treatment regimens. However, extracting new biological insight from high-throughput genomic studies of human diseases is a challenge, limited by difficulties in recognizing and evaluating relevant biological processes from huge quantities of experimental data. Here we present a structured network knowledge-base approach to analyse genome-wide transcriptional responses in the context of known functional interrelationships among proteins, small molecules and phenotypes. This approach was used to analyse changes in blood leukocyte gene expression patterns in human subjects receiving an inflammatory stimulus (bacterial endotoxin). We explore the known genome-wide interaction network to identify significant functional modules perturbed in response to this stimulus. Our analysis reveals that the human blood leukocyte response to acute systemic inflammation includes the transient dysregulation of leukocyte bioenergetics and modulation of translational machinery. These findings provide insight into the regulation of global leukocyte activities as they relate to innate immune system tolerance and increased susceptibility to infection in humans.
Activated protein C (APC) is a serine protease with potent anticoagulant properties, which is formed in blood on the endothelium from an inactive precursor. During normal haemostasis, APC limits clot formation by proteolytic inactivation of factors Va and VIIIa (ref. 2). To do this efficiently the enzyme needs a nonenzymatic cofactor, protein S (ref. 3). Recently it was found that the anticoagulant response to APC (APC resistance) was very weak in the plasma of 21% of unselected consecutive patients with thrombosis and about 50% of selected patients with a personal or family history of thrombosis; moreover, 5% of healthy individuals show APC resistance, which is associated with a sevenfold increase in the risk for deep vein thrombosis. Here we demonstrate that the phenotype of APC resistance is associated with heterozygosity or homozygosity for a single point mutation in the factor V gene (at nucleotide position 1,691, G-->A substitution) which predicts the synthesis of a factor V molecule (FV Q506, or FV Leiden) that is not properly inactivated by APC. The allelic frequency of the mutation in the Dutch population is approximately 2% and is at least tenfold higher than that of all other known genetic risk factors for thrombosis (protein C (ref. 8), protein S (ref. 9), antithrombin10 deficiency) together.
Acetylcholinesterase, an essential enzyme of the nervous system, rapidly terminates the action of acetylcholine released into the synapse. Acetylcholinesterase is also found (in lower abundance) in extrajunctional areas of muscle and nerve and on erythrocyte membranes. Hydrodynamic analyses of the native enzyme and characterization of its dissociated subunits have revealed multiple enzyme forms which can be divided into two classes: dimensionally asymmetric forms which are usually found within the synapse and contain a collagen-like structural subunit disulphide-linked to the catalytic subunits; and globular forms which appear to be widely distributed on the outer surface of cell membranes. Both forms have been characterized in the ray Torpedo californica and, although their catalytic behaviours seem to be identical, they differ slightly in amino-acid composition, peptide maps and reactivity with certain monoclonal antibodies. Here, we report the complete amino-acid sequence of an acetylcholinesterase inferred from the sequence of a complementary DNA clone. The 575-residue protein shows significant homology with the C-terminal portion of thyroglobulin.
The expression of two kappa light chain immunoglobulins in the MPC-11 mouse myeloma is well established, the two protein products being apparently from RNA transcripts derived from separate, rearranged kappa alleles in the MPC-11 genome. Recently, the characterization of kappa-related RNAs and protein products in several lambda-producing myelomas has indicated that multiple expression of light chain RNAs is a common event in myelomas and other cells of the B-lymphocyte lineage. These studies suggest that, although many light chain alleles may function to make RNA and protein in a given B-lymphocytic cell, only one complete, functional light chain is generally translated from the RNAs present in a single cell. The myeloma, MOPC-315, synthesizes and secretes an antibody which has an alpha heavy chain and a lambda II light chain. The DNA of MOPC-315 either has no kappa genes or has only a fragment of one, but it certainly has no kappa genes in the embryonic configuration. Rearrangement of its lambda genes has been observed but the exact nature of the rearrangement is not known. Because initial observations suggested that an immunoglobulin-related protein other than alpha and lambda II was present in MOPC-315 cells, we undertook to derive molecular cDNA clones from the MRNA in MOPC-315 tumour cells. Analysis of the clones has now identified two lambda chain mRNA species: a normal lambda II chain mRNA and another which directs the synthesis of a deleted form of a lambda I protein. The nucleotide sequence of the deleted lambda I mRNA shows that it resulted from a joining of the sequence encoding amino acid 31 of the variable region directly to the constant region coding sequence.
An early event in RNA interference (RNAi) is the cleavage of the initiating double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) to short pieces, 21 to 23 nucleotides in length. Here we describe a null mutation in dicer-1 (dcr-1), a gene proposed to encode the enzyme that generates these short RNAs. We find that dcr-1(-/-) animals have defects in RNAi under some, but not all, conditions. Mutant animals have germ line defects that lead to sterility, suggesting that cleavage of dsRNA to short pieces is a requisite event in normal development.
The early morphogenetic mechanisms involved in heart formation are evolutionarily conserved. A screen for genes that control Drosophila heart development revealed a cardiac defect in which pericardial and cardial cells dissociate, which causes loss of cardiac function and embryonic lethality. This phenotype resulted from mutations in the genes encoding HMG-CoA reductase, downstream enzymes in the mevalonate pathway, and G protein Ggamma1, which is geranylgeranylated, thus representing an end point of isoprenoid biosynthesis. Our findings reveal a cardial cell-autonomous requirement of Ggamma1 geranylgeranylation for heart formation and suggest the involvement of the mevalonate pathway in congenital heart disease.
Human-Chinese hamster cell hybrids and a monoclonal antibody to human S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase were used to identify chromosome 20 as the location of the human gene for this enzyme. The gene for adenosine deaminase had previously been mapped to this chromosome. The activity of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase is dependent in vivo on that of adenosine deaminase, since the substrates for the deaminase, adenosine and deoxyadenosine, respectively, inhibit and inactivate S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase in genetic or drug-induced adenosine deaminase deficiency. This functional dependence and the likelihood that S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, a eukaryotic enzyme, arose later than adenosine deaminase, which occurs in prokaryotes as well as eukaryotes, suggest that the occurrence of their genes on the same chromosome may have evolutionary significance. In addition, the unusual capacity of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase to form stable complexes with adenosine and its cofactor, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, suggest that evolution of its gene may have involved recombination of a portion of the adenosine deaminase gene with an adenine nucleotide domain-coding sequence of another preexisting gene.
Actin is an adenine nucleotide-binding protein and an ATPase. The bound adenine nucleotide stabilizes the protein against denaturation and the ATPase activity, although not required for actin polymerization, affects the kinetics of this assembly Here we provide evidence for another effect of adenine nucleotides. We find that actin filaments made from ATP-containing monomers, the ATPase activity of which hydrolyses ATP to ADP following polymerization, are stiff rods, whereas filaments prepared from ADP-monomers are flexible. ATP exchanges with ADP in such filaments and stiffens them. Because both kinds of actin filaments contain mainly ADP, we suggest the alignment of actin monomers in filaments that have bound and hydrolysed ATP traps them conformationally and stores elastic energy. This energy would be available for release by actin-binding proteins that transduce force or sever actin filaments. These data support earlier proposals that actin is not merely a passive cable, but has an active mechanochemical role in cell function.
One of the biochemical results of ethanol exposure is a change in the amount of the intracellular second messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP) produced in response to receptor stimulation. In general, acute ethanol exposure increases the amount of cAMP produced on stimulation of receptors coupled to the enzyme adenylyl cyclase via the GTP-binding protein Gs, whereas chronic ethanol exposure has the opposite effect (results for receptors coupled via Gi have been more variable). We previously reported that adaptation to continuous ethanol exposure reduces receptor-stimulated cAMP production by 25-35% in a neuroblastoma cell line (NG108-15), and an even greater reduction of 75% was observed in lymphocytes taken from actively-drinking alcoholics. This reduction in receptor-stimulated cAMP levels was recently confirmed in platelets from alcoholics. None of these studies, however, determined whether more than one receptor coupled to adenylyl cyclase activity was affected in the same cell. Here we report that chronic ethanol exposure causes desensitization of heterologous receptors coupled to Gs as cAMP production mediated by prostaglandin E1 as well as by adenosine is reduced by approximately 30% in NG108-15 cells. We show that, after chronic ethanol exposure, the activity of the alpha subunit of Gs is decreased by 29%, the amount of alpha s protein is decreased by 38.5%, and alpha s messenger RNA is decreased by 30%. Thus, cellular adaptation to ethanol involves a reduction in alpha s mRNA and, as a consequence, reduced cAMP production by heterologous receptors coupled to Gs. Such changes in cAMP production may account for the tolerance and physical dependence on ethanol in alcoholism.
During transcription in E. coli, the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase locates specific promoter sequences in the DNA template, melts a small region containing the transcription start site, initiates RNA synthesis, processively elongates the transcript, and finally terminates and releases the RNA product. Each step is regulated by interactions between the polymerase, the DNA, the nascent RNA, and a variety of regulatory proteins and ligands. The E. coli enzyme contains a catalytic core of two alpha-subunits, one beta- and one beta'-subunit, with relative molecular masses (Mr) of 36,512, 150,619 and 155,162, respectively. The holoenzyme has an additional regulatory subunit, normally sigma, of Mr 70,236. Preparations may also contain the omega-subunit (Mr approximately 10,000), which can be removed without affecting any known properties of the enzyme. Because the amino-acid sequences of the beta- and beta'-subunits are homologous to those of the largest subunits of the yeast, Drosophila and murine RNA polymerases, it seems likely that essential features of the three-dimensional structure and catalytic mechanism of RNA polymerase are also conserved across species. Crystals of RNA polymerase suitable for X-ray analysis have not yet been obtained, but two-dimensional crystals of E. coli RNA polymerase holoenzyme can be grown on positively charged lipid layers. Electron microscopy of these crystals in negative stain shows the enzyme in projection as an irregularly shaped complex approximately 100 x 100 x 160 A in size. We have now determined the three-dimensional structure by electron microscopy of negatively stained, two-dimensional crystals tilted at various angles to the incident electron beam. We find a structure in RNA polymerase similar to the active-site cleft of DNA polymerase I. In the light of functional similarities between these two enzymes, together with other evidence, this probably identifies the active-site region of RNA polymerase.
During evolution, the amino acid sequence of a protein is much more variable and changes more rapidly than its tertiary structure. Given sufficient time, the amino acid sequences of proteins derived from a common precursor may alter to the point that they are no longer demonstrably homologous. The ability to make meaningful comparisons between such distantly related proteins must therefore come primarily from structural homology, and only secondarily (if at all) from sequence homology. On the other hand, structural homology in the absence of sequence homology might be attributed to convergent rather than divergent evolution. (A common fold might be dictated by functional or folding requirements.) We have previously argued, on the basis of structural and functional similarities, that the lysozymes of hen egg-white and bacteriophage T4 have a common evolutionary precursor, even though their amino acid sequences have no detectable similarity. Here we report the structure of the lysozyme from Embden goose, a representative of a third class of lysozymes that has no sequence homology (or perhaps very weak homology) with either the hen egg-white or the phage enzyme. The structure of goose egg-white lysozyme has striking similarities to the lysozymes from hen egg-white and bacteriophage T4. However, some parts of goose lysozyme resemble hen lysozyme while other parts correspond only to the phage enzyme. The nature of the structural correspondence strongly suggests that all three lysozymes evolved from a common precursor.
Receptor sites for lactogenic hormones such as prolactin (PRL), human growth hormone (HGH), and placental lactogens, are widely distributed in mammalian tissues, including mammary glands, steroid-secreting cells of the adrenal, testis, and ovary, and target cells of steroid hormone action such as liver, prostrate, and kidney. Although the biological functions of lactogen binding sites remain uncertain, a relationship between prolactin and lipoprotein metabolism is implied by the occurrence of prolactin receptors in steroidogenic cells of the gonads and adrenal, and by the ability of prolactin to increase esterified cholesterol in the testis. Recently, loss of testicular prolactin receptors has been observed following elevation of circulating luteinising hormone (LH) concentrations by the gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) and its agonist analogues. The hormone dependence of lactogen receptor sites in steroid-secreting cells was further analysed in rat testis, ovary, and adrenal glands after treatment with the respective trophic hormones, gonadotropin and ACTH. In each of these tissues, rapid and transient loss of lactogen receptors was observed after trophic hormone stimulation. These findings indicate that increased turnover of lactogen receptors is an important component of the target-cell response, and suggest that prolactin receptors might be involved in the transport of lipoprotein precursors for steroid biosynthesis.
The protein-kinase family is the most frequently mutated gene family found in human cancer and faulty kinase enzymes are being investigated as promising targets for the design of antitumour therapies. We have sequenced the gene encoding the transmembrane protein tyrosine kinase ERBB2 (also known as HER2 or Neu) from 120 primary lung tumours and identified 4% that have mutations within the kinase domain; in the adenocarcinoma subtype of lung cancer, 10% of cases had mutations. ERBB2 inhibitors, which have so far proved to be ineffective in treating lung cancer, should now be clinically re-evaluated in the specific subset of patients with lung cancer whose tumours carry ERBB2 mutations.
Poliovirus RNA and proteins are synthesized in association with distinct membranous structures that were separated by means of Isopycnic centrifugation of cytoplasmic extracts in discontinuous sucrose-density gradients. Viral RNA is replicated in a structure that contains rapidly labeled replicative intermediate RNA and viral RNA polymerase associated with the smooth membrane fraction. In sucrose gradients this viral RNA replication complex is distributed at densities in the range of 1.12 to 1.18 grams per cubic centimeter. Viral proteins are synthesized on polyribosomes bound to membranes and sediment with polyribosomes at densities of less than 1.25 grams per cubic centimeter.
Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors constitute the largest family of eukaryotic signal transduction proteins that communicate across the membrane. We report the crystal structure of a human beta2-adrenergic receptor-T4 lysozyme fusion protein bound to the partial inverse agonist carazolol at 2.4 angstrom resolution. The structure provides a high-resolution view of a human G protein-coupled receptor bound to a diffusible ligand. Ligand-binding site accessibility is enabled by the second extracellular loop, which is held out of the binding cavity by a pair of closely spaced disulfide bridges and a short helical segment within the loop. Cholesterol, a necessary component for crystallization, mediates an intriguing parallel association of receptor molecules in the crystal lattice. Although the location of carazolol in the beta2-adrenergic receptor is very similar to that of retinal in rhodopsin, structural differences in the ligand-binding site and other regions highlight the challenges in using rhodopsin as a template model for this large receptor family.
CCA-adding polymerase matures the essential 3'-CCA terminus of transfer RNA without any nucleic-acid template. However, it remains unclear how the correct nucleotide triphosphate is selected in each reaction step and how the polymerization is driven by the protein and RNA dynamics. Here we present complete sequential snapshots of six complex structures of CCA-adding enzyme and four distinct RNA substrates with and without CTP (cytosine triphosphate) or ATP (adenosine triphosphate). The CCA-lacking RNA stem extends by one base pair to force the discriminator nucleoside into the active-site pocket, and then tracks back after incorporation of the first cytosine monophosphate (CMP). Accommodation of the second CTP clamps the catalytic cleft, inducing a reorientation of the turn, which flips C74 to allow CMP to be accepted. In contrast, after the second CMP is added, the polymerase and RNA primer are locked in the closed state, which directs the subsequent A addition. Between the CTP- and ATP-binding stages, the side-chain conformation of Arg 224 changes markedly; this is controlled by the global motion of the enzyme and position of the primer terminus, and is likely to achieve the CTP/ATP discrimination, depending on the polymerization stage. Throughout the CCA-adding reaction, the enzyme tail domain firmly anchors the TPsiC-loop of the tRNA, which ensures accurate polymerization and termination.
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a proinflammatory cytokine that has several effects in the inflammation process. When it binds to its cell-surface receptor, IL-1 initiates a signalling cascade that leads to activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB and is relayed through the protein TRAF6 and a succession of kinase enzymes, including NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (NIK) and I kappaB kinases (IKKs). However, the molecular mechanism by which NIK is activated is not understood. Here we show that the MAPKK kinase TAK1 acts upstream of NIK in the IL-1-activated signalling pathway and that TAK1 associates with TRAF6 during IL-1 signalling. Stimulation of TAK1 causes activation of NF-kappaB, which is blocked by dominant-negative mutants of NIK, and an inactive TAK1 mutant prevents activation of NF-kappaB that is mediated by IL-1 but not by NIK. Activated TAK1 phosphorylates NIK, which stimulates IKK-alpha activity. Our results indicate that TAK1 links TRAF6 to the NIK-IKK cascade in the IL-1 signalling pathway.
A sudden increase in permeability of the inner mitochondrial membrane, the so-called mitochondrial permeability transition, is a common feature of apoptosis and is mediated by the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mtPTP). It is thought that the mtPTP is a protein complex formed by the voltage-dependent anion channel, members of the pro- and anti-apoptotic BAX-BCL2 protein family, cyclophilin D, and the adenine nucleotide (ADP/ATP) translocators (ANTs). The latter exchange mitochondrial ATP for cytosolic ADP and have been implicated in cell death. To investigate the role of the ANTs in the mtPTP, we genetically inactivated the two isoforms of ANT in mouse liver and analysed mtPTP activation in isolated mitochondria and the induction of cell death in hepatocytes. Mitochondria lacking ANT could still be induced to undergo permeability transition, resulting in release of cytochrome c. However, more Ca2+ than usual was required to activate the mtPTP, and the pore could no longer be regulated by ANT ligands. Moreover, hepatocytes without ANT remained competent to respond to various initiators of cell death. Therefore, ANTs are non-essential structural components of the mtPTP, although they do contribute to its regulation.
Class I phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathways regulate several important cellular functions, including cellular growth, division, survival, and movement. Class IB PI3K (also known as PI3Kgamma) links heterotrimeric GTP-binding protein-coupled receptors to these pathways. Activation of class IB PI3K results in the rapid synthesis of phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate [PtdIns(3,4,5)P3] and its dephosphorylation product PtdIns(3,4)P2 in the plasma membrane. These two lipid messengers bind to pleckstrin homology domain-containing effectors that regulate a complex signaling web downstream of receptor activation. Characteristic features of this pathway are the regulation of protein kinases and the regulation of small guanosine triphosphatases that control cellular movement, adhesion, contraction, and secretion. Most of the ligands that activate class IB PI3K are involved in coordinating the body's response to injury and infection, and recent studies suggest that small molecule inhibitors of this enzyme may represent a novel class of anti-inflammatory therapeutic agents.
A transforming gene detected by transfection of chicken B-cell lymphoma DNA has been isolated by molecular cloning. It is homologous to a conserved family of sequences present in normal chicken and human DNAs but is not related to transforming genes of acutely transforming retroviruses. The nucleotide sequence of the cloned transforming gene suggests that it encodes a protein that is partially homologous to the amino terminus of transferrin and related proteins although only about one tenth the size of transferrin.
The TATA-binding protein (TBP) is required for transcription by all three nuclear RNA polymerases. TBP was subjected to regional codon randomization, a codon-based mutagenesis method that generates complex yet compact protein libraries. Analysis of 186 temperature-sensitive TBP mutants yielded 65 specifically defective in transcription by RNA polymerase III (Pol III). These mutants map to a limited TBP surface that may interact with Tds4, a component of the Pol III transcription factor TFIIIB. Strains that contain the Pol III-defective derivatives have increased amounts of messenger RNA, which suggests that competition among TBP-interacting factors for limiting quantities of TBP determines the ratio of Pol II and Pol III transcription in vivo.
A search for derivatized amino acids in proteins has shown that the extent of posttranslational modification of proteins is quite substantial. While only 20 primary amino acids are specified in the genetic code and are involved as monomer building blocks in the assembly of the polypeptide chain, about 140 amino acids and amino acid derivatives have been identified as constituents of different proteins in different organisms. A brief consideration of the questions about where and when the derivatization reactions occur, how the specificity of the reactions is established, and how the posttranslational modifications can facilitate biological processes, reveal a need for more information on all these points. Answers to these questions should represent significant contributions to our understanding of biochemistry and cell biology.
Multiple, complex molecular events characterize cancer development and progression. Deciphering the molecular networks that distinguish organ-confined disease from metastatic disease may lead to the identification of critical biomarkers for cancer invasion and disease aggressiveness. Although gene and protein expression have been extensively profiled in human tumours, little is known about the global metabolomic alterations that characterize neoplastic progression. Using a combination of high-throughput liquid-and-gas-chromatography-based mass spectrometry, we profiled more than 1,126 metabolites across 262 clinical samples related to prostate cancer (42 tissues and 110 each of urine and plasma). These unbiased metabolomic profiles were able to distinguish benign prostate, clinically localized prostate cancer and metastatic disease. Sarcosine, an N-methyl derivative of the amino acid glycine, was identified as a differential metabolite that was highly increased during prostate cancer progression to metastasis and can be detected non-invasively in urine. Sarcosine levels were also increased in invasive prostate cancer cell lines relative to benign prostate epithelial cells. Knockdown of glycine-N-methyl transferase, the enzyme that generates sarcosine from glycine, attenuated prostate cancer invasion. Addition of exogenous sarcosine or knockdown of the enzyme that leads to sarcosine degradation, sarcosine dehydrogenase, induced an invasive phenotype in benign prostate epithelial cells. Androgen receptor and the ERG gene fusion product coordinately regulate components of the sarcosine pathway. Here, by profiling the metabolomic alterations of prostate cancer progression, we reveal sarcosine as a potentially important metabolic intermediary of cancer cell invasion and aggressivity.
beta-Adrenergic stimulation with isoproterenol inhibits contractility, increases cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) concentration, decreases the concentration of unsaturated cyclic AMP receptor sites, and increases cyclic AMP-independent kinase in the uterus of ovariectomized rats. The total soluble kinase activity is reduced. The protein kinase activity lost from the cytosol was translocated to the microsomal fraction mostly in a cyclic AMP-independent form, suggesting a particulate substrate for the activated enzyme.
Human protein C is a vitamin K-dependent plasma glycoprotein that circulates as an inactive zymogen. At the endothelial cell surface, thrombin in complex with the integral membrane protein thrombomodulin converts protein C to its active form by specific cleavage of an activation peptide. The activated form of protein C has potent anticoagulant activity as a feedback regulator of thrombin generation (reviewed in refs 4-6), and also has profibrinolytic, anti-ischaemic and anti-inflammatory properties. Protein C is effective in the treatment of model and human thrombotic diseases but, except when it has been used to treat genetic or acquired deficiencies and microvascular thrombosis, it is administered as the activated enzyme, which has a short biological half-life. We have altered two putative inhibitory acidic residues near the thrombin cleavage site, which results in a 30-fold increase in substrate utilization by alpha-thrombin. We combined these changes with a genetically altered glycoform to generate a zymogen protein C with a 60-fold increased cleavage rate by free alpha-thrombin, independent of its cofactor thrombomodulin. We show that this 'proform' of protein C, unlike the natural circulating zymogen, can be activated by thrombin generated in clotting human plasma, resulting in an inhibition of further clot formation. Our data therefore show that we have engineered a site-activated agent, which only has anticoagulant activity when significant amounts of thrombin are being generated.
The heterotrimeric influenza virus polymerase, containing the PA, PB1 and PB2 proteins, catalyses viral RNA replication and transcription in the nucleus of infected cells. PB1 holds the polymerase active site and reportedly harbours endonuclease activity, whereas PB2 is responsible for cap binding. The PA amino terminus is understood to be the major functional part of the PA protein and has been implicated in several roles, including endonuclease and protease activities as well as viral RNA/complementary RNA promoter binding. Here we report the 2.2 angstrom (A) crystal structure of the N-terminal 197 residues of PA, termed PA(N), from an avian influenza H5N1 virus. The PA(N) structure has an alpha/beta architecture and reveals a bound magnesium ion coordinated by a motif similar to the (P)DX(N)(D/E)XK motif characteristic of many endonucleases. Structural comparisons and mutagenesis analysis of the motif identified in PA(N) provide further evidence that PA(N) holds an endonuclease active site. Furthermore, functional analysis with in vivo ribonucleoprotein reconstitution and direct in vitro endonuclease assays strongly suggest that PA(N) holds the endonuclease active site and has critical roles in endonuclease activity of the influenza virus polymerase, rather than PB1. The high conservation of this endonuclease active site among influenza strains indicates that PA(N) is an important target for the design of new anti-influenza therapeutics.
Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta)-converting enzyme cleaves the IL-1 beta precursor to mature IL-1 beta, an important mediator of inflammation. The identification of the enzyme as a unique cysteine protease and the design of potent peptide aldehyde inhibitors are described. Purification and cloning of the complementary DNA indicates that IL-1 beta-converting enzyme is composed of two nonidentical subunits that are derived from a single proenzyme, possibly by autoproteolysis. Selective inhibition of the enzyme in human blood monocytes blocks production of mature IL-1 beta, indicating that it is a potential therapeutic target.
Steroid hormone-receptor complexes regulate the transcription of specific genes. Recent studies of high-affinity interactions between the receptors and discrete regions of DNA, together with gene-transfer experiments, have led to the precise mapping of hormone regulatory elements. Nothing is known, however, about the mechanisms whereby DNA-bound receptors modulate gene transcription. At the start of transcription in prokaryotes two oligomeric molecules of several regulatory proteins must bind to two specific DNA sites and interact with one another to regulate the binding of RNA polymerase to DNA. Using electron microscopy to observe progesterone receptor binding to regulatory regions of uteroglobin and mouse mammary tumour virus genes, we demonstrate a similar binding between receptor oligomers at two DNA sites. DNA loops are formed when the hormone regulatory elements are at a distance from one another. Thus, in common with certain prokaryotic systems, protein-protein interactions may be important in steroid hormone regulation of gene transcription.
Splicing of the ribosomal RNA precursor of Tetrahymena has previously been shown to require no protein in vitro; the cleavage-ligation activity is intrinsic to the RNA molecule. Analysis of the reaction kinetics with guanosine, which is a substrate in the reaction, and with several guanosine analogues suggests that guanosine binds to a specific site on the pre-rRNA. It appears that the RNA, like an enzyme, binds its substrate to promote the rate and specificity of a biological reaction.
A replication-defective, acute transforming retrovirus (murine sarcoma virus 3611) was isolated from mouse and molecularly cloned. The nucleotide sequence of 1.5 kilobases encompassing the transforming gene (v-raf) was determined. This sequence, which predicts the amino acid sequence of a gag-raf fusion protein, terminates 180 nucleotides from the 3' end of the acquired cellular sequence. Comparison of the predicted amino acid sequence of v-raf with the predicted amino acid sequences of other oncogenes reveals significant homologies to the src family of oncogenes. There is a lack of homology within the sequence of the tyrosine acceptor domain described for the phosphotyrosine kinase members of the src family of transforming proteins. Phylogenetic arrangement of this family of oncogenes suggests that tyrosine-specific phosphorylation may be a recently acquired activity.
Glucose metabolism in glycolysis and in mitochondria is pivotal to glucose-induced insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells. One or more factors derived from glycolysis other than pyruvate appear to be required for the generation of mitochondrial signals that lead to insulin secretion. The electrons of the glycolysis-derived reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) are transferred to mitochondria through the NADH shuttle system. By abolishing the NADH shuttle function, glucose-induced increases in NADH autofluorescence, mitochondrial membrane potential, and adenosine triphosphate content were reduced and glucose-induced insulin secretion was abrogated. The NADH shuttle evidently couples glycolysis with activation of mitochondrial energy metabolism to trigger insulin secretion.
Extensive work on the maturation of lagging strands during the replication of simian virus 40 DNA suggests that the initiator RNA primers of Okazaki fragments are removed by the combined action of two nucleases, RNase HI and Fen1, before the Okazaki fragments join. Despite the well established in vitro roles of these two enzymes, genetic analyses in yeast revealed that null mutants of RNase HI and/or Fen1 are not lethal, suggesting that an additional enzymatic activity may be required for the removal of RNA. One such enzyme is the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Dna2 helicase/endonuclease, which is essential for cell viability and is well suited to removing RNA primers of Okazaki fragments. In addition, Dna2 interacts genetically and physically with several proteins involved in the elongation or maturation of Okazaki fragments. Here we show that the endonucleases Dna2 and Fen1 act sequentially to facilitate the complete removal of the primer RNA. The sequential action of these enzymes is governed by a single-stranded DNA-binding protein, replication protein-A (RPA). Our results demonstrate that the processing of Okazaki fragments in eukaryotes differs significantly from, and is more complicated than, that occurring in prokaryotes. We propose a novel biochemical mechanism for the maturation of eukaryotic Okazaki fragments.
Eukaryotic cells express a wide variety of endogenous small regulatory RNAs that regulate heterochromatin formation, developmental timing, defence against parasitic nucleic acids and genome rearrangement. Many small regulatory RNAs are thought to function in nuclei. For instance, in plants and fungi, short interfering RNA (siRNAs) associate with nascent transcripts and direct chromatin and/or DNA modifications. To understand further the biological roles of small regulatory RNAs, we conducted a genetic screen to identify factors required for RNA interference (RNAi) in Caenorhabditis elegans nuclei. Here we show that the gene nuclear RNAi defective-2 (nrde-2) encodes an evolutionarily conserved protein that is required for siRNA-mediated silencing in nuclei. NRDE-2 associates with the Argonaute protein NRDE-3 within nuclei and is recruited by NRDE-3/siRNA complexes to nascent transcripts that have been targeted by RNAi. We find that nuclear-localized siRNAs direct an NRDE-2-dependent silencing of pre-messenger RNAs (pre-mRNAs) 3' to sites of RNAi, an NRDE-2-dependent accumulation of RNA polymerase (RNAP) II at genomic loci targeted by RNAi, and NRDE-2-dependent decreases in RNAP II occupancy and RNAP II transcriptional activity 3' to sites of RNAi. These results define NRDE-2 as a component of the nuclear RNAi machinery and demonstrate that metazoan siRNAs can silence nuclear-localized RNAs co-transcriptionally. In addition, these results establish a novel mode of RNAP II regulation: siRNA-directed recruitment of NRDE factors that inhibit RNAP II during the elongation phase of transcription.
RNA interference (RNAi) is the mechanism through which double-stranded RNAs silence cognate genes. In plants, this can occur at both the transcriptional and the post-transcriptional levels; however, in animals, only post-transcriptional RNAi has been reported to date. In both plants and animals, RNAi is characterized by the presence of RNAs of about 22 nucleotides in length that are homologous to the gene that is being suppressed. These 22-nucleotide sequences serve as guide sequences that instruct a multicomponent nuclease, RISC, to destroy specific messenger RNAs. Here we identify an enzyme, Dicer, which can produce putative guide RNAs. Dicer is a member of the RNase III family of nucleases that specifically cleave double-stranded RNAs, and is evolutionarily conserved in worms, flies, plants, fungi and mammals. The enzyme has a distinctive structure, which includes a helicase domain and dual RNase III motifs. Dicer also contains a region of homology to the RDE1/QDE2/ARGONAUTE family that has been genetically linked to RNAi.
CD8 T lymphocytes recognize peptides of 8 to 10 amino acids presented by class I molecules of the major histocompatibility complex. Here, CD8 T lymphocytes were found to recognize a nonameric peptide on melanoma cells that comprises two noncontiguous segments of melanocytic glycoprotein gp100(PMEL17). The production of this peptide involves the excision of four amino acids and splicing of the fragments. This process was reproduced in vitro by incubating a precursor peptide of 13 amino acids with highly purified proteasomes. Splicing appears to occur by transpeptidation involving an acyl-enzyme intermediate. Our results reveal an unanticipated aspect of the proteasome function of producing antigenic peptides.
In retroviral integration, the viral integration protein (integrase) mediates a concerted DNA cleavage-ligation reaction in which the target DNA is cleaved and the resulting 5' ends of target DNA are joined to the 3' ends of viral DNA. Through an oligonucleotide substrate that mimics the recombination intermediate formed by this initial cleavage-ligation reaction, the purified integrase of human immunodeficiency virus was shown to promote the same reaction in reverse, a process called disintegration. Analysis of a set of structurally related substrates showed that integrase could promote a range of DNA cleavage-ligation reactions. When the viral DNA component of the disintegration substrate was single-stranded, integrase could mediate a DNA splicing reaction analogous to RNA splicing.
Activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase (also known as extracellular-signal-regulated kinase, or ERK) by growth factors can trigger either cell growth or differentiation. The intracellular signals that couple growth factors to MAP kinase may determine the different effects of growth factors: for example, transient activation of MAP kinase by epidermal growth factor stimulates proliferation of PC12 cells, whereas they differentiate in response to nerve growth factor, which acts partly by inducing a sustained activation of MAP kinase. Here we show that activation of MAP kinase by nerve growth factor involves two distinct pathways: the initial activation of MAP kinase requires the small G protein Ras, but its activation is sustained by the small G protein Rap1. Rap1 is activated by CRK adaptor proteins and the guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor C3G, and forms a stable complex with B-Raf, an activator of MAP kinase. Rap1 is required for at least two indices of neuronal differentiation by nerve growth factor: electrical excitability and the induction of neuron-specific genes. We propose that the activation of Rap1 by C3G represents a common mechanism to induce sustained activation of the MAP kinase cascade in cells that express B-Raf.
Enzyme-catalysed oxidations are some of the most common transformations in primary and secondary metabolism. The vancomycin biosynthetic enzyme DpgC belongs to a small class of oxygenation enzymes that are not dependent on an accessory cofactor or metal ion. The detailed mechanism of cofactor-independent oxygenases has not been established. Here we report the first structure of an enzyme of this oxygenase class in complex with a bound substrate mimic. The use of a designed, synthetic substrate analogue allows unique insights into the chemistry of oxygen activation. The structure confirms the absence of cofactors, and electron density consistent with molecular oxygen is present adjacent to the site of oxidation on the substrate. Molecular oxygen is bound in a small hydrophobic pocket and the substrate provides the reducing power to activate oxygen for downstream chemical steps. Our results resolve the unique and complex chemistry of DpgC, a key enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway of an important class of antibiotics. Furthermore, mechanistic parallels exist between DpgC and cofactor-dependent flavoenzymes, providing information regarding the general mechanism of enzymatic oxygen activation.
Leishmania species cause a spectrum of human diseases in tropical and subtropical regions of the world. We have sequenced the 36 chromosomes of the 32.8-megabase haploid genome of Leishmania major (Friedlin strain) and predict 911 RNA genes, 39 pseudogenes, and 8272 protein-coding genes, of which 36% can be ascribed a putative function. These include genes involved in host-pathogen interactions, such as proteolytic enzymes, and extensive machinery for synthesis of complex surface glycoconjugates. The organization of protein-coding genes into long, strand-specific, polycistronic clusters and lack of general transcription factors in the L. major, Trypanosoma brucei, and Trypanosoma cruzi (Tritryp) genomes suggest that the mechanisms regulating RNA polymerase II-directed transcription are distinct from those operating in other eukaryotes, although the trypanosomatids appear capable of chromatin remodeling. Abundant RNA-binding proteins are encoded in the Tritryp genomes, consistent with active posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression.
The infectious agents causing scrapie and other transmissible spongiform encephalopathies have been postulated to consist solely of the protease-resistant form of prion protein (PrPSc). One unprecedented requirement of the protein-only model is that the 'inheritance' of pathogen strain differences must be mediated by stable variations in PrPSc structure, rather than mutations in an agent-specific nucleic acid. Strain differences in PrPSc structure have been described for the hyper (HY) and drowsy (DY) strains of hamster transmissible mink encephalopathy (TME), a scrapie-like disease originating in mink. Although HY and DY PrPSc are both post-translationally derived from the precursor prion protein (PrPC) they are cleaved at different amino-terminal sites by proteinase K (ref. 8). Here we investigate whether this strain-specific property of PrPSc is transmitted to PrPC during formation of new PrPSc. PrPSc from the HY and DY TME strains converted the protease-sensitive PrPC into two distinct sets of protease-resistant PrP products in a cell-free system. These data provide evidence that self-propagation of PrPSc polymers with distinct three-dimensional structures could be the molecular basis of scrapie strains.
Neuroleukin is a neurotrophic factor of relative molecular mass (Mr) 56,000 (56K) found in skeletal muscle, brain, heart and kidneys which supports the survival of embryonic spinal neurones, skeletal motor neurones and sensory neurones. Neuroleukin is also a lymphokine product of lectin-stimulated T cells and induces immunoglobulin secretion by cultured human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Mouse neuroleukin has been cloned, the complete nucleotide sequence has been determined and its complementary DNA has been transiently expressed in monkey COS-1 cells. The serum-free supernatant of the transfected, but not of control mock-transfected, cells was shown to mimic the properties of neuroleukin isolated from mouse salivary glands. In our work on the molecular genetics of carbohydrate metabolism we have recently isolated a mouse glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (or phosphoglucose isomerase, PGI) cDNA clone using the yeast PGI gene (PGI 1) as a probe. We report here that there is complete sequence identity between the 759 nucleotides at the 3' end of this clone (coding and non-coding) and the sequence of mouse neuroleukin.
Dissection and reconstitution of the adenovirus DNA replication machinery has led to the discovery of two HeLa nuclear proteins which are required in conjunction with three viral proteins. One of these, nuclear factor I (NF-I), recognizes an internal region of the origin between nucleotides 25 and 40 and by binding to one side of the helix stimulates the initiation reaction up to 30-fold. NFI-binding sites have been observed upstream of several cellular genes, such as chicken lysozyme, human IgM and human c-myc, and coincide in most cases with DNase I hypersensitive regions. Here we report the identification of a novel DNA-binding protein from HeLa nuclei, designated NF-III, that recognizes a sequence in the adenovirus origin very close to the NFI-binding site, between nucleotides 36 and 54. This sequence includes the partially conserved nucleotides TATGATAATGAG. NF-III stimulates DNA replication four- to sixfold by increasing the initiation efficiency. Potential cellular binding sites include promoter elements of the histone H2B gene, the human interferon beta gene, the human and mouse immunoglobulin VK and VH genes and the mammal/chicken/Xenopus laevis U1 and U2 small nuclear RNA genes. Furthermore, a subset of the herpes simplex virus immediate early promoter specific TAATGARAT elements is homologous with the adenovirus 2 (Ad-2) NFIII-binding site.
Iron has a fundamental role in many metabolic processes, including electron transport, deoxyribonucleotide synthesis, oxygen transport and many essential redox reactions involving haemoproteins and Fe-S cluster proteins. Defective iron homeostasis results in either iron deficiency or iron overload. Precise regulation of iron transport in mitochondria is essential for haem biosynthesis, haemoglobin production and Fe-S cluster protein assembly during red cell development. Here we describe a zebrafish mutant, frascati (frs), that shows profound hypochromic anaemia and erythroid maturation arrest owing to defects in mitochondrial iron uptake. Through positional cloning, we show that the gene mutated in the frs mutant is a member of the vertebrate mitochondrial solute carrier family (SLC25) that we call mitoferrin (mfrn). mfrn is highly expressed in fetal and adult haematopoietic tissues of zebrafish and mouse. Erythroblasts generated from murine embryonic stem cells null for Mfrn (also known as Slc25a37) show maturation arrest with severely impaired incorporation of 55Fe into haem. Disruption of the yeast mfrn orthologues, MRS3 and MRS4, causes defects in iron metabolism and mitochondrial Fe-S cluster biogenesis. Murine Mfrn rescues the defects in frs zebrafish, and zebrafish mfrn complements the yeast mutant, indicating that the function of the gene may be highly conserved. Our data show that mfrn functions as the principal mitochondrial iron importer essential for haem biosynthesis in vertebrate erythroblasts.
A new type of host-dependent mutant, azure mutant, of bacteriophage f2 has been isolated. Growth of these mutants was restricted specifically by amber suppressor genes in the host bacteria. Restriction of the formation of infective centers by different bacterial suppressor genes was 98 percent, 90 percent, and 70 percent with Su-3, Su-1, and Su-2 genes, respectively. Restriction, like suppression, was the dominant phenotype. The block in growth of the mutants occurred in an early stage of the infection cycle. Once infection was established, however, an infected cell produced approximately the same number of progeny phage as a cell without the suppressor genes did. It is proposed that the azure codon is the same as the amber codon (uracil, adenine, guanine) and that restriction results from improper termination of protein chains of the phage RNA polymerase. Similar mutants may exist in other systems.
A possible direct effect of guanine nucleotide binding (G) proteins on calcium channels was examined in membrane patches excised from guinea pig cardiac myocytes and bovine cardiac sarcolemmal vesicles incorporated into planar lipid bilayers. The guanosine triphosphate analog, GTP gamma S, prolonged the survival of excised calcium channels independently of the presence of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP), adenosine triphosphate, cAMP-activated protein kinase, and the protein kinase C activator tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate. A specific G protein, activated Gs, or its alpha subunit, purified from the plasma membranes of human erythrocytes, prolonged the survival of excised channels and stimulated the activity of incorporated channels. Thus, in addition to regulating calcium channels indirectly through activation of cytoplasmic kinases, G proteins can regulate calcium channels directly. Since they also directly regulate a subset of potassium channels, G proteins are now known to directly gate two classes of membrane ion channels.
The gene A protein of bacteriophage phiX174 has been used in vitro to convert phiX RFI DNA into the relaxed RFII form by nicking the viral strand. The nucleotide sequence at the 3' end of the nick has been determined as -- T G C T C C C C C A A C T T Goh. This sequence gives the exact position of the origin of phiX RF DNA replication.
The proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA or cyclin) is a nuclear protein recently identified as a cofactor of DNA polymerase delta. When exponentially growing Balb/c3T3 cells are exposed to antisense oligodeoxynucleotides to PCNA, both DNA synthesis and mitosis are completely suppressed. A corresponding sense oligodeoxynucleotide has no inhibitory effects. These experiments indicate that PCNA (cyclin) is important in cellular DNA synthesis and in cell cycle progression.
Replication forks are impeded by DNA damage and protein-nucleic acid complexes such as transcribing RNA polymerase. For example, head-on collision of the replisome with RNA polymerase results in replication fork arrest. However, co-directional collision of the replisome with RNA polymerase has little or no effect on fork progression. Here we examine co-directional collisions between a replisome and RNA polymerase in vitro. We show that the Escherichia coli replisome uses the RNA transcript as a primer to continue leading-strand synthesis after the collision with RNA polymerase that is displaced from the DNA. This action results in a discontinuity in the leading strand, yet the replisome remains intact and bound to DNA during the entire process. These findings underscore the notable plasticity by which the replisome operates to circumvent obstacles in its path and may explain why the leading strand is synthesized discontinuously in vivo.
Replication proteins encoded by bacteriophage T4 generate DNA replication forks that can pass a molecule of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase moving in the same direction as the fork in vitro. The RNA polymerase ternary transcription complex remains bound to the DNA and retains a transcription bubble after the fork passes. The by-passed ternary complex can resume faithful RNA synthesis, suggesting that the multisubunit RNA polymerase of E. coli has evolved to retain its transcript after DNA replication, allowing partially completed transcripts to be elongated into full-length RNA molecules.
The origin of allostery is an unanswered question in the evolution of complex regulatory proteins. Anabolic ornithine transcarbamoylase, a trimer of identical subunits, is not an allosteric enzyme per se. However, when the active-site residue arginine-106 of the Escherichia coli enzyme is replaced with a glycine through site-directed mutagenesis, the resultant mutant enzyme manifests substrate cooperativity that is absent in the wild-type enzyme. Both homotropic and heterotropic interactions occur in the mutant enzyme. The initial velocity saturation curves of the substrates, carbamoyl phosphate and L-ornithine, conform to the Hill equation. The observed cooperativity depends on substrate but not enzyme concentration. The finding underscores the possibility that a single mutation of the enzyme in the cell could turn transcarbamoylation into a regulatory junction in the biosynthesis of L-arginine and urea.
Mammalian phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C enzymes (PI-PLC) act as signal transducers that generate two second messengers, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate and diacylglycerol. The 2.4-A structure of phospholipase C delta 1 reveals a multidomain protein incorporating modules shared by many signalling proteins. The structure suggests a mechanism for membrane attachment and Ca2+-dependent hydrolysis of second-messenger precursors. The regulation and reversible membrane association of PI-PLC may serve as a model for understanding other multidomain enzymes involved in phospholipid signalling.
Monotherapy with (-)2',3'-dideoxy-3'-thiacytidine (3TC) leads to the appearance of a drug-resistant variant of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) with the methionine-184 --> valine (M184V) substitution in the reverse transcriptase (RT). Despite resulting drug resistance, treatment for more than 48 weeks is associated with a lower plasma viral burden than that at baseline. Studies to investigate this apparent contradiction revealed the following. (i) Titers of HIV-neutralizing antibodies remained stable in 3TC-treated individuals in contrast to rapid declines in those treated with azidothymidine (AZT). (ii) Unlike wild-type HIV, growth of M184V HIV in cell culture in the presence of d4T, AZT, Nevirapine, Delavirdine, or Saquinavir did not select for variants displaying drug resistance. (iii) There was an increase in fidelity of nucleotide insertion by the M184V mutant compared with wild-type enzyme.
Sections of liver from rats injected with 3,4-benzpyrene and 3-methylcholanthrene, when incubated in mediums specific for the histochemical demonstration of mitochondrial oxidative enzymes, show greater activity of several of these enzymes than do sections from control rats. This observation was confirmed by comparison of the staining of mitochondria isolated from the control and from "induced" rats. The fact that an inhibitor of protein synthesis, actinomycin D, effectively diminished the stimulation provided evidence that the stimulation of activity is due to an increase in enzyme synthesis, generally called induction.
The complete nucleotide sequence (580,070 base pairs) of the Mycoplasma genitalium genome, the smallest known genome of any free-living organism, has been determined by whole-genome random sequencing and assembly. A total of only 470 predicted coding regions were identified that include genes required for DNA replication, transcription and translation, DNA repair, cellular transport, and energy metabolism. Comparison of this genome to that of Haemophilus influenzae suggests that differences in genome content are reflected as profound differences in physiology and metabolic capacity between these two organisms.
THE superfamily of low molecular mass GTP-binding proteins, for which the ras proteins are prototypes, has been implicated in the regulation of diverse biological activities including protein trafficking, secretion, and cell growth and differentiation. One member of this family, CDC42Hs (originally referred to as Gp or G25K), seems to be the human homologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell-division-cycle protein, CDC42Sc. A second S. cerevisiae protein, CDC24, which is known from complementation studies to act with CDC42Sc to regulate the development of normal cell shape and the selection of nonrandom budding sites in yeast, contains a region with sequence similarity to the dbl oncogene product. Here we show that dbl specifically catalyses the dissociation of GDP from CDC42Hs and thereby qualifies as a highly selective guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the GTP-binding protein. Although guanine nucleotide exchange activities have been previously described for other members of the Ras-related GTP-binding protein family, this is the first demonstration, to our knowledge, of the involvement of a human oncogenic protein in catalysing exchange activity.
Electrostatic forces have been implicated in a variety of biologically important molecular interactions including drug orientation by DNA, protein folding and assembly, substrate binding and catalysis and macromolecular complementarity with inhibitors, drugs and hormones. To examine enzyme-substrate interactions in copper, zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD), we developed a method for the visualization and analysis of an enzyme's three-dimensional electrostatic vector field that allows the contributions of specific residues to be identified. We report here that the arrangement of electrostatic charges in SOD promotes productive enzyme-substrate interaction through substrate guidance and charge complementarity: sequence-conserved residues create an extensive electrostatic field that directs the negatively charged superoxide (O-2) substrate to the highly positive catalytic binding site at the bottom of the active-site channel. Dissection of the electrostatic potential gradient indicated the relative contributions of individual charged residues: Lys 134 and Glu 131 seem to have important roles in directing the long-range approach of O-2, while Arg 141 has local orienting effects. The reported methods of analysis may have general application for the elucidation of intermolecular recognition processes.
Infectious and inflammatory diseases have repeatedly shown strong genetic associations within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC); however, the basis for these associations remains elusive. To define host genetic effects on the outcome of a chronic viral infection, we performed genome-wide association analysis in a multiethnic cohort of HIV-1 controllers and progressors, and we analyzed the effects of individual amino acids within the classical human leukocyte antigen (HLA) proteins. We identified >300 genome-wide significant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the MHC and none elsewhere. Specific amino acids in the HLA-B peptide binding groove, as well as an independent HLA-C effect, explain the SNP associations and reconcile both protective and risk HLA alleles. These results implicate the nature of the HLA-viral peptide interaction as the major factor modulating durable control of HIV infection.
The functional analysis of determinants on RNA has been largely limited to molecules that contain naturally occurring ribonucleotides, so little is known about the role of 2'-hydroxyl groups in protein-RNA recognition. A single base pair (G3.U70) in the acceptor stem of tRNA(Ala) is the principal element for specific recognition by Escherichia coli alanine-tRNA synthetase. This tRNA synthetase aminoacylates small RNA helices that contain the G3.U70 base pair. Furthermore, removal of the G3 exocyclic 2-amino group that projects into the minor groove eliminates aminoacylation. This 2-amino group is flanked on either side by ribose 2'-hydroxyl groups that line the minor groove. Here we use chemical synthesis to construct 32 helices that make deoxy and O-methyl substitutions of individual and multiple 2'-hydroxyl groups near and beyond the G3.U70 base pair and find that functional 2'-hydroxyl contacts are clustered within a few angstroms of the critical 2-amino group. These contacts are highly specific and make a thermodynamically significant contribution to RNA recognition.
Reversible phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine is the most widely studied posttranslational modification of proteins. The number of phosphorylated sites on a protein (n) shows a significant increase from prokaryotes, with n </= 7 sites, to eukaryotes, with examples having n >/= 150 sites. Multisite phosphorylation has many roles and site conservation indicates that increasing numbers of sites cannot be due merely to promiscuous phosphorylation. A substrate with n sites has an exponential number (2(n)) of phospho-forms and individual phospho-forms may have distinct biological effects. The distribution of these phospho-forms and how this distribution is regulated have remained unknown. Here we show that, when kinase and phosphatase act in opposition on a multisite substrate, the system can exhibit distinct stable phospho-form distributions at steady state and that the maximum number of such distributions increases with n. Whereas some stable distributions are focused on a single phospho-form, others are more diffuse, giving the phospho-proteome the potential to behave as a fluid regulatory network able to encode information and flexibly respond to varying demands. Such plasticity may underlie complex information processing in eukaryotic cells and suggests a functional advantage in having many sites. Our results follow from the unusual geometry of the steady-state phospho-form concentrations, which we show to constitute a rational algebraic curve, irrespective of n. We thereby reduce the complexity of calculating steady states from simulating 3 x 2(n) differential equations to solving two algebraic equations, while treating parameters symbolically. We anticipate that these methods can be extended to systems with multiple substrates and multiple enzymes catalysing different modifications, as found in posttranslational modification 'codes' such as the histone code. Whereas simulations struggle with exponentially increasing molecular complexity, mathematical methods of the kind developed here can provide a new language in which to articulate the principles of cellular information processing.
Enzymatic incorporation of chlorine, bromine or iodine atoms occurs during the biosynthesis of more than 4,000 natural products. Halogenation can have significant consequences for the bioactivity of these products so there is great interest in understanding the biological catalysts that perform these reactions. Enzymes that halogenate unactivated aliphatic groups have not previously been characterized. Here we report the activity of five proteins-CmaA, CmaB, CmaC, CmaD and CmaE-in the construction of coronamic acid (CMA; 1-amino-1-carboxy-2-ethylcyclopropane), a constituent of the phytotoxin coronatine synthesized by the phytopathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas syringae. CMA derives from l-allo-isoleucine, which is covalently attached to CmaD through the actions of CmaA, a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase module, and CmaE, an unusual acyltransferase. We show that CmaB, a member of the non-haem Fe(2+), alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent enzyme superfamily, is the first of its class to show halogenase activity, chlorinating the gamma-position of l-allo-isoleucine. Another previously undescribed enzyme, CmaC, catalyses the formation of the cyclopropyl ring from the gamma-Cl-l-allo-isoleucine product of the CmaB reaction. Together, CmaB and CmaC execute gamma-halogenation followed by intramolecular gamma-elimination, in which biological chlorination is a cryptic strategy for cyclopropyl ring formation.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is essential for cells to maintain respiratory competency and is inherited as a protein-DNA complex called the nucleoid. We have identified 22 mtDNA-associated proteins in yeast, among which is mitochondrial aconitase (Aco1p). We show that this Krebs-cycle enzyme is essential for mtDNA maintenance independent of its catalytic activity. Regulation of ACO1 expression by the HAP and retrograde metabolic signaling pathways directly affects mtDNA maintenance. When constitutively expressed, Aco1p can replace the mtDNA packaging function of the high-mobility-group protein Abf2p. Thus, Aco1p may integrate metabolic signals and mtDNA maintenance.
Hydroxylation of rotenone in vitro in the enzyme system composed of microsomes and reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate, and in living mice and houseflies, yields products tentatively identified as rotenolone I; rotenolone II; 8'-hydroxyrotenone; 6',7'-dihydro-6',7'-dihydroxyrotenone; two rotenolones of each of the last-mentioned two compounds; and uncharacterized polar materials. The toxicity of certain of these rotenoids to mice is of the same order as that of rotenone.
Heparin is a sulphated polysaccharide, synthesized exclusively by connective-tissue-type mast cells and stored in the secretory granules in complex with histamine and various mast-cell proteases. Although heparin has long been used as an antithrombotic drug, endogenous heparin is not present in the blood, so it cannot have a physiological role in regulating blood coagulation. The biosynthesis of heparin involves a series of enzymatic reactions, including sulphation at various positions. The initial modification step, catalysed by the enzyme glucosaminyl N-deacetylase/N-sulphotransferase-2, NDST-2, is essential for the subsequent reactions. Here we report that mice carrying a targeted disruption of the gene encoding NDST-2 are unable to synthesize sulphated heparin. These NDST-2-deficient mice are viable and fertile but have fewer connective-tissue-type mast cells; these cells have an altered morphology and contain severely reduced amounts of histamine and mast-cell proteases. Our results indicate that one site of physiological action for heparin could be inside connective-tissue-type mast cells, where its absence results in severe defects in the secretory granules.
Sequence determination of cloned cDNAs and genes of the three classes of interferon (IFN-alpha, -beta and -gamma) has revealed more than a dozen members of the human IFN-alpha gene family and a single gene for IFN-beta. These genes are found on chromosome 9 and contain no introns. We recently reported that the 146-amino acid sequence of mature IFN-gamma deduced from the nucleotide sequence of a cloned cDNA was quite unrelated to those of the other IFNs, and that the gene for IFN-gamma contains at least one intron. We now describe the isolation, characterization and DNA sequence of the human IFN-gamma gene. It contains three introns, a repetitive DNA element, and is not highly polymorphic. All our evidence to date and the present data suggest that this is the only gene for IFN-gamma and that the resolution of IFN-gamma into two components is probably the result of post-translational processing of the protein.
Subtilisin E, an alkaline serine protease consisting of a single polypeptide chain of 275 amino acids is produced from a pre-pro-protein. The pre-sequence functions as the signal peptide for protein secretion across the membrane. Deletion of the pro-sequence yields mature but inactive subtilisin: the 77-amino acid pro-sequence must precede the mature subtilisin to guide the latter into an active conformation. Pro-subtilisin denatured in 6 M guanidine-HCl can be self-processed to the active enzyme intramolecularly, with concomitant cleavage of the pro-sequence, when dialysed against renaturing buffer. We have constructed an active-centre mutant of pro-subtilisin (Asp 32----Asn) which is not processed to active enzyme, unlike the wild-type pro-subtilisin, because intramolecular processing is prevented. Here we report an intermolecular pathway for the refolding of the inactive mature protein to an active enzyme in vitro with the aid of exogenously added pro-sequence. We establish conditions under which the mature inactive form, as well as acid-denatured subtilisins Carlsberg and BPN', can be renatured by the mutant pro-subtilisin.
The nitrogenase enzyme system catalyzes the ATP (adenosine triphosphate)-dependent reduction of dinitrogen to ammonia during the process of nitrogen fixation. Nitrogenase consists of two proteins: the iron (Fe)-protein, which couples hydrolysis of ATP to electron transfer, and the molybdenum-iron (MoFe)-protein, which contains the dinitrogen binding site. In order to address the role of ATP in nitrogen fixation, the crystal structure of the nitrogenase Fe-protein from Azotobacter vinelandii has been determined at 2.9 angstrom (A) resolution. Fe-protein is a dimer of two identical subunits that coordinate a single 4Fe:4S cluster. Each subunit folds as a single alpha/beta type domain, which together symmetrically ligate the surface exposed 4Fe:4S cluster through two cysteines from each subunit. A single bound ADP (adenosine diphosphate) molecule is located in the interface region between the two subunits. Because the phosphate groups of this nucleotide are approximately 20 A from the 4Fe:4S cluster, it is unlikely that ATP hydrolysis and electron transfer are directly coupled. Instead, it appears that interactions between the nucleotide and cluster sites must be indirectly coupled by allosteric changes occurring at the subunit interface. The coupling between protein conformation and nucleotide hydrolysis in Fe-protein exhibits general similarities to the H-Ras p21 and recA proteins that have been recently characterized structurally. The Fe-protein structure may be relevant to the functioning of other biochemical energy-transducing systems containing two nucleotide-binding sites, including membrane transport proteins.
Mitochondrial metabolism provides precursors to build macromolecules in growing cancer cells. In normally functioning tumour cell mitochondria, oxidative metabolism of glucose- and glutamine-derived carbon produces citrate and acetyl-coenzyme A for lipid synthesis, which is required for tumorigenesis. Yet some tumours harbour mutations in the citric acid cycle (CAC) or electron transport chain (ETC) that disable normal oxidative mitochondrial function, and it is unknown how cells from such tumours generate precursors for macromolecular synthesis. Here we show that tumour cells with defective mitochondria use glutamine-dependent reductive carboxylation rather than oxidative metabolism as the major pathway of citrate formation. This pathway uses mitochondrial and cytosolic isoforms of NADP(+)/NADPH-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase, and subsequent metabolism of glutamine-derived citrate provides both the acetyl-coenzyme A for lipid synthesis and the four-carbon intermediates needed to produce the remaining CAC metabolites and related macromolecular precursors. This reductive, glutamine-dependent pathway is the dominant mode of metabolism in rapidly growing malignant cells containing mutations in complex I or complex III of the ETC, in patient-derived renal carcinoma cells with mutations in fumarate hydratase, and in cells with normal mitochondria subjected to acute pharmacological ETC inhibition. Our findings reveal the novel induction of a versatile glutamine-dependent pathway that reverses many of the reactions of the canonical CAC, supports tumour cell growth, and explains how cells generate pools of CAC intermediates in the face of impaired mitochondrial metabolism.
alpha-Difluoromethylornithine is an enzyme-activated irreversible inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase that forms a covalent bond with the enzyme. When alpha-[5-14C]difluoromethylornithine was administered to androgen-treated mice, only ornithine decarboxylase became labeled. Autoradiographic examination of kidney, liver, and brain indicated much more extensive incorporation of labeled difluoromethylornithine into kidney protein than into the protein of the other tissues. Such incorporation was greatly reduced by prior treatment of the mice with cycloheximide. These results correlate with the presence of ornithine decarboxylase activity which is much higher in the kidney than in the other tissues and is lost rapidly when protein synthesis is inhibited. The binding of this drug in vivo, therefore, is useful for determining the distribution of ornithine decarboxylase. The enzyme was predominantly located in the proximal tubule cells of the kidney in androgen-treated mice.
Spike (S) proteins of coronaviruses, including the coronavirus that causes severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), associate with cellular receptors to mediate infection of their target cells. Here we identify a metallopeptidase, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), isolated from SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV)-permissive Vero E6 cells, that efficiently binds the S1 domain of the SARS-CoV S protein. We found that a soluble form of ACE2, but not of the related enzyme ACE1, blocked association of the S1 domain with Vero E6 cells. 293T cells transfected with ACE2, but not those transfected with human immunodeficiency virus-1 receptors, formed multinucleated syncytia with cells expressing S protein. Furthermore, SARS-CoV replicated efficiently on ACE2-transfected but not mock-transfected 293T cells. Finally, anti-ACE2 but not anti-ACE1 antibody blocked viral replication on Vero E6 cells. Together our data indicate that ACE2 is a functional receptor for SARS-CoV.
Vitanin A (retinol) is essential for spermatogenesis. Alcohol dehydrogenase, the enzyme responsible for ethanol metabolism, is also required for the conversion of retinol to bioactive retinal at the end organ site. Ethanol inhibits the oxidation of retinol by testicular homogenates containing alcohol dehydrogenase. Thus, a possible biochemnical mechanism for the sterility of chronic alcoholics is identified.
African sleeping sickness or human African trypanosomiasis, caused by Trypanosoma brucei spp., is responsible for approximately 30,000 deaths each year. Available treatments for this disease are poor, with unacceptable efficacy and safety profiles, particularly in the late stage of the disease when the parasite has infected the central nervous system. Here we report the validation of a molecular target and the discovery of associated lead compounds with the potential to address this lack of suitable treatments. Inhibition of this target-T. brucei N-myristoyltransferase-leads to rapid killing of trypanosomes both in vitro and in vivo and cures trypanosomiasis in mice. These high-affinity inhibitors bind into the peptide substrate pocket of the enzyme and inhibit protein N-myristoylation in trypanosomes. The compounds identified have promising pharmaceutical properties and represent an opportunity to develop oral drugs to treat this devastating disease. Our studies validate T. brucei N-myristoyltransferase as a promising therapeutic target for human African trypanosomiasis.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are generated by a two-step processing pathway to yield RNA molecules of approximately 22 nucleotides that negatively regulate target gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. Primary miRNAs are processed to precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) by the Microprocessor complex. These pre-miRNAs are cleaved by the RNase III Dicer to generate mature miRNAs that direct the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) to messenger RNAs with complementary sequence. Here we show that TRBP (the human immunodeficiency virus transactivating response RNA-binding protein), which contains three double-stranded, RNA-binding domains, is an integral component of a Dicer-containing complex. Biochemical analysis of TRBP-containing complexes revealed the association of Dicer-TRBP with Argonaute 2 (Ago2), the catalytic engine of RISC. The physical association of Dicer-TRBP and Ago2 was confirmed after the isolation of the ternary complex using Flag-tagged Ago2 cell lines. In vitro reconstitution assays demonstrated that TRBP is required for the recruitment of Ago2 to the small interfering RNA (siRNA) bound by Dicer. Knockdown of TRBP results in destabilization of Dicer and a consequent loss of miRNA biogenesis. Finally, depletion of the Dicer-TRBP complex via exogenously introduced siRNAs diminished RISC-mediated reporter gene silencing. These results support a role of the Dicer-TRBP complex not only in miRNA processing but also as a platform for RISC assembly.
Enzymatic turnovers of single cholesterol oxidase molecules were observed in real time by monitoring the emission from the enzyme's fluorescent active site, flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Statistical analyses of single-molecule trajectories revealed a significant and slow fluctuation in the rate of cholesterol oxidation by FAD. The static disorder and dynamic disorder of reaction rates, which are essentially indistinguishable in ensemble-averaged experiments, were determined separately by the real-time single-molecule approach. A molecular memory phenomenon, in which an enzymatic turnover was not independent of its previous turnovers because of a slow fluctuation of protein conformation, was evidenced by spontaneous spectral fluctuation of FAD.
The general transcription factor IIE (TFIIE) is an essential component of the eukaryotic RNA polymerase II initiation complex. We have isolated human complementary DNA clones for both the subunits of TFIIE. Using purified recombinant proteins we find that both subunits are essential to form a stable preinitiation complex and to reconstitute basal-level and Sp1-activated transcription in vitro. Analysis of their predicted amino-acid sequences reveals several intriguing structural motifs that could provide insight into the role of TFIIE in transcription initiation.
Prions are infectious particles causing transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs). They consist, at least in part, of an isoform (PrPSc) of the ubiquitous cellular prion protein (PrPC). Conformational differences between PrPC and PrPSc are evident from increased beta-sheet content and protease resistance in PrPSc. Here we describe a monoclonal antibody, 15B3, that can discriminate between the normal and disease-specific forms of PrP. Such an antibody has been long sought as it should be invaluable for characterizing the infectious particle as well as for diagnosis of TSEs such as bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in humans. 15B3 specifically precipitates bovine, murine or human PrPSc, but not PrPC, suggesting that it recognizes an epitope common to prions from different species. Using immobilized synthetic peptides, we mapped three polypeptide segments in PrP as the 15B3 epitope. In the NMR structure of recombinant mouse PrP, segments 2 and 3 of the 15B3 epitope are near neighbours in space, and segment 1 is located in a different part of the molecule. We discuss models for the PrPSc-specific epitope that ensure close spatial proximity of all three 15B3 segments, either by intermolecular contacts in oligomeric forms of the prion protein or by intramolecular rearrangement.
Structure determination at 2.4 angstrom resolution shows that lambda-exonuclease consists of three subunits that form a toroid. The central channel is funnel shaped, tapering from an inner diameter of about 30 angstroms at the wider end to 15 angstroms at the narrow end. This is adequate to accommodate the DNA substrate and thus provides a structural basis for the ability of the enzyme to sequentially hydrolyze thousands of nucleotides in a highly processive manner. The results also suggest the locations of the active sites and the constraints that limit cleavage to a single strand.
Metal ion cofactors afford proteins virtually unlimited catalytic potential, enable electron transfer reactions and have a great impact on protein stability. Consequently, metalloproteins have key roles in most biological processes, including respiration (iron and copper), photosynthesis (manganese) and drug metabolism (iron). Yet, predicting from genome sequence the numbers and types of metal an organism assimilates from its environment or uses in its metalloproteome is currently impossible because metal coordination sites are diverse and poorly recognized. We present here a robust, metal-based approach to determine all metals an organism assimilates and identify its metalloproteins on a genome-wide scale. This shifts the focus from classical protein-based purification to metal-based identification and purification by liquid chromatography, high-throughput tandem mass spectrometry (HT-MS/MS) and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) to characterize cytoplasmic metalloproteins from an exemplary microorganism (Pyrococcus furiosus). Of 343 metal peaks in chromatography fractions, 158 did not match any predicted metalloprotein. Unassigned peaks included metals known to be used (cobalt, iron, nickel, tungsten and zinc; 83 peaks) plus metals the organism was not thought to assimilate (lead, manganese, molybdenum, uranium and vanadium; 75 peaks). Purification of eight of 158 unexpected metal peaks yielded four novel nickel- and molybdenum-containing proteins, whereas four purified proteins contained sub-stoichiometric amounts of misincorporated lead and uranium. Analyses of two additional microorganisms (Escherichia coli and Sulfolobus solfataricus) revealed species-specific assimilation of yet more unexpected metals. Metalloproteomes are therefore much more extensive and diverse than previously recognized, and promise to provide key insights for cell biology, microbial growth and toxicity mechanisms.
T-cell activation requires clustering of a threshold number of T-cell receptors (TCRs) at the site of antigen presentation, a number that is reduced by CD28 co-receptor recruitment of signalling proteins to TCRs. Here we demonstrate that a deficiency in beta1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V (Mgat5), an enzyme in the N-glycosylation pathway, lowers T-cell activation thresholds by directly enhancing TCR clustering. Mgat5-deficient mice showed kidney autoimmune disease, enhanced delayed-type hypersensitivity, and increased susceptibility to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Recruitment of TCRs to agonist-coated beads, TCR signalling, actin microfilament re-organization, and agonist-induced proliferation were all enhanced in Mgat5-/- T cells. Mgat5 initiates GlcNAc beta1,6 branching on N-glycans, thereby increasing N-acetyllactosamine, the ligand for galectins, which are proteins known to modulate T-cell proliferation and apoptosis. Indeed, galectin-3 was associated with the TCR complex at the cell surface, an interaction dependent on Mgat5. Pre-treatment of wild-type T cells with lactose to compete for galectin binding produced a phenocopy of Mgat5-/- TCR clustering. These data indicate that a galectin-glycoprotein lattice strengthened by Mgat5-modified glycans restricts TCR recruitment to the site of antigen presentation. Dysregulation of Mgat5 in humans may increase susceptibility to autoimmune diseases, such as multiple sclerosis.
G proteins couple receptors to their target enzymes in many signal transduction cascades. It has generally been thought that deactivation of such cascades cannot occur without the hydrolysis of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) by G protein. This requirement has now been reexamined in both vertebrate and invertebrate phototransduction. Results indicate that GTP hydrolysis is not required for deactivation. Evidence is presented for an alternative model in which the target enzyme is deactivated by an inhibitory factor that is available even when GTP hydrolysis is blocked.
Interplay among four genes--egl-1, ced-9, ced-4 and ced-3--controls the onset of programmed cell death in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Activation of the cell-killing protease CED-3 requires CED-4. However, CED-4 is constitutively inhibited by CED-9 until its release by EGL-1. Here we report the crystal structure of the CED-4-CED-9 complex at 2.6 A resolution, and a complete reconstitution of the CED-3 activation pathway using homogeneous proteins of CED-4, CED-9 and EGL-1. One molecule of CED-9 binds to an asymmetric dimer of CED-4, but specifically recognizes only one of the two CED-4 molecules. This specific interaction prevents CED-4 from activating CED-3. EGL-1 binding induces pronounced conformational changes in CED-9 that result in the dissociation of the CED-4 dimer from CED-9. The released CED-4 dimer further dimerizes to form a tetramer, which facilitates the autoactivation of CED-3. Together, our studies provide important insights into the regulation of cell death activation in C. elegans.
Previously known 5' exonucleases of several eubacterial DNA polymerases have now been shown to be structure-specific endonucleases that cleave single-stranded DNA or RNA at the bifurcated end of a base-paired duplex. Cleavage was not coupled to synthesis, although primers accelerated the rate of cleavage considerably. The enzyme appeared to gain access to the cleavage site by moving from the free end of a 5' extension to the bifurcation of the duplex, where cleavage took place. Single-stranded 5' arms up to 200 nucleotides long were cleaved from such a duplex. Essentially any linear single-stranded nucleic acid can be targeted for specific cleavage by the 5' nuclease of DNA polymerase through hybridization with an oligonucleotide that converts the desired cleavage site into a substrate.
Broken chromosomes arising from DNA double-strand breaks result from endogenous events such as the production of reactive oxygen species during cellular metabolism, as well as from exogenous sources such as ionizing radiation. Left unrepaired or incorrectly repaired they can lead to genomic changes that may result in cell death or cancer. DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), a holoenzyme that comprises the DNA-PK catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) and the heterodimer Ku70/Ku80, has a major role in non-homologous end joining-the main pathway in mammals used to repair double-strand breaks. DNA-PKcs is a serine/threonine protein kinase comprising a single polypeptide chain of 4,128 amino acids and belonging to the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K)-related protein family. DNA-PKcs is involved in the sensing and transmission of DNA damage signals to proteins such as p53, setting off events that lead to cell cycle arrest. It phosphorylates a wide range of substrates in vitro, including Ku70/Ku80, which is translocated along DNA. Here we present the crystal structure of human DNA-PKcs at 6.6 A resolution, in which the overall fold is clearly visible, to our knowledge, for the first time. The many alpha-helical HEAT repeats (helix-turn-helix motifs) facilitate bending and allow the polypeptide chain to fold into a hollow circular structure. The carboxy-terminal kinase domain is located on top of this structure, and a small HEAT repeat domain that probably binds DNA is inside. The structure provides a flexible cradle to promote DNA double-strand-break repair.
Gene expression in eukaryotes is normally believed to be controlled by transcriptional regulators that activate genes encoding structural proteins and enzymes. To identify previously unrecognized DNA binding activities, a yeast proteome microarray was screened with DNA probes; Arg5,6, a well-characterized mitochondrial enzyme involved in arginine biosynthesis, was identified. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that Arg5,6 is associated with specific nuclear and mitochondrial loci in vivo, and Arg5,6 binds to specific fragments in vitro. Deletion of Arg5,6 causes altered transcript levels of both nuclear and mitochondrial target genes. These results indicate that metabolic enzymes can directly regulate eukaryotic gene expression.
Major epidemic outbreaks of acute gastroenteritis result from infections with Norwalk or Norwalk-like viruses. Virus purified from stool specimens of volunteers experimentally infected with Norwalk virus was used to construct recombinant complementary DNA (cDNA) and derive clones representing most of the viral genome. The specificity of the clones was shown by their hybridization with post- (but not pre-) infection stool samples from volunteers infected with Norwalk virus and with purified Norwalk virus. A correlation was observed between the appearance of hybridization signals in stool samples and clinical symptoms of acute gastroenteritis in volunteers. Hybridization assays between overlapping clones, restriction enzyme analyses, and partial nucleotide sequence information of the clones indicated that Norwalk virus contains a single-stranded RNA genome of positive sense, with a polyadenylated tail at the 3' end and a size of at least 7.5 kilobases. A consensus amino acid sequence motif typical of viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerases was identified in one of the Norwalk virus clones. The availability of Norwalk-specific cDNA and the new sequence information of the viral genome should permit the development of sensitive diagnostic assays and studies of the molecular biology of the virus.
Incubation of cortical synaptic membranes with low concentrations of calcium resulted in a decrease in the amount of a high-molecular-weight doublet protein and an increase in the sodium-independent binding of glutamate. Both effects were blocked by the thiol protease inhibitor leupeptin. These results suggest that calcium-induced proteolysis of membrane components regulates the number of glutamate receptors in neuronal membranes.
Plasma membranes are dynamic structures of proteins and lipids. Protein-protein or protein-lipid interactions within the membrane are believed to have important roles in many membrane functions, including ion transport, enzyme activity and signal reception. The acetylcholine (ACh) receptor-channel complex in skeletal muscle membrane is one of the best known integral membrane proteins. Its ion transport function is accessible to direct measurement at the single-channel level by the use of the 'giga-seal' patch recording technique. Here we used an in situ electrophoresis technique to rearrange the topography of pre-existing ACh receptor-channels in the muscle membrane, and measured the single-channel kinetics of ACh-activated channels in two different molecular environments within the membrane: those in the diffusely distributed region and those in the ACh receptor clusters induced by the applied field. We found that the channel kinetics are significantly prolonged in the ACh receptor cluster compared with the non-clustered region of the same cell. This result strongly supports the notion that the function of a membrane ionic channel depends on the local molecular environment.
Inflammasomes are a family of cytosolic multiprotein complexes that initiate innate immune responses to pathogenic microbes by activating the caspase 1 protease. Although genetic data support a critical role for inflammasomes in immune defence and inflammatory diseases, the molecular basis by which individual inflammasomes respond to specific stimuli remains poorly understood. The inflammasome that contains the NLRC4 (NLR family, CARD domain containing 4) protein was previously shown to be activated in response to two distinct bacterial proteins, flagellin and PrgJ, a conserved component of pathogen-associated type III secretion systems. However, direct binding between NLRC4 and flagellin or PrgJ has never been demonstrated. A homologue of NLRC4, NAIP5 (NLR family, apoptosis inhibitory protein 5), has been implicated in activation of NLRC4 (refs 7-11), but is widely assumed to have only an auxiliary role, as NAIP5 is often dispensable for NLRC4 activation. However, Naip5 is a member of a small multigene family, raising the possibility of redundancy and functional specialization among Naip genes. Here we show in mice that different NAIP paralogues determine the specificity of the NLRC4 inflammasome for distinct bacterial ligands. In particular, we found that activation of endogenous NLRC4 by bacterial PrgJ requires NAIP2, a previously uncharacterized member of the NAIP gene family, whereas NAIP5 and NAIP6 activate NLRC4 specifically in response to bacterial flagellin. We dissected the biochemical mechanism underlying the requirement for NAIP proteins by use of a reconstituted NLRC4 inflammasome system. We found that NAIP proteins control ligand-dependent oligomerization of NLRC4 and that the NAIP2-NLRC4 complex physically associates with PrgJ but not flagellin, whereas NAIP5-NLRC4 associates with flagellin but not PrgJ. Our results identify NAIPs as immune sensor proteins and provide biochemical evidence for a simple receptor-ligand model for activation of the NAIP-NLRC4 inflammasomes.
Mammals have separate enzymatic and cellularly mediated detoxification systems. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) protect against xenobiotic chemicals which continuously enter the body, largely through mucous membranes. These enzymes catalyse the conjugation of glutathione with a wide variety of electrophilic compounds rendering them non-toxic. Mammals also mount a cellular immunological response on entry of foreign cells, viruses or macromolecules into the body. T lymphocytes mobilize at the site of foreign body entry and secrete protein messengers called lymphokines. Secondary to T lymphocytes, macrophages concentrate at the infection site and function in antigen processing and phagocytosis. In vitro, macrophage movement is arrested by one class of lymphokines known as macrophage migration inhibitory factors (MIFs). We report here the purification of milligram quantities of a unique multifunctional protein from rat liver which links enzymatic and immunological detoxification systems. This protein actuates both GST and MIF activity and matches the primary structure of a human MIF in 25 out of 26 amino-terminal amino acids. Primary structure comparisons revealed significant similarity between GSTs and MIF. The glutathione affinity chromatography purification described here yields a 100-fold increase in obtaining MIF and will aid understanding of its precise biological function.
Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) is a potent pro-inflammatory and immunomodulatory cytokine implicated in inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn's disease, multiple sclerosis and the cachexia associated with cancer or human immunodeficiency virus infection. TNF-alpha is initially expressed as a 233-amino-acid membrane-anchored precursor which is proteolytically processed to yield the mature, 157-amino-acid cytokine. The processing enzyme(s) which cleave TNF-alpha are unknown. Here we show that the release of mature TNF-alpha from leukocytes cultured in vitro is specifically prevented by synthetic hydroxamic acid-based metalloproteinase inhibitors, which also prevent the release of TNF-alpha into the circulation of endotoxin challenged rats. A recombinant, truncated TNF-alpha precursor is cleaved to biologically active, mature TNF-alpha by several matrix metalloproteinase enzymes. These results indicate that processing of the TNF-alpha precursor is dependent on at least one matrix metalloproteinase-like enzyme, inhibition of which represents a novel therapeutic mechanism for interfering with TNF-alpha production.
The nucleotide sequence of the RNA polymerase binding site at a promotor on fd RF DNA has been determined in comparison with the starting sequence of RNA initiated at this promoter. The RNA polymerase binding site contained the startpoint of transcription in the centre and a region with twofold symmetry in the non-transcribed part.
Although promoter regions for many plant nuclear genes have been sequenced, identification of the active promoter sequence has been carried out only for the octopine synthase promoter. That analysis was of callus tissue and made use of an enzyme assay. We have analysed the effects of 5' deletions in a plant viral promoter in tobacco callus as well as in regenerated plants, including different plant tissues. We assayed the RNA transcription product which allows a more direct assessment of deletion effects. The cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter provides a model plant nuclear promoter system, as its double-strand DNA genome is transcribed by host nuclear RNA polymerase II from a CaMV minichromosome. Sequences extending to -46 were sufficient for accurate transcription initiation whereas the region between -46 and -105 increased greatly the level of transcription. The 35S promoter showed no tissue-specificity of expression.
The rate of generation of molecular sequence data is forcing the use of computers as a central tool in molecular biology. Current use of computers is limited largely to data management and sequence comparisons, but rapid growth in the volume of data is generating pressure for the development of high-speed analytical methods for deciphering the codes connecting nucleotide sequence with protein structure and function.
Guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins are required for intracellular vesicular transport. Mastoparan is a peptide component of wasp venom that increases nucleotide exchange in some classes of G alpha subunits of regulatory heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G proteins). Mastoparan and other compounds that increase nucleotide exchange by G proteins inhibited endosome fusion in vitro and reversed the effects of guanosine 5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) (GTP-gamma-S), a nonhydrolyzable GTP analog. Addition of beta gamma subunits of G proteins to the fusion assay antagonized the stimulatory effect of GTP-gamma-S, confirming the participation of G proteins. These results indicate that GTP-binding proteins are required for endosome fusion and in particular that a G protein is involved. Given the function of G proteins in signal transduction, these findings may provide insight into the mechanism by which endosomal vesicles become competent for fusion after their formation at the cell surface.
Thermoplasma acidophilum is a thermoacidophilic archaeon that thrives at 59 degrees C and pH 2, which was isolated from self-heating coal refuse piles and solfatara fields. Species of the genus Thermoplasma do not possess a rigid cell wall, but are only delimited by a plasma membrane. Many macromolecular assemblies from Thermoplasma, primarily proteases and chaperones, have been pivotal in elucidating the structure and function of their more complex eukaryotic homologues. Our interest in protein folding and degradation led us to seek a more complete representation of the proteins involved in these pathways by determining the genome sequence of the organism. Here we have sequenced the 1,564,905-base-pair genome in just 7,855 sequencing reactions by using a new strategy. The 1,509 open reading frames identify Thermoplasma as a typical euryarchaeon with a substantial complement of bacteria-related genes; however, evidence indicates that there has been much lateral gene transfer between Thermoplasma and Sulfolobus solfataricus, a phylogenetically distant crenarchaeon inhabiting the same environment. At least 252 open reading frames, including a complete protein degradation pathway and various transport proteins, resemble Sulfolobus proteins most closely.
The structural basis for the distinction of viral RNA from abundant self RNA in the cytoplasm of virally infected cells is largely unknown. We demonstrated that the 5'-triphosphate end of RNA generated by viral polymerases is responsible for retinoic acid-inducible protein I (RIG-I)-mediated detection of RNA molecules. Detection of 5'-triphosphate RNA is abrogated by capping of the 5'-triphosphate end or by nucleoside modification of RNA, both occurring during posttranscriptional RNA processing in eukaryotes. Genomic RNA prepared from a negative-strand RNA virus and RNA prepared from virus-infected cells (but not from noninfected cells) triggered a potent interferon-alpha response in a phosphatase-sensitive manner. 5'-triphosphate RNA directly binds to RIG-I. Thus, uncapped 5'-triphosphate RNA (now termed 3pRNA) present in viruses known to be recognized by RIG-I, but absent in viruses known to be detected by MDA-5 such as the picornaviruses, serves as the molecular signature for the detection of viral infection by RIG-I.
Ebola virus (EboV) causes rapidly fatal hemorrhagic fever in humans and there is currently no effective treatment. We found that the infection of African green monkey kidney (Vero) cells by vesicular stomatitis viruses bearing the EboV glycoprotein (GP) requires the activity of endosomal cysteine proteases. Using selective protease inhibitors and protease-deficient cell lines, we identified an essential role for cathepsin B (CatB) and an accessory role for cathepsin L (CatL) in EboV GP-dependent entry. Biochemical studies demonstrate that CatB and CatL mediate entry by carrying out proteolysis of the EboV GP subunit GP1 and support a multistep mechanism that explains the relative contributions of these enzymes to infection. CatB and CatB/CatL inhibitors diminish the multiplication of infectious EboV-Zaire in cultured cells and may merit investigation as anti-EboV drugs.
Opsin, the ligand-free form of the G-protein-coupled receptor rhodopsin, at low pH adopts a conformationally distinct, active G-protein-binding state known as Ops*. A synthetic peptide derived from the main binding site of the heterotrimeric G protein-the carboxy terminus of the alpha-subunit (GalphaCT)-stabilizes Ops*. Here we present the 3.2 A crystal structure of the bovine Ops*-GalphaCT peptide complex. GalphaCT binds to a site in opsin that is opened by an outward tilt of transmembrane helix (TM) 6, a pairing of TM5 and TM6, and a restructured TM7-helix 8 kink. Contacts along the inner surface of TM5 and TM6 induce an alpha-helical conformation in GalphaCT with a C-terminal reverse turn. Main-chain carbonyl groups in the reverse turn constitute the centre of a hydrogen-bonded network, which links the two receptor regions containing the conserved E(D)RY and NPxxY(x)(5,6)F motifs. On the basis of the Ops*-GalphaCT structure and known conformational changes in Galpha, we discuss signal transfer from the receptor to the G protein nucleotide-binding site.
New technologies for multiple chemical synthesis of oligonucleotides and stepwise hybridization on a solid-phase support enable the rapid and cost-effective preparation of long duplex DNA regions. Will these new technologies usher in a new era in protein engineering?
The adenovirus EIA and pseudorabies virus immediate early (IE) proteins induce transcription from transfected viral and nonviral genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II (class II genes). These proteins have now been shown also to activate transcription of transfected genes transcribed by RNA polymerase III (class III genes). As previously observed for class II genes, this stimulation of class III gene transcription was much greater for transfected genes than for the major endogenous cellular class III genes. Extracts made from cell lines stably expressing a transfected pseudorabies virus IE gene were 10 to 20 times more active in the in vitro transcription of exogenously added class III genes than extracts of the parental cell line. These results indicate that the E1A and IE proteins stimulate the expression of class III genes by a mechanism similar to the mechanism for stimulation of class II gene transcription by these proteins.
The RepA protein of plasmid pC194 initiates and terminates rolling circle replication. At initiation, it forms a 5'-phosphotyrosyl DNA link, whereas at termination, a glutamate residue directs hydrolytic cleavage of the newly synthesized origin, and the resulting 3'-hydroxyl group undergoes transesterification with the phosphotyrosine link. The protein is thus released from DNA, and the termination is uncoupled from reinitiation of replication. Replacement of the glutamate with tyrosine in RepA altered this mechanism, so that termination occurred by two successive transesterifications and became coupled to reinitiation. This result suggests that various enzymes involved in DNA cleavage and rejoining may have similar mechanistic and evolutionary roots.
Current methods for sequence-specific cleavage of large segments of DNA are severely limited because of the paucity of possible cleavage sites. A method is described whereby any Eco RI site can be targeted for specific cleavage. The technique is based on the ability of RecA protein from Escherichia coli to pair an oligonucleotide to its homologous sequence in duplex DNA and to form a three-stranded complex. This complex is protected from Eco RI methylase; after methylation and RecA protein removal, Eco RI restriction enzyme cleavage was limited to the site previously protected from methylation. When pairs of oligonucleotides are used, a specific fragment can be cleaved out of genomes. The method was tested on lambda phage, Escherichia coli, and human DNA. Fragments exceeding 500 kilobases in length and yields exceeding 80 percent could be obtained.
Understanding the conditions that promote the maintenance of cooperation is a classic problem in evolutionary biology. The essence of this dilemma is captured by the 'tragedy of the commons': how can a group of individuals that exploit resources in a cooperative manner resist invasion by 'cheaters' who selfishly use common resources to maximize their individual reproduction at the expense of the group? Here, we investigate this conflict through experimental competitions between isogenic cheater and cooperator strains of yeast with alternative pathways of glucose metabolism, and by using mathematical models of microbial biochemistry. We show that both coexistence and competitive exclusion are possible outcomes of this conflict, depending on the spatial and temporal structure of the environment. Both of these outcomes are driven by trade-offs between the rate and efficiency of conversion of resources into offspring that are mediated by metabolic intermediates.
The nucleoli of eukaryotic cells are the sites of ribosomal RNA transcription and processing and of ribosomal subunit assembly. They contain multiple small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), several of which are essential for rRNA maturation. The U3, U8 and U13 snoRNA genes are transcribed independently, whereas U14-U24, as well as E3, are located within introns of protein-coding genes, most of whose functions are linked to translation. These snoRNAs are co-transcribed with their host pre-mRNAs and released by processing from excised introns. Here we show that, in addition to U22, seven novel fibrillarin-associated snoRNAs, named U25-U31, are encoded within different introns of the unusually compact mammalian U22 host gene (UHG). All seven RNAs exhibit extensive (12-15 nucleotides) complementarity to different segments of the mature rRNAs, followed by a C/AUGA ('U-turn') sequence. The spliced UHG RNA, although it is associated with polysomes, has little potential for protein coding, is short-lived, and is poorly conserved between human and mouse. Thus, the introns rather than the exons specify the functional products of UHG.
Phenolic reagents which uncouple oxidative phosphorylation are bound to the protein moiety of mitochondria. This interaction may induce configurational changes in the enzymes of oxidative phosphorylation, and these changes could be responsible for the uncoupling phenomenon
Addition of acetate to a stationary phase culture of Escherichia coli in glycerol mineral salts medium containing phosphorus-32-labeled orthophosphate results in rapid loss of isocitrate dehydrogenase activity and concomitant incorporation of phosphorus-32 into the enzyme. This is the first example of protein phosphorylation in a bacterium in which the endogenous substrate for the protein kinase has been identified.
Flavobacterium sp. KI72 metabolizes 6-aminohexanoic acid cyclic dimer, a by-product of nylon manufacture, through two newly evolved enzymes, 6-aminohexanoic acid cyclic dimer hydrolase (EI) and 6-aminohexanoic acid linear oligomer hydrolase (EII). These enzymes are active towards man-made compounds, the cyclic dimer and linear oligomers of 6-aminohexanoic acid respectively, but not towards any of the natural amide bonds tested. The structural genes of EI (nylA) and EII (nylB) are encoded on pOAD2, one of three plasmids harboured in Flavobacterium sp. KI72. This plasmid contains two kinds of repeated sequence (RS-I and RS-II); one of the two RS-II sequences, RS-IIA, contains the nylB gene, while the other, RS-IIB, contains a homologous nylB' gene. From comparisons of the nucleotide sequences and gene products of the nylB and nylB' genes, we now conclude that EII enzyme is newly evolved by gene duplication followed by base substitutions on the same plasmid.
We have previously found that lines of activated T lymphocytes specifically autosensitized to the basic protein of myelin (BP), on intravenous inoculation into syngeneic rats, were able to penetrate blood vessels, accumulate in the nervous system and cause experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). An important question is how effector T cells reach such targets outside the walls of blood vessels. To investigate this we have studied in vitro the interaction of anti-BP effector T lymphocytes with the basement membrane-like extracellular matrix produced by vascular endothelial cells. We now report that activated but not resting T lymphocytes produce an endoglycosidase capable of degrading heparan sulphate side chains of the proteoglycan scaffold of the extracellular matrix. Moreover, the anti-BP T lymphocytes respond to BP presented by extracellular matrix by markedly enhanced elaboration of the endoglycosidase. These results suggest that tissue-specific antigens on blood vessel walls could direct lymphocyte homing by activating enzymes that facilitate penetration of the subendothelial basal lamina. They also suggest that effector T lymphocytes can recognize antigen which is not associated with a major histocompatibility complex signal.
Length polymorphisms within simple-sequence loci occur ubiquitously in non-coding eukaryotic DNA and can be highly informative in the analysis of natural populations. Simple-sequence length polymorphisms (SSLP) in the long-finned pilot whale Globicephala melas (Delphinidae) have provided useful information on the mating system as well as on the genetic structure of populations. We have therefore tested whether the polymerase chain reaction primers designed for Globicephala could also be used to uncover variability in other whale species. Homologous loci could indeed be amplified from a diverse range of whales, including all toothed (Odontoceti) and baleen whales (Mysticeti) tested. Cloning and sequencing these loci from 11 different species revealed an unusually high conservation of sequences flanking the simple-sequence stretches, averaging 3.2% difference over 35-40 Myr. This represents the lowest divergence rate for neutral nucleotide positions found for any species group so far and raises the possible need for a re-evaluation of the age of the modern whales. On the other hand, the high conservation of non-coding sequences in whales simplifies the application of SSLP DNA fingerprinting in cetacean species, as primers designed for one species will often uncover variability in other species.
A large fraction of eukaryotic genomes consists of DNA that is not translated into protein sequence, and little is known about its functional significance. Here I show that several classes of non-coding DNA in Drosophila are evolving considerably slower than synonymous sites, and yet show an excess of between-species divergence relative to polymorphism when compared with synonymous sites. The former is a hallmark of selective constraint, but the latter is a signature of adaptive evolution, resembling general patterns of protein evolution in Drosophila. I estimate that about 40-70% of nucleotides in intergenic regions, untranslated portions of mature mRNAs (UTRs) and most intronic DNA are evolutionarily constrained relative to synonymous sites. However, I also use an extension to the McDonald-Kreitman test to show that a substantial fraction of the nucleotide divergence in these regions was driven to fixation by positive selection (about 20% for most intronic and intergenic DNA, and 60% for UTRs). On the basis of these observations, I suggest that a large fraction of the non-translated genome is functionally important and subject to both purifying selection and adaptive evolution. These results imply that, although positive selection is clearly an important facet of protein evolution, adaptive changes to non-coding DNA might have been considerably more common in the evolution of D. melanogaster.
Eukaryotic cells mobilize the actin cytoskeleton to generate a remarkable diversity of morphological behaviours, including motility, phagocytosis and cytokinesis. Much of this diversity is mediated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) that activate Rho family GTPases-the master regulators of the actin cytoskeleton. There are over 80 Rho GEFs in the human genome (compared to only 22 genes for the Rho GTPases themselves), and the evolution of new and diverse GEFs is thought to provide a mechanism for linking the core cytoskeletal machinery to a wide range of new control inputs. Here we test this hypothesis and ask if we can systematically reprogramme cellular morphology by engineering synthetic GEF proteins. We focused on Dbl family Rho GEFs, which have a highly modular structure common to many signalling proteins: they contain a catalytic Dbl homology (DH) domain linked to diverse regulatory domains, many of which autoinhibit GEF activity. Here we show that by recombining catalytic GEF domains with new regulatory modules, we can generate synthetic GEFs that are activated by non-native inputs. We have used these synthetic GEFs to reprogramme cellular behaviour in diverse ways. The GEFs can be used to link specific cytoskeletal responses to normally unrelated upstream signalling pathways. In addition, multiple synthetic GEFs can be linked as components in series to form an artificial cascade with improved signal processing behaviour. These results show the high degree of evolutionary plasticity of this important family of modular signalling proteins, and indicate that it may be possible to use synthetic biology approaches to manipulate the complex spatio-temporal control of cell morphology.
In order to obtain detailed information about the relationship between structure and function in antibody molecules, a method called affinity labeling has been devised to attach chemical labels specifically to amino acid residues in the active sites of antibody molecules. With antibodies to three different haptens, highly specific labeling of the active sites has been achieved. Tyrosine residues on both heavy and light polypeptide chains have been labeled in a molar ratio close to 2:1, and labels on the two chains are equally specific to the active sites. Peptide fragmentation studies of the labeled chains of one antibody system have shown that: (i) within 25 amino acid residues of the labeled tyrosine on either chain, substantial chemical heterogeneity exists among different antibody molecules of the same specificity; and (ii) the labeled peptide fragments from both chains are very similar in physicochemical characteristics, including average size, heterogeneity, and unusual hydrophobicity. These experimental results have led us to the view that a particular region of the heavy chain and a particular region of the light chain are utilized to construct the active sites of the three different antibodies, differences in specificity arising from chemical perturbations in these two regions. Correlated structural studies of affinity-labeled antibodies and of the homogeneous light chains (Bence Jones proteins) and heavy chains produced in multiple myeloma may permit the identification of these special active-site regions. The view that active sites of different specificity are chemical perturbations of a particular region of the antibody molecule has a possible close analogue in enzyme systems, particularly among the esterases. The marked chemical similarities we have observed between the active site regions of heavy and light chains indicate to us that chemical homologies, but not identities, exist between the chains. This is reinforced by recently obtained amino acid sequence data which reveal homologies between the two chains near their carboxyl-terminals. These results indicate that the structural genes which code for the synthesis of heavy and light chains are related, presumably having arisen from some common ancestral gene during evolution. This conclusion strongly suggests that both heavy and light chains determine antibody specificity, and has important implications for the still-unknow mechanisms of antibody biosynthesis.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a polypeptide that enhances survival, nerve fibre outgrowth and neurotransmitter biosynthesis in sympathetic and sensory neurones. Administration of antibodies against NGF to developing animals leads to atrophy of the sympathetic system. NGF is not normally detectable in innervated tissues but ablation of the innervating neurones leads to the production of measurable NGF in the target tissue. After transplantation of the denervated tissue, reinnervation occurs, then NGF decreases to undetectable levels. Thus NGF seems to act as a neurotrophic messenger and its level is regulated by innervating neurones. Because of the minute levels present it is very difficult to study NGF biosynthesis in innervated tissue. However, NGF can be isolated from male mouse submaxillary glands, where it exists in inexplicably high levels. Its amino acid sequence has been determined, and the synthesis of NGF and its larger precursors has been demonstrated in cultured submaxillary glands. We report here the nucleotide sequence of a submaxillary cDNA encoding the mouse NGF precursor (preproNGF). In contrast to previous suppositions the NGF moiety is situated near the carboxyterminus of the polyprotein precursor. It is flanked at the amino-terminus by 187 amino acids which may be cleaved at dibasic residues to generate three peptides; there are only two additional amino acids at the carboxy-terminus.
The preparation of synthetic molecules showing the remarkable efficiencies characteristic of natural biopolymer catalysts remains a formidable challenge for chemical biology. Although significant advances have been made in the understanding of protein structure and function, the de novo construction of such systems remains elusive. Re-engineered natural enzymes and catalytic antibodies, possessing tailored binding pockets with appropriately positioned functional groups, have been successful in catalysing a number of chemical transformations, sometimes with impressive efficiencies. But efforts to produce wholly synthetic catalytic peptides have typically resulted in compounds with questionable structural stability, let alone reactivity. Here we describe a 33-residue synthetic peptide, based on the coiled-coil structural motif, which efficiently catalyses the condensation of two shorter peptide fragments with high sequence- and diastereoselectivity. Depending on the substrates used, we observe rate enhancements of tenfold to 4,100-fold over the background, with catalytic efficiencies in excess of 10(4). These results augur well for the rational design of functional peptides.
The regulatory domain of protein kinase C contains an amino acid sequence between residues 19 and 36 that resembles a substrate phosphorylation site in its distribution of basic residue recognition determinants. The corresponding synthetic peptide (Arg19-Phe-Ala-Arg-Lys-Gly-Ala25-Leu-Arg-Gln-Lys-Asn-Val-His -Glu-Val-Lys-Asn36) acts as a potent substrate antagonist with an inhibitory constant of 147 +/- 9 nM. It is a specific inhibitor of protein kinase C and inhibits both autophosphorylation and protein substrate phosphorylation. Substitution of Ala25 with serine transforms the pseudosubstrate into a potent substrate. These results demonstrate that the conserved region of the regulatory domain (residues 19 to 36) of protein kinase C has the secondary structural features of a pseudosubstrate and may be responsible for maintaining the enzyme in the inactive form in the absence of allosteric activators such as phospholipids.
The molecular clock maintains energy constancy by producing circadian oscillations of rate-limiting enzymes involved in tissue metabolism across the day and night. During periods of feeding, pancreatic islets secrete insulin to maintain glucose homeostasis, and although rhythmic control of insulin release is recognized to be dysregulated in humans with diabetes, it is not known how the circadian clock may affect this process. Here we show that pancreatic islets possess self-sustained circadian gene and protein oscillations of the transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1. The phase of oscillation of islet genes involved in growth, glucose metabolism and insulin signalling is delayed in circadian mutant mice, and both Clock and Bmal1 (also called Arntl) mutants show impaired glucose tolerance, reduced insulin secretion and defects in size and proliferation of pancreatic islets that worsen with age. Clock disruption leads to transcriptome-wide alterations in the expression of islet genes involved in growth, survival and synaptic vesicle assembly. Notably, conditional ablation of the pancreatic clock causes diabetes mellitus due to defective beta-cell function at the very latest stage of stimulus-secretion coupling. These results demonstrate a role for the beta-cell clock in coordinating insulin secretion with the sleep-wake cycle, and reveal that ablation of the pancreatic clock can trigger the onset of diabetes mellitus.
How DNA repair proteins distinguish between the rare sites of damage and the vast expanse of normal DNA is poorly understood. Recognizing the mutagenic lesion 8-oxoguanine (oxoG) represents an especially formidable challenge, because this oxidized nucleobase differs by only two atoms from its normal counterpart, guanine (G). Here we report the use of a covalent trapping strategy to capture a human oxoG repair protein, 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase I (hOGG1), in the act of interrogating normal DNA. The X-ray structure of the trapped complex features a target G nucleobase extruded from the DNA helix but denied insertion into the lesion recognition pocket of the enzyme. Free energy difference calculations show that both attractive and repulsive interactions have an important role in the preferential binding of oxoG compared with G to the active site. The structure reveals a remarkably effective gate-keeping strategy for lesion discrimination and suggests a mechanism for oxoG insertion into the hOGG1 active site.
Dimethyl sulfoxide inhibits horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase. In the direction of aldehyde reduction, this inhibition is competitive with aldehyde, with an inhibition constant of 5 x 10(-3)M. Dimethyl sulfoxide reacts with the binary complex consisting of enzyme and the reduced form of nicotinamide -adenine dinucleotide to form a highly fluorescent ternary complex, with a dissociation constant similar to the inhibition constant. The inhibition of aldehyde reduction can be interpreted as due to competition between aldehyde and dimethyl sulfoxide for the carbonyl binding site of the above-mentioned binary complex.
Many hormones act on neuroendocrine cells by activating second messenger pathways. Two of these, the phosphoinositol and cAMP-dependent pathways, cause changes in cellular activity through specific protein kinases. By phosphorylating cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, these kinases apparently coordinate cellular processes, including the biosynthesis and release of neuropeptides. Somatostatin biosynthesis and release, for example, are both positively regulated by the second messenger cAMP in hypothalamic cells, and cAMP also induces somatostatin gene transcription 8-10-fold in transfected PC12 pheochromocytoma cells. Transcriptional induction requires a 30-nucleotide cAMP response element (CRE) which is conserved in other cAMP-responsive genes. This element also confers cAMP responsiveness when placed upstream of the heterologous simian virus 40 (SV40) promoter. The somatostatin gene does not, however, respond to cAMP in mutant PC12 cells which lack cAMP-dependent protein kinase type II activity. Activation of somatostatin gene transcription may consequently require the phosphorylation of a nuclear protein which binds to the CRE. Using a DNase I protection assay, we have characterized a nuclear protein in PC12 cells which binds selectively to the CRE in the somatostatin gene. We have purified this protein which is of relative molecular mass 43,000 (Mr 43K) by sequence-specific DNA affinity chromatography. This 43K CRE binding protein (CREB) is phosphorylated in vitro when it is incubated with the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Stimulating PC12 cells with forskolin, an activator of adenyl cyclase, causes a 3-4-fold increase in the phosphorylation of this protein. We conclude that the cAMP-dependent pathway may regulate gene transcription in response to hormonal stimulation by phosphorylating this CREB protein.
A nucleotide sequence comprising 960 base pairs of bacteriophage lambda DNA has been determined. The sequence includes the entire genes of the regulatory proteins cro and cII, and part of the O gene, together with control elements for their transcription and translation. The right-hand boundaries of the lambdaimm434 and lambdaimm21 substitutions and the cy42 mutation have been located.
Post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins plays an important part in mediating protein interactions and/or the recruitment of specific protein targets. PTM can be mediated by the addition of functional groups (for example, acetylation or phosphorylation), peptides (for example, ubiquitylation or sumoylation), or nucleotides (for example, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation). Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation often involves the addition of long chains of ADP-ribose units, linked by glycosidic ribose-ribose bonds, and is critical for a wide range of processes, including DNA repair, regulation of chromosome structure, transcriptional regulation, mitosis and apoptosis. Here we identify a novel poly(ADP-ribose)-binding zinc finger (PBZ) motif in a number of eukaryotic proteins involved in the DNA damage response and checkpoint regulation. The PBZ motif is also required for post-translational poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. We demonstrate interaction of poly(ADP-ribose) with this motif in two representative human proteins, APLF (aprataxin PNK-like factor) and CHFR (checkpoint protein with FHA and RING domains), and show that the actions of CHFR in the antephase checkpoint are abrogated by mutations in PBZ or by inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) synthesis.
The only well-understood mechanism of zymogen activation is that of the serine proteinases, in which proteolytic cleavage leads to conformational changes resulting in a functional active site. A different mechanism is now unveiled by the crystal structure of pepsinogen. Salt bridges that stabilize the positioning of the N-terminal proenzyme segment across the active site of pepsin are disrupted at low pH, releasing the amino-terminal segment and thereby exposing the catalytic apparatus and the substrate-binding sites.
The crystal structure of the aldehyde oxido-reductase (Mop) from the sulfate reducing anaerobic Gram-negative bacterium Desulfovibrio gigas has been determined at 2.25 A resolution by multiple isomorphous replacement and refined. The protein, a homodimer of 907 amino acid residues subunits, is a member of the xanthine oxidase family. The protein contains a molybdopterin cofactor (Mo-co) and two different [2Fe-2S] centers. It is folded into four domains of which the first two bind the iron sulfur centers and the last two are involved in Mo-co binding. Mo-co is a molybdenum molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide. Molybdopterin forms a tricyclic system with the pterin bicycle annealed to a pyran ring. The molybdopterin dinucleotide is deeply buried in the protein. The cis-dithiolene group of the pyran ring binds the molybdenum, which is coordinated by three more (oxygen) ligands.
Removal of intervening sequences from eukaryotic messenger RNA precursors is carried out by the spliceosome, a complex assembly of five small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) and a large number of proteins. Although it has been suggested that the spliceosome might be an RNA enzyme, direct evidence for this has been lacking, and the identity of the catalytic domain of the spliceosome is unknown. Here we show that a protein-free complex of two snRNAs, U2 and U6, can bind and position a small RNA containing the sequence of the intron branch site, and activate the branch adenosine to attack a catalytically critical domain of U6 in a reaction that is related to the first step of splicing. Our data provide direct evidence for the catalytic potential of spliceosomal snRNAs.
In many cell types an increase in cytosolic calcium is the main signal for the exocytotic release of stored secretory components such as hormones and neurotransmitters. The site of action of calcium in exocytosis is not known, neither are the participating molecules. In the case of the intracellular membrane fusions that occur during transport through early stages of the secretory pathway, several cytosolic and peripheral membrane proteins are necessary. Permeabilized cells have been useful in understanding the requirements for calcium and nucleotides in regulated exocytosis and under certain conditions there is leakage of soluble protein components and run-down of the exocytotic response. This system can be used to identify the soluble proteins involved in exocytosis, one candidate in chromaffin cells being annexin II (calpactin). Here we use this assay to identify two other cytosolic protein factors that regulate exocytosis in permeabilized adrenal chromaffin cells, which we term Exo1 and Exo2. Exo1 from brain cytosol resolves on electrophoresis in SDS-polyacrylamide gels as a group of polypeptides of relative molecular mass approximately 30,000 and shares sequence homology with the 14-3-3 family of proteins. The ability of Exo1 to reactivate exocytosis is potentiated by protein kinase C activation and therefore Exo1 may influence the protein kinase C-mediated control of Ca(2+)-dependent exocytosis.
Injection of two 25-microgram-per-gram doses of the hemolytic agent phenylhydrazine reduced the hemoglobin level and the erythrocyte count to less than 1 percent of normal tadpole and young blullfrog blood. These anemic animals survive for weeks with little change in overall metabolism. A slow recovery of hemoglobin levels was observed. The implications of this observation for comparative biochemistry are considered.
Infestation of the gastrointestinal tract by parasitic nematodes is invariably associated with mucosal mastocytosis, which is a thymus-dependent phenomenon in parasitized rats, and is adoptively transferable with a T cell-enriched population of thoracic duct lymphocytes. When derived by in vitro culture, mucosal mast cells (MMC) arise from a bone marrow precursor after stimulation by T cell-derived factors. In rats infected with the nematode Trichinella spiralis, mucosal mastocytosis is temporally associated with the immune expulsion of the adult worms whereas in the case of Nippostrongylus brasiliensis, mastocytosis is frequently observed to occur after worm expulsion has been completed. Consequently, there has been doubt as to whether MMC are active and serve a functional role in the expulsion of rat intestinal nematodes. MMC contain and secrete a neutral proteinase, rat mast cell protease II (RMCP II); detection and assay of secreted RMCP II therefore provides a direct measurement of MMC activity. Here we describe the release of this enzyme into the blood of rats infected with N. brasiliensis or T. spiralis. Our results show that the systemic secretion of RMCP II coincides with the immune expulsion of these nematodes, demonstrating clearly for the first time that rat MMC are functionally active during the immune elimination of primary nematode infections.
A comparison between eukaryotic gene sequences and protein sequences of homologous enzymes from bacterial and mammalian organisms shows that intron-exon junctions frequently coincide with variable surface loops of the protein structures. The altered surface structures can account for functional differences among the members of a family. Sliding of the intron-exon junctions may constitute one mechanism for generating length polymorphisms and divergent sequences found in protein families. Since intron-exon junctions map to protein surfaces, the alterations mediated by sliding of these junctions can be effected without disrupting the stability of the protein core.
Gene transcription requires the release of inactive DNA from its packaging of histone proteins. Following the discovery of the first transcription-associated histone acetyltransferase, tetrahymena GCN5, it was shown that yeast GCN5 is recruited to the promoter and causes hyper-acetylation of histones and transcriptional activation of target genes, establishing a direct connection between histone acetylation and transcriptional activation. Many other important transcription regulators have been found to have histone acetyltransferase activity, including TAFII230/250, p300/CBP and its associated factor PCAF. Here we present the solution structure of the catalytic domain of tGCN5 (residues 47-210) in complex with coenzyme A. The structure contains two domains; the amino-terminal domain is similar to those of other GCN5-related N-acetyltransferases but the carboxy-terminal domain is not. Coenzyme A binds in a deep hydrophobic pocket between the two domains. Chemical shift changes upon titration with histone H3 peptides indicate a binding site at the domain boundary opposite to the coenzyme A site. The structural data indicate a single-step acetyl-transfer reaction mechanism catalysed by a hydrogen bond to the backbone amide group of leucine 126 and the side-chain carboxyl group of a conserved acidic residue.
Maize smut caused by the fungus Ustilago maydis is a widespread disease characterized by the development of large plant tumours. U. maydis is a biotrophic pathogen that requires living plant tissue for its development and establishes an intimate interaction zone between fungal hyphae and the plant plasma membrane. U. maydis actively suppresses plant defence responses by secreted protein effectors. Its effector repertoire comprises at least 386 genes mostly encoding proteins of unknown function and expressed exclusively during the biotrophic stage. The U. maydis secretome also contains about 150 proteins with probable roles in fungal nutrition, fungal cell wall modification and host penetration as well as proteins unlikely to act in the fungal-host interface like a chorismate mutase. Chorismate mutases are key enzymes of the shikimate pathway and catalyse the conversion of chorismate to prephenate, the precursor for tyrosine and phenylalanine synthesis. Root-knot nematodes inject a secreted chorismate mutase into plant cells likely to affect development. Here we show that the chorismate mutase Cmu1 secreted by U. maydis is a virulence factor. The enzyme is taken up by plant cells, can spread to neighbouring cells and changes the metabolic status of these cells through metabolic priming. Secreted chorismate mutases are found in many plant-associated microbes and might serve as general tools for host manipulation.
Escherichia coli contains three DNA polymerases that differ in their size, ability to interact with accessory proteins and biological function. Monomeric DNA polymerase I (Pol I) has a relative molecular mass (Mr) of 103,000 (103K) and is involved primarily in the repair of damaged DNA and the processing of Okazaki fragments; polymerase II is of Mr 120K, and polymerase III has a Mr of 140K, is responsible for the replication of the DNA chromosome and is just one of several proteins that are required for replication. DNA polymerases from bacteriophage as well as those of eukaryotic viral and cellular origin also differ with respect to their size and the number of associated proteins that are required for them to function in replication. However, the template-directed copying of DNA is identical in all cases. The crystal structure of the large proteolytic fragment of Pol I shows that it consists of two domains, the larger of which contains a deep crevice whose dimensions are such that it can bind duplex DNA. The T7 polymerase consists of two subunits, the 80K gene 5 protein and the host-encoded 12K thioredoxin of E. coli. We show here that there is an amino acid sequence homology between at least eight polypeptide segments that form the large cleft in the Klenow fragment and polypeptides in T7 DNA polymerase gene 5 protein, suggesting that this domain evolved from a common precursor. The parts of the Pol I and T7 DNA polymerase molecules that bind the DNA substrate appear to share common structural features, and these features may be shared by all of these varied DNA polymerases.
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are highly cytotoxic lesions that are generated by ionizing radiation and various DNA-damaging chemicals. Following DSB formation, cells activate the DNA-damage response (DDR) protein kinases ATM, ATR and DNA-PK (also known as PRKDC). These then trigger histone H2AX (also known as H2AFX) phosphorylation and the accumulation of proteins such as MDC1, 53BP1 (also known as TP53BP1), BRCA1, CtIP (also known as RBBP8), RNF8 and RNF168/RIDDLIN into ionizing radiation-induced foci (IRIF) that amplify DSB signalling and promote DSB repair. Attachment of small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) to target proteins controls diverse cellular functions. Here, we show that SUMO1, SUMO2 and SUMO3 accumulate at DSB sites in mammalian cells, with SUMO1 and SUMO2/3 accrual requiring the E3 ligase enzymes PIAS4 and PIAS1. We also establish that PIAS1 and PIAS4 are recruited to damage sites via mechanisms requiring their SAP domains, and are needed for the productive association of 53BP1, BRCA1 and RNF168 with such regions. Furthermore, we show that PIAS1 and PIAS4 promote DSB repair and confer ionizing radiation resistance. Finally, we establish that PIAS1 and PIAS4 are required for effective ubiquitin-adduct formation mediated by RNF8, RNF168 and BRCA1 at sites of DNA damage. These findings thus identify PIAS1 and PIAS4 as components of the DDR and reveal how protein recruitment to DSB sites is controlled by coordinated SUMOylation and ubiquitylation.
Transcription of the mitochondrial genome is performed by a single-subunit RNA polymerase (mtRNAP) that is distantly related to the RNAP of bacteriophage T7, the pol I family of DNA polymerases, and single-subunit RNAPs from chloroplasts. Whereas T7 RNAP can initiate transcription by itself, mtRNAP requires the factors TFAM and TFB2M for binding and melting promoter DNA. TFAM is an abundant protein that binds and bends promoter DNA 15-40 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site, and stimulates the recruitment of mtRNAP and TFB2M to the promoter. TFB2M assists mtRNAP in promoter melting and reaches the active site of mtRNAP to interact with the first base pair of the RNA-DNA hybrid. Here we report the X-ray structure of human mtRNAP at 2.5 A resolution, which reveals a T7-like catalytic carboxy-terminal domain, an amino-terminal domain that remotely resembles the T7 promoter-binding domain, a novel pentatricopeptide repeat domain, and a flexible N-terminal extension. The pentatricopeptide repeat domain sequesters an AT-rich recognition loop, which binds promoter DNA in T7 RNAP, probably explaining the need for TFAM during promoter binding. Consistent with this, substitution of a conserved arginine residue in the AT-rich recognition loop, or release of this loop by deletion of the N-terminal part of mtRNAP, had no effect on transcription. The fingers domain and the intercalating hairpin, which melts DNA in phage RNAPs, are repositioned, explaining the need for TFB2M during promoter melting. Our results provide a new venue for the mechanistic analysis of mitochondrial transcription. They also indicate how an early phage-like mtRNAP lost functions in promoter binding and melting, which were provided by initiation factors in trans during evolution, to enable mitochondrial gene regulation and the adaptation of mitochondrial function to changes in the environment.
We describe the use of gold nanoparticle-oligonucleotide complexes as intracellular gene regulation agents for the control of protein expression in cells. These oligonucleotide-modified nanoparticles have affinity constants for complementary nucleic acids that are higher than their unmodified oligonucleotide counterparts, are less susceptible to degradation by nuclease activity, exhibit greater than 99% cellular uptake, can introduce oligonucleotides at a higher effective concentration than conventional transfection agents, and are nontoxic to the cells under the conditions studied. By chemically tailoring the density of DNA bound to the surface of gold nanoparticles, we demonstrated a tunable gene knockdown.
A primary intracellular substrate for pp60v-src kinase in a variety of avian and mammalian cells is a protein of 34 to 39 kilodaltons (kD). After incubation of chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEF) with [3H]myristic acid for 4 hours, the 36-kD protein contained covalently bound myristic acid by several criteria: (i) the radioactively labeled material comigrated with the 36-kD protein on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels in one and two dimensions, (ii) the labeled material was insoluble in chloroform-methanol, and (iii) radioactively labeled myristate could be recovered from the purified 36-kD protein. The resistance of the acyl fatty acid moiety to hydrolysis by hydroxylamine suggested that the covalent linkage to the 36-kD protein may be through an amide linkage. The [3H]myristic-acid labeling of the 36-kD protein in Rous sarcoma virus-transformed CEF showed a reduction of up to 45 percent when compared to an identical amount of 36-kD protein derived from normal cells; this reduction was not due to general changes in myristic acid metabolism in transformed cells.
The opening of duplex DNA in the elongation phase of transcription by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase in vivo was detected at a regulatory site where a prolonged pause in transcription occurs. Single-stranded DNA in the transcription bubble was identified by its reactivity with potassium permanganate (KMnO4). The elongation structure in vivo was similar to that of transcription complexes made in vitro with some differences. The observed reactivity to KMnO4 of the DNA template strand was consistent with the existence of an RNA-DNA hybrid of about 12 nucleotides.
Caspases mediate essential key proteolytic events in inflammatory cascades and the apoptotic cell death pathway. Human caspases functionally segregate into two distinct subfamilies: those involved in cytokine maturation (caspase-1, -4 and -5) and those involved in cellular apoptosis (caspase-2, -3, -6, -7, -8, -9 and -10). Although caspase-12 is phylogenetically related to the cytokine maturation caspases, in mice it has been proposed as a mediator of apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress including amyloid-beta cytotoxicity, suggesting that it might contribute to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Here we show that a single nucleotide polymorphism in caspase-12 in humans results in the synthesis of either a truncated protein (Csp12-S) or a full-length caspase proenzyme (Csp12-L). The read-through single nucleotide polymorphism encoding Csp12-L is confined to populations of African descent and confers hypo-responsiveness to lipopolysaccharide-stimulated cytokine production in ex vivo whole blood, but has no significant effect on apoptotic sensitivity. In a preliminary study, we find that the frequency of the Csp12-L allele is increased in African American individuals with severe sepsis. Thus, Csp12-L attenuates the inflammatory and innate immune response to endotoxins and in doing so may constitute a risk factor for developing sepsis.
Lesions in the transcribed strand block transcription and are repaired more rapidly than lesions in the nontranscribed (coding) strand which do not block RNA polymerase (RNAP). It has been shown previously that in Escherichia coli the mfd (mutation frequency decline) gene is necessary for strand-specific repair. The mfd gene was cloned and sequenced and the Mfd protein was purified and used to reconstitute strand-specific repair in a completely defined system. The mfd gene encodes a protein of 130 kilodaltons and contains the so-called "helicase motifs," a leucine zipper motif, and regions of sequence similarity to UvrB and RecG proteins. The Mfd protein was shown to (i) displace RNAP stalled at a lesion in an adenosine triphosphate-dependent reaction, (ii) bind to the damage recognition subunit (UvrA) of the excision nuclease, and (iii) stimulate the repair of the transcribed strand only when transcription is taking place. Thus, Mfd appears to target the transcribed strand for repair by recognizing a stalled RNAP and actively recruiting the repair enzyme to the transcription blocking lesion as it dissociates the stalled RNAP.
Translocation of protein kinase to the nucleus had been implicated earlier in the transsynaptic control of gene expression mediated by cholinergic nerves in adrenal medulla. Phosphorylation of chromosomal proteins by adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-dependent protein kinase and adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate enhances the template activity of chromatin from adrenal medulla. When homologous RNA polymerase II is used the relative activation is greater than that obtained with Escherichia coli RNA polymerase. The substrate for such phosphorylation does not seem to be RNA polymerase II. Phosphorylation of specific acidic protein probably mediates this enhancement of template activity.
A potassium-activated phosphodiesterase that hydrolyzes polyribonucleotides to 5'-mononucleotides has been purified approximately 600-fold from extracts of Escherichia coli B. The purified enzyme appears to be specific for single-stranded polyribonucleotides: helical forms are not hydrolyzed, nor do they inhibit the hydrolysis of single-stranded chains.
Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) are the predominant product of photodamage in DNA after exposure of cells to ultraviolet light and are cytotoxic, mutagenic and carcinogenic in a variety of cellular and animal systems. In prokaryotes, enzymes and protein complexes have been characterized that remove or reverse CPDs in DNA. Micrococcus luteus and T4 phage-infected Escherichia coli contain a specific N-glycosylase/apurinic-apyrimidinic lyase that catalyses a two-step DNA incision process at sites of CPDs, thus initiating base excision repair of these lesions. It is well established that CPDs are recognized and removed from eukaryotic DNA by excision repair processes but very little information exists concerning the nature of the proteins involved in CPD recognition and DNA incision events. We report here that an enzyme functionally similar to the prokaryotic N-glycosylase/apurinic-apyrimidinic lyases exists in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. To our knowledge, this is the first time such an activity has been found in a eukaryote and is also the first example of an organism having both direct reversal and base excision repair pathways for the removal of CPDs from DNA.
Dynamics of proteins are crucial to their function. In his Perspective, Orrit stresses the advantages of studying these dynamics with single-molecule methods--which require no synchronization--rather than with conventional ensemble measurements. He highlights the report by Yang et al., who follow the fluorescence of a single enzyme molecule. Electron transfer from the fluorophore to a quencher induces fluctuations of the fluorescence lifetime along with the fluorophore-quencher distance. The wide range of characteristic times of those fluctuations reveals the complexity of the protein's potential energy landscape. As a new molecular ruler, electron transfer complements other single-molecule methods such as energy transfer (FRET) for distances shorter than a few nanometers.
Although expansion of trinucleotide repeats accounts for over 30 human diseases, mechanisms of repeat instability remain poorly understood. We show that a Drosophila model for the CAG/polyglutamine (polyQ) disease spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 recapitulates key features of human CAG-repeat instability, including large repeat changes and strong expansion bias. Instability is dramatically enhanced by transcription and modulated by nuclear excision repair and a regulator of DNA repair adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein-a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) whose decreased activity contributes to polyQ disease. Pharmacological treatment to normalize acetylation suppressed instability. Thus, toxic consequences of pathogenic polyQ protein may include enhancing repeat instability.
The rate-limiting step in cholesterol biosynthesis in mammals is catalyzed by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, a four-electron oxidoreductase that converts HMG-CoA to mevalonate. The crystal structure of HMG-CoA reductase from Pseudomonas mevalonii was determined at 3.0 angstrom resolution by multiple isomorphous replacement. The structure reveals a tightly bound dimer that brings together at the subunit interface the conserved residues implicated in substrate binding and catalysis. These dimers are packed about a threefold crystallographic axis, forming a hexamer with 23 point group symmetry. Difference Fourier studies reveal the binding sites for the substrates HMG-CoA and reduced or oxidized nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [NAD(H)] and demonstrate that the active sites are at the dimer interfaces. The HMG-CoA is bound by a domain with an unusual fold, consisting of a central alpha helix surrounded by a triangular set of walls of beta sheets and alpha helices. The NAD(H) is bound by a domain characterized by an antiparallel beta structure that defines a class of dinucleotide-binding domains.
Lipases belong to a class of esterases whose activity on triglycerides is greatly enhanced at lipid-water interfaces. This phenomenon, called interfacial activation, has a structural explanation: a hydrophobic lid, which at rest covers the catalytic site, is displaced on substrate or inhibitor binding and probably interacts with the lipid matrix. Fusarium solani pisi cutinase belongs to a group of homologous enzymes of relative molecular mass 22-25K (ref. 7) capable of degrading cutin, the insoluble lipid-polyester matrix covering the surface of plants, and hydrolysing triglycerides. Cutinases differ from classical lipases in that they do not exhibit interfacial activation; they are active on soluble as well as on emulsified triglycerides. Cutinases therefore establish a bridge between esterases and lipases. We report here the three-dimensional structure of a recombinant cutinase from F. solani pisi, expressed in Escherichia coli. Cutinase is an alpha-beta protein; the active site is composed of the triad Ser 120, His 188 and Asp 175. Unlike other lipases, the catalytic serine is not buried under surface loops, but is accessible to solvent. This could explain why cutinase does not display interfacial activation.
The beta-adrenergic receptor binding subunits from frog erythrocytes, hamster lung and guinea pig lung have been purified to apparent homogeneity and in all cases reside on a single polypeptide. Insertion of the pure receptors into phospholipid vesicles and subsequent fusion of these vesicles with a receptor-deficient cell conveys beta-adrenergic responsiveness to the adenylate cyclase system of the acceptor cell. Such responsiveness is linearly dependent on the amount of receptor used in the fusion experiments and is independent of the receptor source. Moreover, this responsiveness displays appropriate beta-adrenergic specificity. These results indicate that the beta-adrenergic receptor polypeptide contains both the ligand binding site and the site responsible for mediating stimulation of adenylate cyclase activity, presumably via interaction with the guanine nucleotide regulatory protein.
Respiration in the heat-generating, sterile florets of Philodendron selloum was examined by electron microscopy and carbon isotopic analysis of respired carbon dioxide. After the spathe unfolded, the florets switched from carbohydrate oxidation to lipid oxidation, which persisted during heating and for at least 2 days thereafter. The scarcity of glyoxysome-like organelles and the low catalase activity in this tissue indicate that the lipid was respired directly and not after conversion to carbohydrate by the glyoxylate shunt. Thus, lipid metabolism in this heat-generating plant tissue appears to mimic aspects of the biochemistry and physiology of heat production in some animal tissues.
Altered glucose metabolism in cancer cells is termed the Warburg effect, which describes the propensity of most cancer cells to take up glucose avidly and convert it primarily to lactate, despite available oxygen. Notwithstanding the renewed interest in the Warburg effect, cancer cells also depend on continued mitochondrial function for metabolism, specifically glutaminolysis that catabolizes glutamine to generate ATP and lactate. Glutamine, which is highly transported into proliferating cells, is a major source of energy and nitrogen for biosynthesis, and a carbon substrate for anabolic processes in cancer cells, but the regulation of glutamine metabolism is not well understood. Here we report that the c-Myc (hereafter referred to as Myc) oncogenic transcription factor, which is known to regulate microRNAs and stimulate cell proliferation, transcriptionally represses miR-23a and miR-23b, resulting in greater expression of their target protein, mitochondrial glutaminase, in human P-493 B lymphoma cells and PC3 prostate cancer cells. This leads to upregulation of glutamine catabolism. Glutaminase converts glutamine to glutamate, which is further catabolized through the tricarboxylic acid cycle for the production of ATP or serves as substrate for glutathione synthesis. The unique means by which Myc regulates glutaminase uncovers a previously unsuspected link between Myc regulation of miRNAs, glutamine metabolism, and energy and reactive oxygen species homeostasis.
A region in the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) env message, with the potential to form a complex secondary structure (designated RRE), interacts with the rev protein (Rev). This interaction is believed to mediate export of HIV structural messenger RNAs from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. In this report the regions essential for Rev interaction with the RRE are further characterized and the functional significance of Rev-RRE interaction in vivo is examined. A single hairpin loop structure within the RRE was found to be a primary determinant for Rev binding in vitro and Rev response in vivo. Maintenance of secondary structure, rather than primary nucleotide sequence alone, appeared to be necessary for Rev-RNA interaction, which distinguishes it from the mechanism for cis-acting elements in DNA. Limited changes within the 200 nucleotides, which preserved the proper RRE conformational structure, were well tolerated for Rev binding and function. Thus, variation among the RRE elements present in the diverse HIV isolates would have little, if any, effect on Rev responsiveness.
Bacteria produce an arsenal of sophisticated toxins that disrupt the normal processes of the host cell, usually by modifying or inactivating host cell proteins. Now, as Coburn and Leong discuss in their Perspective, members of the cytolethal distending toxin (CDT) family have been identified as enzymes that attack DNA (and not protein) within the host cell (Lara-Tejero and Galan). By attacking DNA, perhaps during chromosomal replication, CDTs cause the host cell to halt in G2 phase of the cell cycle.
Apolipoprotein (apo-) B is the ligand responsible for the receptor-mediated catabolism of low density lipoproteins, the principal cholesterol-transporting lipoproteins in plasma. The primary structure of the carboxyl-terminal 30 percent (1455 amino acids) of human apo-B (apo-B100) has been deduced from the nucleotide sequence of complementary DNA. Portions of the protein structure that may relate to its receptor binding function and lipid binding properties have been identified. The apo-B100 messenger RNA is about 19 kilobases in length. The apo-B100 gene is expressed primarily in liver and, to a lesser extent, in small intestine, but in no other tissues. The gene for apo-B100 is located in the p24 region (near the tip of the short arm) of chromosome 2.
The pol gene of Rous sarcoma virus is positioned downstream of the gag gene in a different, briefly overlapping reading frame; nevertheless, the primary translation product of pol is a gag-pol fusion protein. Two mechanisms, ribosomal frameshifting and RNA splicing, have been considered to explain this phenomenon. The frameshifting model is supported by synthesis of both gag protein and gag-pol fusion protein in a cell-free mammalian translation system programmed by a single RNA species that was synthesized from cloned viral DNA with a bacteriophage RNA polymerase. Under these conditions, the ratio of the gag protein to the fusion protein (about 20 to 1) is similar to that previously observed in infected cells, the frameshifting is specific for the gag-pol junction, and it is unaffected by large deletions in gag. In addition, synthesis of the fusion protein is ten times less efficient in an Escherichia coli cell-free translation system and cannot be explained by transcriptional errors or in vitro modification of the RNA. Ribosomal frameshifting may affect production of other proteins in higher eukaryotes, including proteins encoded by several retroviruses and transposable elements.
Urate oxidase (E.C. 1.7.3.3) catalyzes the oxidation of uric acid to allantoin in most mammals except humans and certain primates. The amino-terminal amino acid sequence for porcine urate oxidase was determined and used in a novel procedure for generating complementary DNA (cDNA) probes to this amino acid sequence. The procedure is based on the polymerase chain reaction and utilizes mixed oligonucleotide primers complementary to the reverse translation products of an amino acid sequence. This rapid and simple cDNA cloning procedure is generally applicable and requires only a partial amino acid sequence. A cDNA probe developed by this procedure was used to isolate a full-length porcine urate oxidase cDNA and to demonstrate the presence of homologous genomic sequences in humans.
Regulated intramembrane proteolysis by members of the site-2 protease (S2P) family is an important signaling mechanism conserved from bacteria to humans. Here we report the crystal structure of the transmembrane core domain of an S2P metalloprotease from Methanocaldococcus jannaschii. The protease consists of six transmembrane segments, with the catalytic zinc atom coordinated by two histidine residues and one aspartate residue approximately 14 angstroms into the lipid membrane surface. The protease exhibits two distinct conformations in the crystals. In the closed conformation, the active site is surrounded by transmembrane helices and is impermeable to substrate peptide; water molecules gain access to zinc through a polar, central channel that opens to the cytosolic side. In the open conformation, transmembrane helices alpha1 and alpha6 separate from each other by 10 to 12 angstroms, exposing the active site to substrate entry. The structure reveals how zinc embedded in an integral membrane protein can catalyze peptide cleavage.
The venom of the funnel-web spider Agelenopsis aperta contains several peptides that paralyze prey by blocking voltage-sensitive calcium channels. Two peptides, omega-Aga-IVB (IVB) and omega-Aga-IVC (IVC), have identical amino acid sequences, yet have opposite absolute configurations at serine 46. These toxins had similar selectivities for blocking voltage-sensitive calcium channel subtypes but different potencies for blocking P-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels in rat cerebellar Purkinje cells as well as calcium-45 influx into rat brain synaptosomes. An enzyme purified from venom converts IVC to IVB by isomerizing serine 46, which is present in the carboxyl-terminal tail, from the L to the D configuration. Unlike the carboxyl terminus of IVC, that of IVB was resistant to the major venom protease. These results show enzymatic activities in A. aperta venom being used in an unprecedented strategy for coproduction of necessary neurotoxins that possess enhanced stability and potency.
The RAC guanine nucleotide binding proteins regulate multiple biological activities, including actin polymerization, activation of the Jun kinase (JNK) cascade, and cell proliferation. RAC effector loop mutants were identified that separate the ability of RAC to interact with different downstream effectors. One mutant of activated human RAC protein, RACV12H40 (with valine and histidine substituted at position 12 and 40, respectively), was defective in binding to PAK3, a Ste20-related p21-activated kinase (PAK), but bound to POR1, a RAC-binding protein. This mutant failed to stimulate PAK and JNK activity but still induced membrane ruffling and mediated transformation. A second mutant, RACV12L37 (with leucine substituted at position 37), which bound PAK but not POR1, induced JNK activation but was defective in inducing membrane ruffling and transformation. These results indicate that the effects of RAC on the JNK cascade and on actin polymerization and cell proliferation are mediated by distinct effector pathways that diverge at the level of RAC itself.
The design of enzymes with new functions and properties has long been a goal in protein engineering. Here, we report a strategy to change the catalytic activity of an existing protein scaffold. This was achieved by simultaneous incorporation and adjustment of functional elements through insertion, deletion, and substitution of several active site loops, followed by point mutations to fine-tune the activity. Using this approach, we were able to introduce beta-lactamase activity into the alphabeta/betaalpha metallohydrolase scaffold of glyoxalase II. The resulting enzyme, evMBL8 (evolved metallo beta-lactamase 8), completely lost its original activity and, instead, catalyzed the hydrolysis of cefotaxime with a (kcat/Km)app of 1.8 x 10(2) (mole/liter)(-1) second(-1), thus increasing resistance to Escherichia coli growth on cefotaxime by a factor of about 100.
Folding of two monomeric enzymes mediated by groE has been reconstituted in vitro. The groEL protein stabilizes the polypeptides in a conformation resembling the 'molten globule' state. Mg-ATP and groES then promote the acquisition of ordered tertiary structure at the surface of groEL. Folding requires the hydrolysis of about 100 ATP molecules per protein monomer. This active process of surface-mediated chain folding might represent a general mechanism for the formation of protein structure in vivo.
The protein Hck is a member of the Src family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases which is preferentially expressed in haematopoietic cells of the myeloid and B-lymphoid lineages. Src kinases are inhibited by tyrosine-phosphorylation at a carboxy-terminal site. The SH2 domains of these enzymes play an essential role in this regulation by binding to the tyrosine-phosphorylated tail. The crystal structure of the downregulated form of Hck has been determined and reveals that the SH2 domain regulates enzymatic activity indirectly; intramolecular interactions between the SH3 and catalytic domains appear to stabilize an inactive form of the kinase. Here we compare the roles of the SH2 and SH3 domains in modulating the activity of Hck in an investigation of the C-terminally phosphorylated form of the enzyme. We show that addition of the HIV-1 Nef protein, which is a high-affinity ligand for the Hck SH3 domain, to either the downregulated or activated form of Hck causes a large increase in Hck catalytic activity. The intact SH3-binding motif in Nef is crucial for Hck activation. Our results indicate that binding of the Hck SH3 domain by Nef causes a more marked activation of the enzyme than does binding of the SH2 domain, suggesting a new mechanism for regulation of the activity of tyrosine kinases.
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is a soluble protein that causes damage to tumor cells but has no effect on normal cells. Human TNF was purified to apparent homogeneity as a 17.3-kilodalton protein from HL-60 leukemia cells and showed cytotoxic and cytostatic activities against various human tumor cell lines. The amino acid sequence was determined for the amino terminal end of the purified protein, and oligodeoxyribonucleotide probes were synthesized on the basis of this sequence. Complementary DNA (cDNA) encoding human TNF was cloned from induced HL-60 messenger RNA and was confirmed by hybrid-selection assay, direct expression in COS-7 cells, and nucleotide sequence analysis. The human TNF cDNA is 1585 base pairs in length and encodes a protein of 233 amino acids. The mature protein begins at residue 77, leaving a long leader sequence of 76 amino acids. Expression of high levels of human TNF in Escherichia coli was accomplished under control of the bacteriophage lambda PL promoter and gene N ribosome binding site.
It is now established that CD1 molecules present lipid antigens to T cells, although it is not clear how the exchange of lipids between membrane compartments and the CD1 binding groove is assisted. We report that mice deficient in prosaposin, the precursor to a family of endosomal lipid transfer proteins (LTP), exhibit specific defects in CD1d-mediated antigen presentation and lack Valpha14 NKT cells. In vitro, saposins extracted monomeric lipids from membranes and from CD1, thereby promoting the loading as well as the editing of lipids on CD1. Transient complexes between CD1, lipid, and LTP suggested a "tug-of-war" model in which lipid exchange between CD1 and LTP is on the basis of their respective affinities for lipids. LTPs constitute a previously unknown link between lipid metabolism and immunity and are likely to exert a profound influence on the repertoire of self, tumor, and microbial lipid antigens.
Protective antigen (PA) is the central component of the three-part protein toxin secreted by Bacillus anthracis, the organism responsible for anthrax. After proteolytic activation on the host cell surface, PA forms a membrane-inserting heptamer that translocates the toxic enzymes, oedema factor and lethal factor, into the cytosol. PA, which has a relative molecular mass of 83,000 (M(r) 83K), can also translocate heterologous proteins, and is being evaluated for use as a general protein delivery system. Here we report the crystal structure of monomeric PA at 2.1 A resolution and the water-soluble heptamer at 4.5 A resolution. The monomer is organized mainly into antiparallel beta-sheets and has four domains: an amino-terminal domain (domain 1) containing two calcium ions and the cleavage site for activating proteases; a heptamerization domain (domain 2) containing a large flexible loop implicated in membrane insertion; a small domain of unknown function (domain 3); and a carboxy-terminal receptor-binding domain (domain 4). Removal of a 20K amino-terminal fragment from domain 1 allows the assembly of the heptamer, a ring-shaped structure with a negatively charged lumen, and exposes a large hydrophobic surface for binding the toxic enzymes. We propose a model of pH-dependent membrane insertion involving the formation of a porin-like, membrane-spanning beta-barrel.
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is synthesized by macrophages exposed to endotoxin. It produces haemorrhagic necrosis of a variety of tumours in mice and is cytostatic or cytocidal against various transformed cell lines in vitro, but viability of normal human or rodent cells is unaffected. The role of TNF is unlikely to be restricted to the rejection of tumours. Colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) are required for survival, proliferation and differentiation of haematopoietic progenitor cells. The haematopoietic growth factor known as granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) has the ability to stimulate proliferation and differentiation of normal granulocyte-monocyte and eosinophil stem cells and enhance the proliferation of pluripotent, megakaryocyte and erythroid stem cells. In addition, GM-CSF stimulates a variety of functional activities in mature granulocytes and macrophages, for example inhibition of migration, phagocytosis of microbes, oxidative metabolism, and antibody-dependent cytotoxic killing of tumour cells. We show here that TNF markedly stimulates production of GM-CSF messenger RNA and protein in normal human lung fibroblasts and vascular endothelial cells, and in cells of several malignant tissues.
The hematopoietically expressed product of the vav proto-oncogene, Vav, shared homology with guanine nucleotide releasing factors (GRFs) [also called guanosine diphosphate-dissociation stimulators (GDSs)] that activate Ras-related small guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins. Human T cell lysates or Vav immunoprecipitates possessed GRF activity that increased after T cell antigen receptor (TCR)-CD3 triggering; an in vitro-translated Vav fragment that contained the putative GRF domain was also active. Vav-associated GRF stimulation after TCR-CD3 ligation paralleled its tyrosine phosphorylation; both were blocked by a protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) inhibitor. Vav also was a substrate for the p56lck PTK. Thus, Vav is a PTK-regulated GRF that may be important in TCR-CD3-initiated signal transduction through the activation of Ras.
Higher plants produce seed through pollination, using specific interactions between pollen and pistil. Self-incompatibility is an important mechanism used in many species to prevent inbreeding; it is controlled by a multi-allelic S locus. 'Self' (incompatible) pollen is discriminated from 'non-self' (compatible) pollen by interaction of pollen and pistil S locus components, and is subsequently inhibited. In Papaver rhoeas, the pistil S locus product is a small protein that interacts with incompatible pollen, triggering a Ca(2+)-dependent signalling network, resulting in pollen inhibition and programmed cell death. Here we have cloned three alleles of a highly polymorphic pollen-expressed gene, PrpS (Papaver rhoeas pollen S), from Papaver and provide evidence that this encodes the pollen S locus determinant. PrpS is a single-copy gene linked to the pistil S gene (currently called S, but referred to hereafter as PrsS for Papaver rhoeas stigma S determinant). Sequence analysis indicates that PrsS and PrpS are equally ancient and probably co-evolved. PrpS encodes a novel approximately 20-kDa protein. Consistent with predictions that it is a transmembrane protein, PrpS is associated with the plasma membrane. We show that a predicted extracellular loop segment of PrpS interacts with PrsS and, using PrpS antisense oligonucleotides, we demonstrate that PrpS is involved in S-specific inhibition of incompatible pollen. Identification of PrpS represents a major advance in our understanding of the Papaver self-incompatibility system. As a novel cell-cell recognition determinant it contributes to the available information concerning the origins and evolution of cell-cell recognition systems involved in discrimination between self and non-self, which also include histocompatibility systems in primitive chordates and vertebrates.
Earlier reports of oestrogen receptor binding to DNA indicated that a protein which does not bind oestrogen might be involved in the conversion of the 4S oestradiol receptor to the 5S form but no direct evidence for the existence of this protein was presented. This receptor transformation or activation step is thought to be a requirement for events in the nucleus. We considered it likely that such a protein might be similar to the cytoplasmic proteins which stimulate eukaryotic RNA polymerases. These are basic proteins which are not adsorbed to DEAE cellulose and have a sedimentation coefficient of approximately 3S. To examine this possibility, we fractionated unlabelled uterine cytosol by DEAE-cellulose chromatography. Unlabelled cytosol was used to avoid the possibility that such a factor might be retained on the column as a component of the receptor--oestradiol complex. Here we present evidence of a protein present in uterine cytosol which forms a complex with the 4S form of the oestrogen receptor to produce a 5S-activated form. This activated form binds to uterine nuclei, DNA-cellulose and native calf thymus DNA. The cytosol protein, which we call receptor activation factor, does not bind oestradiol, has a sedimentation coefficient of approximately 3S and does not bind to DEAE-cellulose.
Multiple mutations in the gene responsible for cystic fibrosis are located within a region predicted to encode a nucleotide-binding fold in the amino terminal half of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator protein. A 67-amino acid peptide (P-67) that corresponds to the central region of this putative nucleotide binding site was chemically synthesized and purified. This peptide bound adenine nucleotides. The apparent dissociation constants (Kd's) for the trinitrophenyl (TNP) adenine nucleotides, TNP-adenosine triphosphate, TNP-adenosine diphosphate, and TNP-adenosine monophosphate, were 300 nanomolar, 200 nanomolar, and greater than 1 micromolar, respectively. The Kd for adenosine triphosphate was 300 micromolar. Circular dichroism spectroscopy was used to show that P-67 assumes a predominantly beta sheet structure in solution, a finding that is consistent with secondary structure predictions. On the basis of this information, the phenylalanine at position 508, which is deleted in approximately 70 percent of individuals with cystic fibrosis, was localized to a beta strand within the nucleotide binding peptide. Deletion of this residue is predicted to induce a significant structural change in the beta strand and altered nucleotide binding.
Protein kinase C has a crucial role in signal transduction for a variety of biologically active substances which activate cellular functions and proliferation. When cells are stimulated, protein kinase C is transiently activated by diacylglycerol which is produced in the membrane during the signal-induced turnover of inositol phospholipids. Tumour-promoting phorbol esters, when intercalated into the cell membrane, may substitute for diacylglycerol and permanently activate protein kinase C. The enzyme probably serves as a receptor for the tumour promoters. Further exploration of the roles of this enzyme may provide clues for understanding the mechanism of cell growth and differentiation.
Regulated translation of messenger RNA offers an important mechanism for the control of gene expression. The biosynthesis of the intracellular iron storage protein ferritin is translationally regulated by iron. A cis-acting element that is both necessary and sufficient for this translational regulation is present within the 5' nontranslated leader region of the human ferritin H-chain messenger RNA. In this report the iron-responsive element (IRE) was identified by deletional analysis. Moreover, a synthetic oligodeoxynucleotide was shown to be able to transfer iron regulation to a construct that would otherwise not be able to respond to iron. The IRE has been highly conserved and predates the evolutionary segregation between amphibians, birds, and man. The IRE may prove to be useful for the design of translationally regulated expression systems.
Neutrophils kill microorganisms with oxygen radicals generated by an oxidase that uses the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) as substrate. This system requires both membrane and cytosolic components and is defective in patients with chronic granulomatous disease. A cytosolic complex capable of activating latent membrane oxidase was eluted from guanosine triphosphate-agarose and was used to raise polyclonal antiserum that recognized 47- and 67-kilodalton proteins. These proteins were restricted to the cytosol of myeloid cells. Both proteins were associated with NADPH oxidase-activating capacity when neutrophil cytosol was purified on nucleotide affinity matrices or molecular sizing columns. Neutrophils from patients with two different forms of autosomal chronic granulomatous disease lacked either the 47- or 67-kilodalton protein.
Calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is a necessary component of the cellular machinery underlying learning and memory. Here, a constitutively active form of this enzyme, CaMKII(1-290), was introduced into neurons of hippocampal slices with a recombinant vaccinia virus to test the hypothesis that increased postsynaptic activity of this enzyme is sufficient to produce long-term synaptic potentiation (LTP), a prominent cellular model of learning and memory. Postsynaptic expression of CaMKII(1-290) increased CaMKII activity, enhanced synaptic transmission, and prevented more potentiation by an LTP-inducing protocol. These results, together with previous studies, suggest that postsynaptic CaMKII activity is necessary and sufficient to generate LTP.
Creatine kinase (CK, EC 2.7.3.2), an enzyme important for energy metabolism in cells of high and fluctuating energy requirements, catalyses the reversible transfer of a phosphoryl goup from phosphocreatine to ADP. We have solved the structure of the octameric mitochondrial isoform, Mib-CK, which is located in the intermembrane compartment and along the cristae membranes. Mib-CK consumes ATP produced in the mitochondria for the production of phosphocreatine, which is then exported into the cytosol for fast regeneration of ATP by the cytosolic CK isoforms. The octamer has 422 point-group symmetry, and appears as a cube of side length 93 angstrom with a channel 20 angstrom wide extending along the four-fold axis. Positively charged amino acids at the four-fold faces of the octamer possibly interact with negatively charged mitochondrial membranes. Each monomer consists of a small alpha-helical domain and a large domain containing an eight-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet flanked by seven alpha-helices. The conserved residues of the CK family form a compact cluster that covers the active site between the domains.
Damaged DNA, if not repaired before replication, can lead to replication fork stalling and genomic instability; however, cells can switch to different damage bypass modes that permit replication across lesions. Two main bypasses are controlled by ubiquitin modification of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), a homotrimeric DNA-encircling protein that functions as a polymerase processivity factor and regulator of replication-linked functions. Upon DNA damage, PCNA is modified at the conserved lysine residue 164 by either mono-ubiquitin or a lysine-63-linked multi-ubiquitin chain, which induce error-prone or error-free replication bypasses of the lesions. In S phase, even in the absence of exogenous DNA damage, yeast PCNA can be alternatively modified by the small ubiquitin-related modifier protein SUMO; however the consequences of this remain controversial. Here we show by genetic analysis that SUMO-modified PCNA functionally cooperates with Srs2, a helicase that blocks recombinational repair by disrupting Rad51 nucleoprotein filaments. Moreover, Srs2 displays a preference for interacting directly with the SUMO-modified form of PCNA, owing to a specific binding site in its carboxy-terminal tail. Our finding suggests a model in which SUMO-modified PCNA recruits Srs2 in S phase in order to prevent unwanted recombination events of replicating chromosomes.
Genes that encode nucleoside diphosphate kinases (NDKs) have been implicated as regulators of mammalian tumor metastasis and development in Drosophila melanogaster. However, the cellular pathways through which NDKs function are not known. One potential mechanism of regulation is phosphorylation of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) bound to regulatory guanosine triphosphate (GTP) binding proteins. NDK-catalyzed phosphorylation of bound GDP was investigated for the adenosine diphosphate ribosylation factor (ARF), a 21-kilodalton GTP-binding protein that functions in the protein secretion pathway. Bovine liver NDK, recombinant human NDK, and the protein product of the mouse gene nm23-1, which suppresses the metastatic potential of certain tumor cells, used ARF-GDP as a substrate, thereby allowing rapid and efficient production of activated ARF (ARF-GTP) in the absence of nucleotide exchange. These data are consistent with the proposed function of NDK as an activator of a small GTP-binding protein and provide a mechanism of activation for a regulatory GTP-binding protein that is independent of nucleotide exchange.
Although steroid hormone receptors are known to activate gene expression by binding to specific hormone-dependent enhancers, the mechanisms by which steroids inhibit the transcription of specific genes are unknown. It is shown here by gene transfer studies that the same glucocorticoid receptor that activates gene expression can negatively regulate expression of the human glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene. Glucocorticoid inhibition was conferred by a 52-nucleotide region that also contains elements crucial both for adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) responsiveness and for placental-specific expression of this gene and was observed only under conditions in which these elements were functioning as enhancers. Purified glucocorticoid receptor was found to bind to DNA that overlap the cAMP responsive elements sites in this region. It is hypothesized that steroid receptors negatively regulate gene expression by interfering with the activity or binding of other important transcription factors.
A major action of the microbicidal system of human neutrophils is the formation of superoxide anion (O2-) by a multicomponent oxidase that transfers electrons from the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) to molecular oxygen. The mechanism of assembly and activation of the oxidase from its cytosolic and membrane-bound components is unknown, but may require the activity of a guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP)-binding component. A cytosolic GTP-binding protein (Gox) that regulates the NADPH oxidase of neutrophils was identified. Gox was purified and shown to augment the rate of O2- production in a cell-free oxidase activation system. Sequence analysis of peptide fragments from Gox identified it as Rac 2, a member of the Ras superfamily of GTP-binding proteins. Antibody to a peptide derived from the COOH-terminus of Rac 2 inhibited O2- generation in a concentration-dependent manner. These results suggest that Rac 2 is a regulatory component of the human neutrophil NADPH oxidase, and provide new insights into the mechanism by which this oxygen radical-generating system is regulated.
Yeast RNA polymerase II initiation factor b copurifies with three polypeptides of 85, 73, and 50 kilodaltons and with a protein kinase that phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal repeat domain (CTD) of the largest polymerase subunit. The gene that encodes the 73-kilodalton polypeptide, designated TFB1, was cloned and found to be essential for cell growth. The deduced protein sequence exhibits no similarity to those of protein kinases. However, the sequence is similar to that of the 62-kilodalton subunit of the HeLa transcription factor BFT2, suggesting that this factor is the human counterpart of yeast factor b. Immunoprecipitation experiments using antibodies to the TFB1 gene product demonstrate that the transcriptional and CTD kinase activities of factor b are closely associated with an oligomer of the three polypeptides. Photoaffinity labeling with 3'-O-(4-benzoyl)benzoyl-ATP (adenosine triphosphate) identified an ATP-binding site in the 85-kilodalton polypeptide, suggesting that the 85-kilodalton subunit contains the catalytic domain of the kinase.
The Escherichia coli RNA degradosome is a multi-enzyme complex that contains the exoribonuclease polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase) and the endoribonuclease RNase E. Both enzymes are important in RNA processing and messenger RNA degradation. Here we report that enolase and RhlB are two other major components of the degradosome. Enolase is a glycolytic enzyme with an unknown role in RNA metabolism. RhlB is a member of the DEAD-box family of ATP-dependent RNA helicases, which are found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. We show that the degradosome has an ATP-dependent activity that aids the degradation of structured RNA by PNPase. Incubation of the degradosome with affinity-purified antibody against RhlB inhibited the ATP-stimulated RNA degradation. These results suggest that RhlB acts by unwinding RNA structures that impede the processive activity of PNPase. RhlB is thus an important enzyme in mRNA turnover.
Univalent antibody fragments directed against special membrane antigens dissociate multicellular bodies of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum completely into single cells. This provides a gentle method for cell dissociation and demonstrates that a nonenzyme protein can disintegrate a tissue
The growth of plants depends on continuous function of the meristems. Shoot meristems are responsible for all the post-embryonic aerial organs, such as leaves, stems and flowers. It has been assumed that the phytohormone cytokinin has a positive role in shoot meristem function. A severe reduction in the size of meristems in a mutant that is defective in all of its cytokinin receptors has provided compelling evidence that cytokinin is required for meristem activity. Here, we report a novel regulation of meristem activity, which is executed by the meristem-specific activation of cytokinins. The LONELY GUY (LOG) gene of rice is required to maintain meristem activity and its loss of function causes premature termination of the shoot meristem. LOG encodes a novel cytokinin-activating enzyme that works in the final step of bioactive cytokinin synthesis. Revising the long-held idea of multistep reactions, LOG directly converts inactive cytokinin nucleotides to the free-base forms, which are biologically active, by its cytokinin-specific phosphoribohydrolase activity. LOG messenger RNA is specifically localized in shoot meristem tips, indicating the activation of cytokinins in a specific developmental domain. We propose the fine-tuning of concentrations and the spatial distribution of bioactive cytokinins by a cytokinin-activating enzyme as a mechanism that regulates meristem activity.
A survey of representative invertebrates has revealed the presence of pyridine nucleotide-linked (D)-lactate dehydrogenase in a number of groups. All species studied contained either D(D)-or (L)L-lactate dehydrogenase, but no species contained both enzymes. The (D)-lactate dehydrogenase from Limulus polyphemus has been purified and has a molecular weight of 65,000.
Designing an enzyme requires, among a number of parameters, the appropriate positioning of catalytic machinery within a substrate-binding cleft. Using the structures of cyclophilin-peptide complexes, we have engineered a new catalytic activity into an Escherichia coli cyclophilin by mutating three amino acids, close to the peptide binding cleft, to form a catalytic triad similar to that found in serine proteases. In conjunction with cyclophilin's specificity for proline-bearing peptides, this creates a unique endopeptidase, cyproase 1, which cleaves peptides on the amino-side of proline residues. When acting on an Ala-Pro dipeptide, cyproase 1 has an efficiency (kcat/Km) of 0.7 x 10(4) M(-1) s(-1) and enhances the rate of reaction (kcat/kuncat) 8 x 10(8)-fold. This activity depends upon a deprotonated histidine and is inhibited by nucleophile-specific reagents, as occurs in natural serine proteases. Cyproase 1 can hydrolyse a protein substrate with a proline-specific endoprotease activity.
Histone acetylation in single-cell eukaryotes relies on acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) synthetase enzymes that use acetate to produce acetyl-CoA. Metazoans, however, use glucose as their main carbon source and have exposure only to low concentrations of extracellular acetate. We have shown that histone acetylation in mammalian cells is dependent on adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-citrate lyase (ACL), the enzyme that converts glucose-derived citrate into acetyl-CoA. We found that ACL is required for increases in histone acetylation in response to growth factor stimulation and during differentiation, and that glucose availability can affect histone acetylation in an ACL-dependent manner. Together, these findings suggest that ACL activity is required to link growth factor-induced increases in nutrient metabolism to the regulation of histone acetylation and gene expression.
Most mitochondrial proteins are encoded in the nucleus and are translated on free cytoplasmic ribosomes as larger precursors containing amino-terminal "leader" sequences, which are removed after the precursors are taken up by mitochondria. We have deduced the complete primary structure of the precursor of a human mitochondrial matrix enzyme, ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), from the nucleotide sequence of cloned complementary DNA. The amino-terminal leader peptide of OTC is 32 amino acids in length and contains four arginines but no acidic residues. Cleavage of the leader peptide from the "mature" protein occurs between glutamine and asparagine residues. The sequence of mature human OTC resembles that of the subunits of both OTC and aspartate transcarbamylase from Escherichia coli. The biological activity of the cloned OTC complementary DNA was tested by joining it with SV40 (an animal virus) regulatory elements and transfecting cultured HeLa cells, which do not normally express OTC. Both the precursor and mature forms of the OTC subunit were identified; in stable transformants, enzymatic activity was also detected.
One of the main mechanisms of messenger RNA degradation in eukaryotes occurs by deadenylation-dependent decapping which leads to 5'-to-3' decay. A family of Sm-like (Lsm) proteins has been identified, members of which contain the 'Sm' sequence motif, form a complex with U6 small nuclear RNA and are required for pre-mRNA splicing. Here we show that mutations in seven yeast Lsm proteins (Lsm1-Lsm7) also lead to inhibition of mRNA decapping. In addition, the Lsm1-Lsm7 proteins co-immunoprecipitate with the mRNA decapping enzyme (Dcp1), a decapping activator (Pat1/Mrt1) and with mRNA. This indicates that the Lsm proteins may promote decapping by interactions with the mRNA and the decapping machinery. In addition, the Lsm complex that functions in mRNA decay appears to be distinct from the U6-associated Lsm complex, indicating that Lsm proteins form specific complexes that affect different aspects of mRNA metabolism.
A circadian rhythm in the activity of luciferase is partly responsible for rhythmic bioluminescence in the dinoflagellate alga Gonyaulax polyedra. The cyclic activity of this enzyme can be attributed to a corresponding rhythm in the concentration of immunologically reactive luciferase protein. Hence protein turnover (synthesis or degradation or both) is used by the endogenous clock to control the daily rhythm of bioluminescence.
The recent discovery of a large number of histone demethylases suggests a central role for these enzymes in regulating histone methylation dynamics. Histone H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) has been linked to polycomb-group-protein-mediated suppression of Hox genes and animal body patterning, X-chromosome inactivation and possibly maintenance of embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity. An imbalance of H3K27 methylation owing to overexpression of the methylase EZH2 has been implicated in metastatic prostate and aggressive breast cancers. Here we show that the JmjC-domain-containing related proteins UTX and JMJD3 catalyse demethylation of H3K27me3/2. UTX is enriched around the transcription start sites of many HOX genes in primary human fibroblasts, in which HOX genes are differentially expressed, but is selectively excluded from the HOX loci in ESCs, in which HOX genes are largely silent. Consistently, RNA interference inhibition of UTX led to increased H3K27me3 levels at some HOX gene promoters. Importantly, morpholino oligonucleotide inhibition of a zebrafish UTX homologue resulted in mis-regulation of hox genes and a striking posterior developmental defect, which was partially rescued by wild-type, but not by catalytically inactive, human UTX. Taken together, these findings identify a small family of H3K27 demethylases with important, evolutionarily conserved roles in H3K27 methylation regulation and in animal anterior-posterior development.
The nucleotide sequence in the promoter region for the coat protein gene of phage fd has been determined. This sequence contains an endonuclease R-Hha cleavage site at the fifteenth nucleotide upstream from the RNA start site. Cleavage results in loss of promoter function. Comparison with the sequence of another fd promoter indicates that the longest sequence common to both was TATAAT in the region in which RNA polymerase forms a stable initiation complex.
A critical enzyme in protein breakdown in Escherichia coli is protease La (the lon gene product), which hydrolyzes proteins and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in a coupled process. The mechanism of this process was studied with fluorogenic tripeptides. Although proteins and peptides are degraded at the same active site, protein substrates enhance the ability of the enzyme to degrade these peptides two- to tenfold. Proteins that are not substrates had little or no effect. Thus, protein substrates must bind to protease La at two sites, the active site and an allosteric site whose occupancy enhances proteolytic activity. This effect did not require that the proteins themselves be degraded. Proteins could induce peptide breakdown even in the absence of ATP, and proteins and ATP had additive effects in stimulating peptidase activity. A multistep cyclical mechanism is proposed in which the binding of the substrate and ATP activates the protease. The enzyme can then cleave a peptide bond, but is inactivated through ATP hydrolysis. Such a mechanism may help account for the selectivity of protein breakdown and prevent inappropriate or excessive proteolysis in vivo.
The clinical development of an inhibitor of cellular proteasome function suggests that compounds targeting other components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system might prove useful for the treatment of human malignancies. NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) is an essential component of the NEDD8 conjugation pathway that controls the activity of the cullin-RING subtype of ubiquitin ligases, thereby regulating the turnover of a subset of proteins upstream of the proteasome. Substrates of cullin-RING ligases have important roles in cellular processes associated with cancer cell growth and survival pathways. Here we describe MLN4924, a potent and selective inhibitor of NAE. MLN4924 disrupts cullin-RING ligase-mediated protein turnover leading to apoptotic death in human tumour cells by a new mechanism of action, the deregulation of S-phase DNA synthesis. MLN4924 suppressed the growth of human tumour xenografts in mice at compound exposures that were well tolerated. Our data suggest that NAE inhibitors may hold promise for the treatment of cancer.
Nuclear hormone receptors regulate diverse metabolic pathways and the orphan nuclear receptor LRH-1 (also known as NR5A2) regulates bile acid biosynthesis. Structural studies have identified phospholipids as potential LRH-1 ligands, but their functional relevance is unclear. Here we show that an unusual phosphatidylcholine species with two saturated 12 carbon fatty acid acyl side chains (dilauroyl phosphatidylcholine (DLPC)) is an LRH-1 agonist ligand in vitro. DLPC treatment induces bile acid biosynthetic enzymes in mouse liver, increases bile acid levels, and lowers hepatic triglycerides and serum glucose. DLPC treatment also decreases hepatic steatosis and improves glucose homeostasis in two mouse models of insulin resistance. Both the antidiabetic and lipotropic effects are lost in liver-specific Lrh-1 knockouts. These findings identify an LRH-1 dependent phosphatidylcholine signalling pathway that regulates bile acid metabolism and glucose homeostasis.
Calorie restriction (CR) extends lifespan in a wide spectrum of organisms and is the only regimen known to lengthen the lifespan of mammals. We established a model of CR in budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In this system, lifespan can be extended by limiting glucose or by reducing the activity of the glucose-sensing cyclic-AMP-dependent kinase (PKA). Lifespan extension in a mutant with reduced PKA activity requires Sir2 and NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide). In this study we explore how CR activates Sir2 to extend lifespan. Here we show that the shunting of carbon metabolism toward the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid cycle and the concomitant increase in respiration play a central part in this process. We discuss how this metabolic strategy may apply to CR in animals.
Allelic sequence variation has been analysed by synthetic oligonucleotide hybridization probes which can detect single base substitutions in human genomic DNA. An allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) will only anneal to sequences that match it perfectly, a single mismatch being sufficient to prevent hybridization under appropriate conditions. To improve the sensitivity, specificity and simplicity of this approach, we used the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) procedure to enzymatically amplify a specific segment of the beta-globin or HLA-DQ alpha gene in human genomic DNA before hybridization with ASOs. This in vitro amplification method, which produces a greater than 10(5)-fold increase in the amount of target sequence, permits the analysis of allelic variation with as little as 1 ng of genomic DNA and the use of a simple 'dot blot' for probe hybridization. As a further simplification, PCR amplification has been performed directly on crude cell lysates, eliminating the need for DNA purification.
The DNA topoisomerases are ubiquitous enzymes that fulfil vital roles in the replication, transcription and recombination of DNA by carrying out DNA-strand passage reactions. Here we characterize a prokaryotic counterpart to the eukaryotic topoisomerase I in the hyperthermophilic methanogen Methanopyrus kandleri. The new enzyme, called topoisomerase V, has the following properties in common with eukaryotic topoisomerase I, which distinguish it from all other known prokaryotic topoisomerases: (1) its activity is Mg(2+)-independent; (2) it relaxes both negatively and positively supercoiled DNA; (3) it makes a covalent complex with the 3' end of the broken DNA strand; and (4) it is recognized by antibody raised against human topoisomerase I. Eukaryotic-like enzymes have been discovered in some hyperthermophilic prokaryotes, namely the eocytes and the extremely thermophilic archaebacteria, and hyperthermophilic homologues of eukaryotic DNA polymerase-alpha, transcription factor IIB and DNA ligase have all been reported. Thus our findings support the idea that some essential parts of the eukaryotic transcription-translation and replication machineries were in place before the emergence of eukaryotes, and that the closest living relatives of eukaryotes may be hyperthermophiles.
The I region of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) of the mouse (H-2) contains a tightly-linked cluster of highly polymorphic genes (class II MHC genes) which control immune responsiveness. Speculation on the origin of this polymorphism, which is believed to be essential for the function of the class II proteins in immune responses to disease, has given rise to two hypotheses. The first is that hypermutational mechanisms (gene conversion or segmental exchange) promote the rapid generation of diversity in MHC genes. The alternative is that polymorphism has arisen from the steady accumulation of mutations over long evolutionary periods, and multiple specific alleles have survived speciation (trans-species evolution). We have looked for evidence of 'segmental exchange' and/or 'trans-species evolution' in the class II genes of the genus Mus by molecular genetic analysis of I-A beta alleles. The results indicate that greater than 90% (28 out of 31) of the alleles examined can be organized into two evolutionary groups both on the basis of restriction site polymorphisms and by the presence or absence of a short interspersed nucleotide element (SINE). Using this SINE sequence as an evolutionary tag, we demonstrate that I-A beta alleles in these two evolutionary groups diverged at least three million years ago and have survived the speciation events leading to several modern Mus species. Nucleotide sequence comparisons of eight Mus m. domesticus I-A beta alleles representing all three evolutionary groups indicate that most of the divergence in exon sequences is due to the steady accumulation of mutations that are maintained independently in the different alleles. But segmental exchanges between alleles from different evolutionary groups have also played a role in the diversification of beta 1 exons.
Natural killer cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes accomplish the critically important function of killing virus-infected and neoplastic cells. They do this by releasing the pore-forming protein perforin and granzyme proteases from cytoplasmic granules into the cleft formed between the abutting killer and target cell membranes. Perforin, a 67-kilodalton multidomain protein, oligomerizes to form pores that deliver the pro-apoptopic granzymes into the cytosol of the target cell. The importance of perforin is highlighted by the fatal consequences of congenital perforin deficiency, with more than 50 different perforin mutations linked to familial haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (type 2 FHL). Here we elucidate the mechanism of perforin pore formation by determining the X-ray crystal structure of monomeric murine perforin, together with a cryo-electron microscopy reconstruction of the entire perforin pore. Perforin is a thin 'key-shaped' molecule, comprising an amino-terminal membrane attack complex perforin-like (MACPF)/cholesterol dependent cytolysin (CDC) domain followed by an epidermal growth factor (EGF) domain that, together with the extreme carboxy-terminal sequence, forms a central shelf-like structure. A C-terminal C2 domain mediates initial, Ca(2+)-dependent membrane binding. Most unexpectedly, however, electron microscopy reveals that the orientation of the perforin MACPF domain in the pore is inside-out relative to the subunit arrangement in CDCs. These data reveal remarkable flexibility in the mechanism of action of the conserved MACPF/CDC fold and provide new insights into how related immune defence molecules such as complement proteins assemble into pores.
A modified form of RNA polymerase from Bacillus subtilis selectively transcribes a cloned gene under early sporulation control. This RNA polymerase lacks sigma factor but contains a newly identified subunit of molecular weight 37,000, termed P37. P37 could be a regulatory protein that controls, at least in part, an early stage of spore development.
The earliest stages of mouse embryogenesis, from fertilisation to the two-cell stage, are characterised by an extremely low level of RNA synthesis. Indeed, during this period, RNA polymerase II activity and incorporation of labelled precurosrs into heterogeneous RNA are not detectable, and there is no increase in the poly(A) content of the embryo, but rather a slight decrease. The rate of protein synthesis remains low and relatively constant throughout the one- and two-cell stages. However, qualitative analysis of the protein synthetic profile on SDS gels has revealed changes which appear around the late one-cell to early two-cell stage. This early change in the pattern of polypeptide synthesis represents the first major qualitative molecular change found so far in development. We present evidence which suggests that the increased synthesis at the early two-cell stage of a small number of polypeptides of molecular weight 35,000 is not dependent on transcription, but rather represents control at a post-transcriptional level using mRNAs synthesised before fertilisation.
The enzyme-catalysed transfer of a phosphoryl group from ATP is an important reaction in a wide variety of biological processes. We demonstrate here the essential function of an aspartate group in the catalysis of phosphoryl transfer by Escherichia coli phosphofructokinase, and the minor role of an arginine residue. We have used oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis to replace two amino-acid residues which X-ray analysis has shown to be close to the transferred phosphoryl group and we have analysed the forward and back reactions of the mutant enzymes by steady-state kinetics. Changing Asp 127 to Ser reduced the turnover number by a factor of 18,000 in the forward direction and 3,100 in the back reaction, and the Michaelis constant for fructose 1,6-bisphosphate in the reverse reaction by a factor of 45. This shows that this aspartate is a key residue in the rate enhancement by the enzyme, probably acting as a base in the reaction mechanism, and that it also destabilizes the product complex. Changing Arg 171 to Ser reduced the turnover numbers by about 3.4, showing that this arginine has only a minor effect on the catalysis.
Infection with Friend leukemia virus causes a marked increase in the activity of splenic phosphoribosylamidotransferase in mice. Intraperitoneal injection of purine nucleotides and their free bases inhibits this enzyme. This is the first example of the control of phosphoribosylamidostransferase in vivo in the mammalian system as well as in virus-induced leukemia. Experiments in vitro support the findings in vivo.
The enzyme isopenicillin N synthetase (IPS) catalyses the oxidative condensation of delta-(L-alpha-aminoadipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine (LLD-ACV) to isopenicillin N, which is a central reaction in the pathway to clinically important penicillins and cephalosporins. Here we report the cloning, characterization and expression in Escherichia coli of the gene encoding the IPS protein in Cephalosporium acremonium. The IPS gene was identified by purifying IPS protein, determining the first 23 amino-terminal amino acids, preparing a set of synthetic oligonucleotides encoding a portion of the determined amino-acid sequence, and probing a cosmid genome library with the mixed oligonucleotides. A cosmid hybridizing with the probe was isolated and the IPS gene was localized and sequenced. The IPS gene encodes a polypeptide of relative molecular mass (Mr) 38,416. When this open reading frame was cloned into an E. coli expression vector and inserted into E. coli, the recombinant E. coli produced a new protein co-migrating with authentic IPS as the major protein of the cell (approximately 20% of cell protein). Crude cell extracts condensed LLD-ACV to a penicillinase-sensitive molecule whose antibacterial activity indicated that it was isopenicillin N.
The haemagglutinin glycoprotein HA of influenza viruses is responsible for the attachment of the virus to neuraminic acid-containing receptors at the cell surface and subsequent penetration by triggering fusion of the viral envelope with cellular membranes. To express full activity of the newly synthesized precursor, HA has to be modified by post-translational proteolytic cleavage into the polypeptides HA1 and HA2 by cellular enzymes. If proteases suitable for cleavage are not present in the host cell, the resulting virus particles are non-infectious. During adaptation of the apathogenic influenza virus A/turkey/Oregon/71 to chicken embryo cells, which are not permissive for HA cleavage, we obtained an infectious virus variant with increased pathogenicity. Sequence analysis revealed that during adaptation 54 nucleotides were inserted into the HA gene; their sequence corresponds to a region of the 28S ribosomal RNA. This insertion is probably responsible for increased cleavability of HA, as well as for infectivity and pathogenicity of the adapted virus.
Every cell contains many families of protein kinases, and may express several structurally related yet genetically distinct kinases of each family. The activity of the serine/threonine protein kinase C (PKC) enzymes has long been implicated in T-cell activation, but it is not known which members of the PKC family regulate the T-cell response to foreign antigens. The activation of T cells by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) is spatially restricted to their site of contact, where receptors on the T cells engage their counter-receptors on the APCs. We used this localized engagement to identify, at the single-cell level, intracellular proteins involved in the activation process. By digital immunofluorescence microscopy, we localized six isoforms of PKC in antigen-specific T-cell clones activated by APCs. Surprisingly, only PKC-theta translocated to the site of cell contact. Accordingly, in vitro kinase activity assays of PKC immunoprecipitates from the conjugates of T cells and APCs showed a selective increase in the activity of PKC-theta, indicating that the translocated enzyme is active. Several modes of partial T-cell activation that failed to cause PKC-theta translocation also failed to cause T-cell proliferation, further suggesting the involvement of PKC-theta in T-cell activation.
Computer simulations of the diffusion of a substrate to an enzyme active site were performed. They included the detailed shape of the protein and an accurate description of its electrostatic potential. Application of the method to the diffusion of the superoxide anion to the protein superoxide dismutase revealed that the electric field of the enzyme enhances the association rate of the anion by a factor of 30 or more. Calculated changes in the association rate as a function of ionic strength and amino acid modification paralleled the observed behavior. Design principles of superoxide dismutase are considered with respect to insights provided by the simulations. A possible means of enhancing the enzyme turnover rate through site-directed mutagenesis is proposed.
Recent studies suggest that proteases of the interleukin 1-beta-converting enzyme (ICE)/ced-3 family are involved in initiating the active phase of apoptosis. Here we identify a novel protease resembling ICE (prICE) that is active in a cell-free system that reproduces the morphological and biochemical events of apoptosis. prICE cleaves the nuclear enzyme poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) at a tetrapeptide sequence identical to one of two ICE sites in pro-interleukin-1-beta. However, prICE does not cleave purified pro-interleukin-1-beta, and purified ICE does not cleave PARP, indicating that the two activities are distinct. Inhibition of prICE abolishes all manifestations of apoptosis in the extracts including morphological changes, cleavage of PARP and production of an oligonucleosomal ladder. These studies suggest that prICE might be pivotal in initiating the active phase of apoptosis in vitro and in intact cells.
Protein kinase C activity in rat hippocampal membranes and cytosol was determined 1 minute and 1 hour after induction of the synaptic plasticity of long-term potentiation. At 1 hour after long-term potentiation, but not at 1 minute, protein kinase C activity was increased twofold in membranes and decreased proportionately in cytosol, suggesting translocation of the activity. This time-dependent redistribution of enzyme activity was directly related to the persistence of synaptic plasticity, suggesting a novel mechanism regulating the strength of synaptic transmission.
We report the humanization of the glycosylation pathway in the yeast Pichia pastoris to secrete a human glycoprotein with uniform complex N-glycosylation. The process involved eliminating endogenous yeast glycosylation pathways, while properly localizing five active eukaryotic proteins, including mannosidases I and II, N-acetylglucosaminyl transferases I and II, and uridine 5'-diphosphate (UDP)-N-acetylglucosamine transporter. Targeted localization of the enzymes enabled the generation of a synthetic in vivo glycosylation pathway, which produced the complex human N-glycan N-acetylglucosamine2-mannose3-N-acetylglucosamine2 (GlcNAc2Man3GlcNAc2). The ability to generate human glycoproteins with homogeneous N-glycan structures in a fungal host is a step toward producing therapeutic glycoproteins and could become a tool for elucidating the structure-function relation of glycoproteins.
Elevated plasma levels of the lipoprotein Lp(a) are associated with increased risk for atherosclerosis and its manifestations, myocardial infarction, stroke and restenosis (for reviews, see refs 1-3). Lp(a) differs from low-density lipoprotein by the addition of the glycoprotein apolipoprotein(a), a homologue of plasminogen that contains many tandemly repeated units which resemble the fourth kringle domain of plasminogen, and single homologues of its kringle-5 and protease domain. As plasma Lp(a) concentration is strongly influenced by heritable factors and is refractory to most drug and dietary manipulation, the effects of modulating it are difficult to mimic experimentally. In addition, the absence of apolipoprotein(a) from virtually all species other than primates precludes the use of convenient animal models. Here we show that transgenic mice expressing human apolipoprotein(a) are more susceptible than control mice to the development of lipid-staining lesions in the aorta, and that apolipoprotein(a) co-localizes with lipid deposition in the artery walls.
Many retroviral oncogenes have been classified into one of several categories based on structure, enzymology and cellular localization. These genes originated from host cells and are probably derived from genes normally involved in the control of cell proliferation. The cellular counterparts of three oncogenes have been identified as a growth factor or growth factor receptor; related oncogenes include receptor-like membrane proteins which often express tyrosine kinase activity. These growth factor-related oncogenes are structurally and biochemically distinct from the membrane-associated ras gene family, which bind and hydrolyse GTP. Oncogenes localized primarily in the cytoplasm which probably have serine kinase activity, have also been identified. Although the structure and biochemistry of many oncogenes have been extensively studied, relatively little is known about the functional relationships of oncogene proteins within the cell. An opportunity to study such interaction is provided by the identification of a monoclonal antibody that neutralizes cellular ras proteins when microinjected into cells. It has been shown previously that the injected antibody inhibits the initiation of S-phase in NIH 3T3 cells. In the present study we injected this monoclonal antibody into NIH 3T3 cells transformed by a variety of oncogenes. The results show that transformation by three growth factor receptor-like oncogenes depends on c-ras proteins, while transformation by two cytoplasmic oncogenes appears to be independent of c-ras protein.
A single-site mutant of Escherichia coli glutaminyl-synthetase (D235N, GlnRS7) that incorrectly acylates in vivo the amber suppressor supF tyrosine transfer RNA (tRNA(Tyr] with glutamine has been described. Two additional mutant forms of the enzyme showing this misacylation property have now been isolated in vivo (D235G, GlnRS10; I129T, GlnRS15). All three mischarging mutant enzymes still retain a certain degree of tRNA specificity; in vivo they acylate supE glutaminyl tRNA (tRNA(Gln] and supF tRNA(Tyr) but not a number of other suppressor tRNA's. These genetic experiments define two positions in GlnRS where amino acid substitution results in a relaxed specificity of tRNA discrimination. The crystal structure of the GlnRS:tRNA(Gln) complex provides a structural basis for interpreting these data. In the wild-type enzyme Asp235 makes sequence-specific hydrogen bonds through its side chain carboxylate group with base pair G3.C70 in the minor groove of the acceptor stem of the tRNA. This observation implicates base pair 3.70 as one of the identity determinants of tRNA(Gln). Isoleucine 129 is positioned adjacent to the phosphate of nucleotide C74, which forms part of a hairpin structure adopted by the acceptor end of the complexed tRNA molecule. These results identify specific areas in the structure of the complex that are critical to accurate tRNA discrimination by GlnRS.
RNA polymerase I and II transcription factors SL1 and TFIID, respectively, are composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and a set of TBP-associated factors (TAFs) responsible for promoter recognition. How the universal transcription factor TBP becomes committed to a TFIID or SL1 complex has not been known. Complementary DNAs encoding each of the three TAFIs that are integral components of SL1 have not been isolated. Analysis of subunit interactions indicated that the three TAFIs can bind individually and specifically to TBP. In addition, these TAFIs interact with each other to form a stable TBP-TAF complex. When TBP was bound first by either TAFI110, 63, or 48, subunits of TFIID such as TAFII250 and 150 did not bind TBP. Conversely, if TBP first formed a complex with TAFII250 or 150, the subunits of SL1 did not bind TBP. These results suggest that a mutually exclusive binding specificity for TBP intrinsic to SL1 and TFIID subunits directs the formation of promoter- and RNA polymerase-selective TBP-TAF complexes.
The small GTPase Ran enzyme regulates critical eukaryotic cellular functions including nuclear transport and mitosis through the creation of a RanGTP gradient around the chromosomes. This concentration gradient is created by the chromatin-bound RCC1 (regulator of chromosome condensation) protein, which recruits Ran to nucleosomes and activates Ran's nucleotide exchange activity. Although RCC1 has been shown to bind directly with the nucleosome, the molecular details of this interaction were not known. Here we determine the crystal structure of a complex of Drosophila RCC1 and the nucleosome core particle at 2.9 A resolution, providing an atomic view of how a chromatin protein interacts with the histone and DNA components of the nucleosome. Our structure also suggests that the Widom 601 DNA positioning sequence present in the nucleosomes forms a 145-base-pair nucleosome core particle, not the expected canonical 147-base-pair particle.
The RAD30 gene of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is required for the error-free postreplicational repair of DNA that has been damaged by ultraviolet irradiation. Here, RAD30 is shown to encode a DNA polymerase that can replicate efficiently past a thymine-thymine cis-syn cyclobutane dimer, a lesion that normally blocks DNA polymerases. When incubated in vitro with all four nucleotides, Rad30 incorporates two adenines opposite the thymine-thymine dimer. Rad30 is the seventh eukaryotic DNA polymerase to be described and hence is named DNA polymerase eta.
Transcription of eukaryotic messenger RNA (mRNA) encoding genes by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is triggered by the binding of transactivating proteins to enhancer DNA, which stimulates the recruitment of general transcription factors (TFIIA, B, D, E, F, H) and Pol II on the cis-linked promoter, leading to pre-initiation complex formation and transcription. In TFIID-dependent activation pathways, this general transcription factor containing TATA-box-binding protein is first recruited on the promoter through interaction with activators and cooperates with TFIIA to form a committed pre-initiation complex. However, neither the mechanisms by which activation signals are communicated between these factors nor the structural organization of the activated pre-initiation complex are known. Here we used cryo-electron microscopy to determine the architecture of nucleoprotein complexes composed of TFIID, TFIIA, the transcriptional activator Rap1 and yeast enhancer-promoter DNA. These structures revealed the mode of binding of Rap1 and TFIIA to TFIID, as well as a reorganization of TFIIA induced by its interaction with Rap1. We propose that this change in position increases the exposure of TATA-box-binding protein within TFIID, consequently enhancing its ability to interact with the promoter. A large Rap1-dependent DNA loop forms between the activator-binding site and the proximal promoter region. This loop is topologically locked by a TFIIA-Rap1 protein bridge that folds over the DNA. These results highlight the role of TFIIA in transcriptional activation, define a molecular mechanism for enhancer-promoter communication and provide structural insights into the pathways of intramolecular communication that convey transcription activation signals through the TFIID complex.
Ion channels formed by the TRP (transient receptor potential) superfamily of proteins act as sensors for temperature, osmolarity, mechanical stress and taste. The growth cones of developing axons are responsible for sensing extracellular guidance factors, many of which trigger Ca2+ influx at the growth cone; however, the identity of the ion channels involved remains to be clarified. Here, we report that TRP-like channel activity exists in the growth cones of cultured Xenopus neurons and can be modulated by exposure to netrin-1 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor, two chemoattractants for axon guidance. Whole-cell recording from growth cones showed that netrin-1 induced a membrane depolarization, part of which remained after all major voltage-dependent channels were blocked. Furthermore, the membrane depolarization was sensitive to blockers of TRP channels. Pharmacological blockade of putative TRP currents or downregulation of Xenopus TRP-1 (xTRPC1) expression with a specific morpholino oligonucleotide abolished the growth-cone turning and Ca2+ elevation induced by a netrin-1 gradient. Thus, TRPC currents reflect early events in the growth cone's detection of some extracellular guidance signals, resulting in membrane depolarization and cytoplasmic Ca2+ elevation that mediates the turning of growth cones.
We isolated two mutants from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, cim3-1 and cim5-1, that arrest cell division in G2/metaphase at 37 degrees C. CIM3 (identical to SUG1; ref. 1) and CIM5 are similar to each other and are members of a family of putative ATPases that have been proposed to be 26S protease subunits. We show here that CIM5 is the functional yeast homologue of the human MSS1 protein and that homologues of CIM3 and CIM5 are present in a highly purified preparation of the Drosophila 26S protease. The short-lived ubiquitin-proline-beta-galactosidase fusion protein is stabilized in cim mutants, but Leu-beta-galactosidase is not. The CLB2 and CLB3 cyclins also accumulate in the cim mutants. Thus the 26S protease is required in vivo for the degradation of ubiquitinated substrates and for anaphase chromosome separation.
A distinct subpopulation of striatal aspiny neurons, containing the enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase, is preserved in the caudate nucleus in Huntington's disease. Biochemical assays confirmed a significant increase in the activity of this enzyme in both the caudate nucleus and putamen in postmortem brain tissue from patients with this disease. The resistance of these neurons suggests that the gene defect in Huntington's disease may be modifiable by the local biochemical environment. This finding may provide insight into the nature of the genetically programmed cell death that is a characteristic of the disease.
It has been suggested that the liver may be a major site for irreversible degradation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL). The disappearance of autologous (125)I-labeled LDL from plasma was compared in intact and in hepatectomized swine. Contrary to expectations, the rate of irreversible removal of LDL from plasma was increased rather then decreased by hepatectomy. These studies suggest that the liver is not a major site for LDL removal. We propose further that the liver (or some function requiring an intact liver) may affect the metabolism of LDL in a manner that prolongs its lifetime in the plasma compartment.
Peptide synthetases involved in the nonribosomal synthesis of peptide secondary metabolites possess a highly conserved domain structure. The arrangement of these domains within the multifunctional enzymes determines the number and order of the amino acid constituents of the peptide product. A general approach has been developed for targeted substitution of amino acid-activating domains within the srfA operon, which encodes the protein templates for the synthesis of the lipopeptide antibiotic surfactin in Bacillus subtilis. Exchange of domain-coding regions of bacterial and fungal origin led to the construction of hybrid genes that encoded peptide synthetases with altered amino acid specificities and the production of peptides with modified amino acid sequences.
The major FK506 binding protein (FKBP, relative molecular mass approximately 11,800; Mr 11.8K) and cyclophilin (Mr approximately 17K) belong to a class of proteins termed immunophilins. Although unrelated at the amino-acid sequence level, they both possess peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activities which are inhibited by immunosuppressants that block signal transduction pathways leading to T-lymphocyte activation. FK506 and rapamycin strongly inhibit the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity of FKBP, whereas cyclosporin A inhibits that of cyclophilin. The significance of this enzyme activity and the role of the immunophilins in immunoregulation is unknown. To understand better the function of the immunophilins and their interaction with inhibitors, we are investigating the solution structures of FKBP and FKBP-inhibitor complexes by multidimensional NMR methods. Here we report the solution conformation of FKBP, as generated by NMR, distance geometry and molecular dynamics methods. The regular secondary structure of FKBP is composed mainly of beta sheet (approximately 35%) with little helical structure (less than 10%). The hydrophobic core of the molecule, containing the buried side chains of six of the protein's nine aromatic amino acids, is enclosed by a five-stranded antiparallel beta sheet on one side, a loop and a short helix at residues 51-56 and 57-65, and an aperiodic loop at residues 81-95. Examination of the structure suggests a possible site of interaction with FK506.
Steric and hydrophobic effects on substrate specificity were probed by protein engineering of subtilisin. Subtilisin has broad peptidase specificity and contains a large hydrophobic substrate binding cleft. A conserved glycine (Gly(166)), located at the bottom of the substrate binding left, was replaced by 12 nonionic amino acids by the cassette mutagenesis method. Mutant enzymes showed large changes in specificity toward substrates of increasing size and hydrophobicity. In general, the catalytic efficiency (k(cat)/K(m)) toward small hydrophobic substrates was increased (up to 16 times) by hydrophobic substitutions at position 166 in the binding cleft. Exceeding the optimal binding volume of the cleft ( approximately 160 A(3)), by enlarging either the substrate side chain or the side chain at position 166, evoked precipitous drops in catalytic efficiency (k(cat)/K(m)) (up to 5000 times) as a result of steric hindrance.
Studies in ctltured fibroblasts indicate that the primary genetic abnormality in familial hypercholesterolemia involves a deficiency in a cell surface receptor for low density lipoproteins (LDL). In normal cells, binding of LDL to this receptor regulates cholesterol metabolism by suppressing cholesterol synthesis and increasing LDL degradation. In cells from heterozygotes, a 60 percent reduction in LDL receptors leads to a concentration-dependent defect in regulation, so that attainment of equal rates of cholesterol synthesis and LDL degradation in normal and heterozygous cells requires a two- to threefold higher concentration of LDL in the heterozygote. The identification of this genetic regulatory defect in fibroblasts of heterozygotes makes available an in vitro system for studying the effects of a dominant mutation on gene expression in mammalian cells.
Primate and rodent genomes contain a family of highly repetitive, long interspersed sequences, designated the L1 family or LINE-1. Characteristic features of the L1 family sequences such as an A-rich stretch at the 3' end, a truncated 5' end, the existence of significantly long open reading frames (ORFs) and the presence of L1 family transcripts in various types of cells, including pluripotential embryonic cells, suggest that the L1 family is derived from a sequence encoding a protein(s) and dispersed in the genome through an RNA-mediated process. These features of the L1 family are believed to be due to reverse transcription beginning at the 3' end of the L1 transcript and terminating prematurely and to the site duplication caused by the insertion of the complementary DNA. It is likely that this type of transcript is converted to cDNA and inserted into the chromosome through a process similar to that of the formation of processed pseudogenes. The above model, however, does not necessarily explain why the L1 family should produce the extraordinarily large number of copies (more than 10(4) per haploid genome) seen during evolution. It seems likely that the progenitor of the L1 family itself carries (or carried) a function which promotes the active dispersion of the L1 family sequence. We reasoned that such a function, if present, must be conserved during evolution and may be shown by comparative analysis of L1 family sequences from evolutionarily distant species. We show here that the L1 family sequence contains an ORF possessing significant sequence homology to several RNA-dependent DNA polymerases of viral and transposable element origins.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Dual specificity protein phosphatases (DSPs) regulate mitogenic signal transduction and control the cell cycle. Here, the crystal structure of a human DSP, vaccinia H1-related phosphatase (or VHR), was determined at 2.1 angstrom resolution. A shallow active site pocket in VHR allows for the hydrolysis of phosphorylated serine, threonine, or tyrosine protein residues, whereas the deeper active site of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) restricts substrate specificity to only phosphotyrosine. Positively charged crevices near the active site may explain the enzyme's preference for substrates with two phosphorylated residues. The VHR structure defines a conserved structural scaffold for both DSPs and PTPs. A "recognition region," connecting helix alpha1 to strand beta1, may determine differences in substrate specificity between VHR, the PTPs, and other DSPs.
A 2.91-billion base pair (bp) consensus sequence of the euchromatic portion of the human genome was generated by the whole-genome shotgun sequencing method. The 14.8-billion bp DNA sequence was generated over 9 months from 27,271,853 high-quality sequence reads (5.11-fold coverage of the genome) from both ends of plasmid clones made from the DNA of five individuals. Two assembly strategies-a whole-genome assembly and a regional chromosome assembly-were used, each combining sequence data from Celera and the publicly funded genome effort. The public data were shredded into 550-bp segments to create a 2.9-fold coverage of those genome regions that had been sequenced, without including biases inherent in the cloning and assembly procedure used by the publicly funded group. This brought the effective coverage in the assemblies to eightfold, reducing the number and size of gaps in the final assembly over what would be obtained with 5.11-fold coverage. The two assembly strategies yielded very similar results that largely agree with independent mapping data. The assemblies effectively cover the euchromatic regions of the human chromosomes. More than 90% of the genome is in scaffold assemblies of 100,000 bp or more, and 25% of the genome is in scaffolds of 10 million bp or larger. Analysis of the genome sequence revealed 26,588 protein-encoding transcripts for which there was strong corroborating evidence and an additional approximately 12,000 computationally derived genes with mouse matches or other weak supporting evidence. Although gene-dense clusters are obvious, almost half the genes are dispersed in low G+C sequence separated by large tracts of apparently noncoding sequence. Only 1.1% of the genome is spanned by exons, whereas 24% is in introns, with 75% of the genome being intergenic DNA. Duplications of segmental blocks, ranging in size up to chromosomal lengths, are abundant throughout the genome and reveal a complex evolutionary history. Comparative genomic analysis indicates vertebrate expansions of genes associated with neuronal function, with tissue-specific developmental regulation, and with the hemostasis and immune systems. DNA sequence comparisons between the consensus sequence and publicly funded genome data provided locations of 2.1 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). A random pair of human haploid genomes differed at a rate of 1 bp per 1250 on average, but there was marked heterogeneity in the level of polymorphism across the genome. Less than 1% of all SNPs resulted in variation in proteins, but the task of determining which SNPs have functional consequences remains an open challenge.
APOBEC-2 (APO2) belongs to the family of apolipoprotein B messenger RNA-editing enzyme catalytic (APOBEC) polypeptides, which deaminates mRNA and single-stranded DNA. Different APOBEC members use the same deamination activity to achieve diverse human biological functions. Deamination by an APOBEC protein called activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is critical for generating high-affinity antibodies, and deamination by APOBEC-3 proteins can inhibit retrotransposons and the replication of retroviruses such as human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus. Here we report the crystal structure of APO2. APO2 forms a rod-shaped tetramer that differs markedly from the square-shaped tetramer of the free nucleotide cytidine deaminase, with which APOBEC proteins share considerable sequence homology. In APO2, two long alpha-helices of a monomer structure prevent the formation of a square-shaped tetramer and facilitate formation of the rod-shaped tetramer via head-to-head interactions of two APO2 dimers. Extensive sequence homology among APOBEC family members allows us to test APO2 structure-based predictions using AID. We show that AID deamination activity is impaired by mutations predicted to interfere with oligomerization and substrate access. The structure suggests how mutations in patients with hyper-IgM-2 syndrome inactivate AID, resulting in defective antibody maturation.
Oleylethanolamide (OEA) is a naturally occurring lipid that regulates satiety and body weight. Although structurally related to the endogenous cannabinoid anandamide, OEA does not bind to cannabinoid receptors and its molecular targets have not been defined. Here we show that OEA binds with high affinity to the peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPAR-alpha), a nuclear receptor that regulates several aspects of lipid metabolism. Administration of OEA produces satiety and reduces body weight gain in wild-type mice, but not in mice deficient in PPAR-alpha. Two distinct PPAR-alpha agonists have similar effects that are also contingent on PPAR-alpha expression, whereas potent and selective agonists for PPAR-gamma and PPAR-beta/delta are ineffective. In the small intestine of wild-type but not PPAR-alpha-null mice, OEA regulates the expression of several PPAR-alpha target genes: it initiates the transcription of proteins involved in lipid metabolism and represses inducible nitric oxide synthase, an enzyme that may contribute to feeding stimulation. Our results, which show that OEA induces satiety by activating PPAR-alpha, identify an unexpected role for this nuclear receptor in regulating behaviour, and raise possibilities for the treatment of eating disorders.
The Sir2 deacetylase regulates chromatin silencing and lifespan in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In mice, deficiency for the Sir2 family member SIRT6 leads to a shortened lifespan and a premature ageing-like phenotype. However, the molecular mechanisms of SIRT6 function are unclear. SIRT6 is a chromatin-associated protein, but no enzymatic activity of SIRT6 at chromatin has yet been detected, and the identity of physiological SIRT6 substrates is unknown. Here we show that the human SIRT6 protein is an NAD+-dependent, histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) deacetylase that modulates telomeric chromatin. SIRT6 associates specifically with telomeres, and SIRT6 depletion leads to telomere dysfunction with end-to-end chromosomal fusions and premature cellular senescence. Moreover, SIRT6-depleted cells exhibit abnormal telomere structures that resemble defects observed in Werner syndrome, a premature ageing disorder. At telomeric chromatin, SIRT6 deacetylates H3K9 and is required for the stable association of WRN, the factor that is mutated in Werner syndrome. We propose that SIRT6 contributes to the propagation of a specialized chromatin state at mammalian telomeres, which in turn is required for proper telomere metabolism and function. Our findings constitute the first identification of a physiological enzymatic activity of SIRT6, and link chromatin regulation by SIRT6 to telomere maintenance and a human premature ageing syndrome.
Molecular evolution is moving from statistical descriptions of adaptive molecular changes toward predicting the fitness effects of mutations. Here, we characterize the fitness landscape of the six amino acids controlling coenzyme use in isopropylmalate dehydrogenase (IMDH). Although all natural IMDHs use nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) as a coenzyme, they can be engineered to use nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) instead. Intermediates between these two phenotypic extremes show that each amino acid contributes additively to enzyme function, with epistatic contributions confined to fitness. The genotype-phenotype-fitness map shows that NAD use is a global optimum.
Injections of leupeptin (a thiol proteinase inhibitor) or chloroquine (a general lysosomal enzyme inhibitor) into the brains of young rats induced the formation of lysosome-associated granular aggregates (dense bodies) which closely resembled the ceroid-lipofuscin that accumulates in certain disease states and during aging. The dense material increased in a dose- and time-dependent fashion and was differentially distributed across brain regions and cell types. These observations provide clues to the origins of ceroid-lipofuscin and suggest means for studying the consequences of its accumulation.
Protein secretion occurs via translocation by the evolutionarily conserved Sec complex. LacZ hybrid proteins have long been used to study translocation in Escherichia coli. Some LacZ hybrids were thought to block secretion by physically jamming the Sec complex, leading to cell death. We found that jammed Sec complexes caused the degradation of essential translocator components by the protease FtsH. Increasing the amounts or the stability of the membrane protein YccA, a known inhibitor of FtsH, counteracted this destruction. Antibiotics that inhibit translation elongation also jammed the translocator and caused the degradation of translocator components, which may contribute to their effectiveness. Intriguingly, YccA is a functional homolog of the proto-oncogene product Bax Inhibitor-1, which may share a similar mechanism of action in regulating apoptosis upon prolonged secretion stress.
Many protein kinases are self-regulated by an intrasteric mechanism where part of the enzyme's structure directly inhibits the active site. This inhibitory structure is called a pseudosubstrate and specific regulators are required to remove it from the active site to allow substrates access. Removal of the pseudosubstrate sequence from members of the myosin light-chain kinase subfamily, including twitchin kinase, activates them but it is not known whether the pseudosubstrate sequence binds to the active site. Native twitchin is a 753K protein (6,839 residues) located in muscle A-bands of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and because of its size has not been easy to study. We have determined the crystal structure, refined to 2.8 A resolution, of a recombinant fragment (residues 5,890 to 6,262) of twitchin kinase that contains the catalytic core and a 60 residue carboxy-terminal tail. The C-terminal tail extends through the active site, wedged between the small and large lobes of the structure and making extensive contacts with the catalytic core which accounts for autoinhibition and provides direct support for the intrasteric mechanism of protein kinase regulation.
Dormant ascospores contain the same ribosomal population as growing hyphae and resting conidia. This conclusion is based on analyses of sedimentation coefficients and of nucleotide composition of ribosomes, ribosomal RNA, and soluble RNA. Thus dormancy is not characterized by the absence of the important parts of the protein-synthesizing apparatus.
The enzyme ornithine decarboxylase is the key regulator of the synthesis of polyamines which are essential for cell proliferation. Expression of this enzyme is transiently increased upon stimulation by growth factors, but becomes constitutively activated during cell transformation induced by carcinogens, viruses or oncogenes. To test whether ornithine decarboxylase could be a common mediator of transformation and oncogenic itself, we transfected NIH3T3 cells with expression vectors carrying the complementary DNA encoding human ornithine decarboxylase in sense and antisense orientations. The increased expression of the enzyme (50-100-times endogenous levels) induced not only cell transformation, but also anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and increased tyrosine phosphorylation of a protein of M(r) 130K. Expression of ornithine decarboxylase antisense RNA was associated with an epithelioid morphology and reduced cell proliferation. Moreover, blocking the endogenous enzyme using specific inhibitor or synthesizing antisense RNA prevented transformation of rat fibroblasts by temperature-sensitive v-src oncogene. Our results imply that the gene encoding ornithine decarboxylase is a proto-oncogene central for regulation of cell growth and transformation.
Activators of bacterial sigma54-RNA polymerase holoenzyme are mechanochemical proteins that use adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis to activate transcription. We have determined by cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) a 20 angstrom resolution structure of an activator, phage shock protein F [PspF(1-275)], which is bound to an ATP transition state analog in complex with its basal factor, sigma54. By fitting the crystal structure of PspF(1-275) at 1.75 angstroms into the EM map, we identified two loops involved in binding sigma54. Comparing enhancer-binding structures in different nucleotide states and mutational analysis led us to propose nucleotide-dependent conformational changes that free the loops for association with sigma54.
The recent cloning of the complementary DNAs and/or genes for several receptors linked to guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins including the adrenergic receptors (alpha 1, alpha 2A, alpha 2B, beta 1, beta 2), several subtypes of the muscarinic cholinergic receptors, and the visual 'receptor' rhodopsin has revealed considerable similarity in the primary structure of these proteins. In addition, all of these proteins contain seven putative transmembrane alpha-helices. We have previously described a genomic clone, G-21, isolated by cross-hybridization at reduced stringency with a full length beta 2-adrenergic receptor probe. This clone contains an intronless gene which, because of its striking sequence resemblance to the adrenergic receptors, is presumed to encode a G-protein-coupled receptor. Previous attempts to identify this putative receptor by expression studies have failed. We now report that the protein product of the genomic clone, G21, transiently expressed in monkey kidney cells has all the typical ligand-binding characteristics of the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT1A) receptor.
The transposable genetic element Tn9 consists of two direct repeats of the insertion sequence IS1 flanking a region of 1,102 base pairs which determines chloramphenicol resistance. Transposition of Tn9 leads to the duplication of a 9-base pair sequence which preexists at the site of insertion. One copy of this sequence is found at each end of the inserted element. The chloramphenicol resistance determined by Tn9, and by various other R plasmids, is due to the synthesis of the enzyme chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT). This enzyme catalyses the formation of acetylated derivatives of chloramphenicol which are inactive as inhibitors of protein synthesis. By using the chain termination technique of DNA sequencing, we have now determined the nucleotide sequence of the 1,102 base pair region between the directly repeated IS1 sequence in the bacterial transposon Tn9 (encoding chloramphenicol resistance). The amino acid sequence of CAT predicted from the nucleotide sequence is identical to that determined by Shaw and coworkers. An analysis of the sequence suggests that the internal 1,102 base pair region is not directly involved in transposition.
The protozoan Plasmodium falciparum causes lethal malaria. Adhesion of erythrocytes infected with P. falciparum to vascular endothelium and to uninfected red blood cells (rosetting) may be involved in the pathogenesis of severe malaria. The binding is mediated by the antigenically variant erythrocyte-membrane-protein-1 (PfEMP-1), which is encoded by members of the P. falciparum var gene family. The control of expression and switching of var genes seems to lack resemblance to mechanisms operating in variant gene families of other microbial pathogens. Here we show that multiple, distinct var gene transcripts (about 24 or more) can be detected by reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction in bulk cultures of the rosetting parasite FCR3S1.2, despite the adhesive homogeneity of the cultures. We also detected several var transcripts in single erythrocytes infected with a ring-stage parasite of FCR3S1.2, and found that different var genes are transcribed simultaneously from several chromosomes in the same cell. In contrast, we detected only one var transcript, FCR3S1.2 var-1, which encodes the rosetting PfEMP-1 protein, in individual rosette-adhesive trophozoite-infected cells, and we found only one PfEMP-1 type at the erythrocyte surface by labelling with 125iodine and immunoprecipitation. We conclude that a single P. falciparum parasite simultaneously transcribes multiple var genes but, through a developmentally regulated process, selects only one PfEMP-1 to reach the surface of the host cell.
3'-End formation of pre-mRNA in yeast and mammals follows a similar but distinct pathway. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the cleavage reaction can be reconstituted by two activities called cleavage factor I and II (CFI and CFII). A CFII component, designated CFT1 (cleavage factor two) was identified by its sequence similarity to the AAUAAA-binding subunit of the mammalian cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF), even though the AAUAAA signal sequence appears to play no role in yeast pre-mRNA 3' processing. Depletion of a yeast whole-cell extract with antibodies to CFT1 protein abolished cleavage and polyadenylation of pre-mRNAs. Addition of CFII restored cleavage activity, but not polyadenylation. Polyadenylation required the further addition of poly(A) polymerase and polyadenylation factor I, suggesting a close but not necessarily direct association of these two factors with the CFT1 protein.
A family of homomultimeric outer-membrane proteins termed secretins mediates the secretion of large macromolecules such as enzymes and filamentous bacteriophages across bacterial outer membranes to the extracellular milieu. The secretin encoded by filamentous phage f1 was purified. Mass determination of individual molecules by scanning transmission electron microscopy revealed two forms, a unit multimer composed of about 14 subunits and a multimer dimer. The secretin is roughly cylindrical and has an internal diameter of about 80 angstroms, which is large enough to accommodate filamentous phage (diameter of 65 angstroms).
Methanogenic and sulfate-reducing Archaea are considered to have an energy metabolism involving C1 transfer coenzymes and enzymes unique for this group of strictly anaerobic microorganisms. An aerobic methylotrophic bacterium, Methylobacterium extorquens AM1, was found to contain a cluster of genes that are predicted to encode some of these enzymes and was shown to contain two of the enzyme activities and one of the methanogenic coenzymes. Insertion mutants were all unable to grow on C1 compounds, suggesting that the archaeal enzymes function in aerobic C1 metabolism. Thus, methylotrophy and methanogenesis involve common genes that cross the bacterial/archaeal boundaries.
Dormin (abscisin II), inhibits growth of Lemna minor cultures. At 1 part per million (3.8x10(-6)M), the culture appears nearly completely dormant but can be revived readily by transferring it to fresh medium free of dormin. The cytokinin benzyladenine, but not auxin or gibberellin, will counteract the dormin effect. Quantitative restoration of normal growth by cytokinin, however, can be achieved only if the dormin concentration does not exceed a critical level. Separation, after phenol-detergent extraction, of nucleic acids on methylated albumin kieselguhr columns showed suppression of nucleic acid synthesis by dormin in all fractions. Inhibition of the synthesis of the DNA fraction seems to precede that of RNA. Cytokinins reverse the process. They promote synthesis of all nucleic acid fractions, but again DNA seems to lead. Further work on the interaction of dormin with growth-promoting hormones might be facilitated by adopting the Monod model of allosteric transition, with, for example, DNA polymerase as the protein, dormin as the inhibitor, and cytokinin or other growth promoters as activators.
alpha-Amino acids can undergo peptide formation by activation with carbon monoxide (CO) under hot aqueous conditions in the presence of freshly coprecipitated colloidal (Fe,Ni)S. We now show that CO-driven peptide formation proceeds concomitantly with CO-driven, N-terminal peptide degradation by racemizing N-terminal hydantoin and urea derivatives to alpha-amino acids. This establishes a peptide cycle with closely related anabolic and catabolic segments. The hydantoin derivative is a purin-related heterocycle. The (Fe,Ni)S-dependent urea hydrolysis could have been the evolutionary precursor of the nickelenzyme urease. The results support the theory of a chemoautotrophic origin of life with a CO-driven, (Fe,Ni)S-dependent primordial metabolism.
Proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) generates amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide, which is thought to be causal for the pathology and subsequent cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease. Cleavage by beta-secretase at the amino terminus of the Abeta peptide sequence, between residues 671 and 672 of APP, leads to the generation and extracellular release of beta-cleaved soluble APP, and a corresponding cell-associated carboxy-terminal fragment. Cleavage of the C-terminal fragment by gamma-secretase(s) leads to the formation of Abeta. The pathogenic mutation K670M671-->N670L671 at the beta-secretase cleavage site in APP, which was discovered in a Swedish family with familial Alzheimer's disease, leads to increased beta-secretase cleavage of the mutant substrate. Here we describe a membrane-bound enzyme activity that cleaves full-length APP at the beta-secretase cleavage site, and find it to be the predominant beta-cleavage activity in human brain. We have purified this enzyme activity to homogeneity from human brain using a new substrate analogue inhibitor of the enzyme activity, and show that the purified enzyme has all the properties predicted for beta-secretase. Cloning and expression of the enzyme reveals that human brain beta-secretase is a new membrane-bound aspartic proteinase.
The messenger RNAs specifying certain proteins involved in the inflammatory response and certain oncoproteins contain a conserved UA-rich sequence in the 3' untranslated region. This sequence, which is composed of several interspersed repeats of the octanucleotide UUAUUUAU, has been shown to destabilize mRNA in some eukaryotes. However, this effect is not seen when mRNAs are transferred to Xenopus oocytes, which made it possible to separate stability from translational regulation. For interferon, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and c-fos RNAs, the UA-rich sequence was observed to preclude mRNA translation.
Enolase or 2-phospho-D-glycerate hydrolase catalyses the dehydration of 2-phosphoglycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate, which in turn is converted by pyruvate kinase to pyruvate. We describe here the crystallographic determination of the structure of yeast enolase at high resolution (2.25 A) and an analysis of the structural homology between enolase, pyruvate kinase and triose phosphate isomerase. Each of the two subunits of enolase forms two distinctive domains. The larger domain (residues 143-420) is a regular 8-fold beta/alpha-barrel, as first found in triose phosphate isomerase, and later in pyruvate kinase and 11 other functionally different enzymes. An analysis of the molecular geometries of enolase and pyruvate kinase based on the roughly 8-fold symmetry of the barrel showed a structural homology better than expected for proteins related by convergent evolution. We argue that enolase and pyruvate kinase have evolved from a common ancestral multifunctional enzyme which could process phosphoenolpyruvate in both directions along the glycolytic pathway. There is structural and sequence evidence that muconate lactonizing enzyme later evolved from enolase.
Previous experimental results along with the structural modeling presented indicate that a nucleotide fold starts in the amino-terminal part of Escherichia coli isoleucyl-transfer RNA synthetase, a single chain polypeptide of 939 amino acids. Internal deletions were created in the region of the nucleotide fold. A set of deletions that collectively span 145 contiguous amino acids yielded active enzymes. Further extensions of the deletions yielded inactive or unstable proteins. The three-dimensional structure of an evidently homologous protein suggests that the active deletions lack portions of a segment that connects two parts of the nucleotide fold. Therefore, the results imply that removal of major sections of the polypeptide that connects these two parts of the fold does not result in major perturbation of the nucleotide binding site.
The nusA gene protein of Escherichia coli and N gene protein of bacteriophage lambda interact in vitro and cooperate in vivo to prevent transcription termination. In vitro the nusA gene protein causes RNA polymerase to pause in the tR2 terminator region of lambda DNA. A completed termination event at tR2 requires both the nusA gene protein and the previously described E. coli termination factor rho. The nusA gene protein is therefore both a transcription termination factor and a protein which couples antitermination factors to the elongating transcription complex.
The nucleotide sequence for the Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene TOP2, which encodes DNA topoisomerase II, was compared with the sequence for bacterial DNA gyrase. The amino and carboxyl terminal halves of the single-subunit yeast enzyme showed homologies with the B and A subunits of bacterial gyrase, respectively, at corresponding positions along the polypeptide chains. Although the two enzymes differ in both quaternary structure and activity, the homology between the two proteins indicates mechanistic as well as structural similarities, and a probable evolutionary relationship.
The transcription apparatus in Archaea can be described as a simplified version of its eukaryotic RNA polymerase (RNAP) II counterpart, comprising an RNAPII-like enzyme as well as two general transcription factors, the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and the eukaryotic TFIIB orthologue TFB. It has been widely understood that precise comparisons of cellular RNAP crystal structures could reveal structural elements common to all enzymes and that these insights would be useful in analysing components of each enzyme that enable it to perform domain-specific gene expression. However, the structure of archaeal RNAP has been limited to individual subunits. Here we report the first crystal structure of the archaeal RNAP from Sulfolobus solfataricus at 3.4 A resolution, completing the suite of multi-subunit RNAP structures from all three domains of life. We also report the high-resolution (at 1.76 A) crystal structure of the D/L subcomplex of archaeal RNAP and provide the first experimental evidence of any RNAP possessing an iron-sulphur (Fe-S) cluster, which may play a structural role in a key subunit of RNAP assembly. The striking structural similarity between archaeal RNAP and eukaryotic RNAPII highlights the simpler archaeal RNAP as an ideal model system for dissecting the molecular basis of eukaryotic transcription.
Crawling locomotion of eukaryotic cells is achieved by a process dependent on the actin cytoskeleton: protrusion of the leading edge requires assembly of a network of actin filaments, which must be disassembled at the cell rear for sustained motility. Although ADF/cofilin proteins have been shown to contribute to actin disassembly, it is not clear how activity of these locally acting proteins could be coordinated over the distance scale of the whole cell. Here we show that non-muscle myosin II has a direct role in actin network disassembly in crawling cells. In fish keratocytes undergoing motility, myosin II is concentrated in regions at the rear with high rates of network disassembly. Activation of myosin II by ATP in detergent-extracted cytoskeletons results in rear-localized disassembly of the actin network. Inhibition of myosin II activity and stabilization of actin filaments synergistically impede cell motility, suggesting the existence of two disassembly pathways, one of which requires myosin II activity. Our results establish the importance of myosin II as an enzyme for actin network disassembly; we propose that gradual formation and reorganization of an actomyosin network provides an intrinsic destruction timer, enabling long-range coordination of actin network treadmilling in motile cells.
Mitochondria contain the simplest DNA molecules that are present in eukaryotes. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is easily purified, and is an important model system for studying eukaryote gene structure and basic molecular processes. The protein sequences of mitochondrial gene products have been shown to be conserved from yeast to man, and there are definite similarities at the DNA sequence level. In contrast, the overall organization of the mitochondrial genome is drastically different in these organisms. To understand this, we need to extend work on mtDNA to a wider range of species. We have chosen to study the mtDNA of Aspergillus nidulans because a particularly comprehensive analysis of this system can be achieved using genetics as well as biochemistry, and like most eukaryotes it is an obligate aerobe, whereas Saccharomyces cerevisiae is not. We have investigated whether defined pieces of particular yeast mitochondrial genes show enough homology to Aspergillus mtDNA fragments to enable the corresponding Aspergillus genes to be located on the physical map. The results reported here show that this is the case for all five genes tested, and present the first data on the physical organization of the structural genes in the mitochondrial genome of A. nidulans.
The stability of the Wnt pathway transcription factor beta-catenin is tightly regulated by the multi-subunit destruction complex. Deregulated Wnt pathway activity has been implicated in many cancers, making this pathway an attractive target for anticancer therapies. However, the development of targeted Wnt pathway inhibitors has been hampered by the limited number of pathway components that are amenable to small molecule inhibition. Here, we used a chemical genetic screen to identify a small molecule, XAV939, which selectively inhibits beta-catenin-mediated transcription. XAV939 stimulates beta-catenin degradation by stabilizing axin, the concentration-limiting component of the destruction complex. Using a quantitative chemical proteomic approach, we discovered that XAV939 stabilizes axin by inhibiting the poly-ADP-ribosylating enzymes tankyrase 1 and tankyrase 2. Both tankyrase isoforms interact with a highly conserved domain of axin and stimulate its degradation through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Thus, our study provides new mechanistic insights into the regulation of axin protein homeostasis and presents new avenues for targeted Wnt pathway therapies.
The isocitrate dehydrogenase of Escherichia coli is an example of a ubiquitous class of enzymes that are regulated by covalent modification. In the three-dimensional structure of the enzyme-substrate complex, isocitrate forms a hydrogen bond with Ser113, the site of regulatory phosphorylation. The structures of Asp113 and Glu113 mutants, which mimic the inactivation of the enzyme by phosphorylation, show minimal conformational changes from wild type, as in the phosphorylated enzyme. Calculations based on observed structures suggest that the change in electrostatic potential when a negative charge is introduced either by phosporylation or site-directed mutagenesis is sufficient to inactivate the enzyme. Thus, direct interaction at a ligand binding site is an alternative mechanism to induced conformational changes from an allosteric site in the regulation of protein activity by phosphorylation.
Nuclear messenger RNA splicing involves multiple interactions between the five spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 and numerous spliceosomal proteins. Here it is shown that binding of a 2'-O-methyl-oligoribonucleotide complementary to U5 small nuclear RNA (snRNA) nucleotides 68 to 88 (BU5Ae) disrupts the initial U4/U5/U6 tri-snRNP complex, enhances the U2/U6 interaction, and induces a Ul/U4/U5 snRNP complex. The Ul/U4/U5 snRNP complex interacts specifically with an RNA oligonucleotide containing the 5' splice site sequence and may therefore represent a transitional stage in the displacement of U1 from the 5' splice site by U5 snRNP.
The discovery of RNA enzymes has, for the first time, provided a single molecule that has both genetic and catalytic properties. We have devised techniques for the mutation, selection and amplification of catalytic RNA, all of which can be performed rapidly in vitro. Here we describe how these techniques can be integrated and performed repeatedly within a single reaction vessel. This allows evolution experiments to be carried out in response to artificially imposed selection constraints. We worked with the Tetrahymena ribozyme, a self-splicing group I intron derived from the large ribosomal RNA precursor of Tetrahymena thermophila that catalyses sequence-specific phosphoester transfer reactions involving RNA substrates. It consists of 413 nucleotides, and assumes a well-defined secondary and tertiary structure responsible for its catalytic activity. We selected for variant forms of the enzyme that could best react with a DNA substrate. This led to the recovery of a mutant form of the enzyme that cleaves DNA more efficiently than the wild-type enzyme. The selected molecule represents the discovery of the first RNA enzyme known to cleave single-stranded DNA specifically.
The fidelity and specificity of information flow within a cell is controlled by scaffolding proteins that assemble and link enzymes into signalling circuits. These circuits can be inhibited by bacterial effector proteins that post-translationally modify individual pathway components. However, there is emerging evidence that pathogens directly organize higher-order signalling networks through enzyme scaffolding, and the identity of the effectors and their mechanisms of action are poorly understood. Here we identify the enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 type III effector EspG as a regulator of endomembrane trafficking using a functional screen, and report ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) GTPases and p21-activated kinases (PAKs) as its relevant host substrates. The 2.5 A crystal structure of EspG in complex with ARF6 shows how EspG blocks GTPase-activating-protein-assisted GTP hydrolysis, revealing a potent mechanism of GTPase signalling inhibition at organelle membranes. In addition, the 2.8 A crystal structure of EspG in complex with the autoinhibitory Ia3-helix of PAK2 defines a previously unknown catalytic site in EspG and provides an allosteric mechanism of kinase activation by a bacterial effector. Unexpectedly, ARF and PAKs are organized on adjacent surfaces of EspG, indicating its role as a 'catalytic scaffold' that effectively reprograms cellular events through the functional assembly of GTPase-kinase signalling complex.
An unexpected biochemical strategy for chain initiation is described for the loading module of the polyketide synthase of curacin A, an anticancer lead derived from the marine cyanobacterium Lyngbya majuscula. A central GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) domain bears bifunctional decarboxylase/S-acetyltransferase activity, both unprecedented for the GNAT superfamily. A CurA loading tridomain, consisting of an adaptor domain, the GNAT domain, and an acyl carrier protein, was assessed biochemically, revealing that a domain showing homology to GNAT (GNAT(L)) catalyzes (i) decarboxylation of malonyl-coenzyme A (malonyl-CoA) to acetyl-CoA and (ii) direct S-acetyl transfer from acetyl-CoA to load an adjacent acyl carrier protein domain (ACP(L)). Moreover, the N-terminal adapter domain was shown to facilitate acetyl-group transfer. Crystal structures of GNAT(L) were solved at 1.95 angstroms (ligand-free form) and 2.75 angstroms (acyl-CoA complex), showing distinct substrate tunnels for acyl-CoA and holo-ACP(L) binding. Modeling and site-directed mutagenesis experiments demonstrated that histidine-389 and threonine-355, at the convergence of the CoA and ACP tunnels, participate in malonyl-CoA decarboxylation but not in acetyl-group transfer. Decarboxylation precedes acetyl-group transfer, leading to acetyl-ACP(L) as the key curacin A starter unit.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the large fragment of DNA polymerase I (Klenow fragment) yielded two mutant proteins lacking 3',5'-exonuclease activity but having normal polymerase activity. Crystallographic analysis of the mutant proteins showed that neither had any alteration in protein structure other than the expected changes at the mutation sites. These results confirmed the presumed location of the exonuclease active site on the small domain of Klenow fragment and its physical separation from the polymerase active site. An anomalous scattering difference Fourier of a complex of the wild-type enzyme with divalent manganese ion and deoxythymidine monophosphate showed that the exonuclease active site has binding sites for two divalent metal ions. The properties of the mutant proteins suggest that one metal ion plays a role in substrate binding while the other is involved in catalysis of the exonuclease reaction.
A glutamine synthetase gene from alfalfa (Medicago sativa) has been expressed in Escherichia coli after fusion of bacterial transcription and translation signals to a complete alfalfa glutamine synthetase coding sequence. Synthesis of the alfalfa glutamine synthetase enzyme in Escherichia coli was demonstrated by functional genetic complementation of a glutamine synthetase-deficient mutant and by immunoblotting analysis. These results should facilitate protein engineering and structure-function analysis of the plant enzyme.
Guanine nucleotide binding proteins, interchangeably called N or G proteins, seem to be the primary signal-transducing components of various agonist-induced cell membrane functions. In the heart, G proteins have been implicated in beta-adrenergic modulation of the slow inward Ca2+ current. We have investigated the role of G proteins in muscarinic activation of an inwardly rectifying, acetylcholine (ACh)-induced K+ current (IACh), and beta-adrenergic activation of an (isoprenaline)-induced Ca2+ current (Isi). Here we report that intracellular application of the non-hydrolysable GTP analogue 5'-guanylylimidodiphosphate (GppNHp) brought about an agonist-induced, antagonist-resistant, persistent activation of IACh and Isi. This functional uncoupling of channel from receptor suggests that the muscarinic receptor and the IACh channel are separate molecular structures. Membrane conductance responses to sequential activation of muscarinic and beta-adrenergic receptors demonstrate that in contrast to the muscarinic inhibition of Isi, muscarinic stimulation of IACh is mediated by a G protein via a pathway that does not involve adenylate cyclase. Taken together, the results support the notion that agonist is required to induce GppNHp binding and/or activation of the G proteins. Once triggered by agonist, the control system remains maximally activated, thereby transforming the cell so that it no longer responds to subsequent homologous receptor-mediated signals.
Molecular motors require ATP to move along microtubules or actin filaments. To understand how molecular motors function, it is crucial to know how binding of the motor to its filamentous track stimulates the hydrolysis of ATP by the motor, enabling it to move along the filament. A mechanism for the enhanced ATP hydrolysis has not been elucidated, but it is generally accepted that conformational changes in the motor proteins occur when they bind to microtubules or actin filaments, facilitating the release of ADP. Here we report that a mutation in the motor domain of the microtubule motor proteins Kar3 and Ncd uncouples nucleotide- and microtubule-binding by the proteins, preventing activation of the motor ATPase by microtubules. Unlike the wild-type motors, the mutants bind tightly to both ADP and microtubules, indicating that interactions between the nucleotide- and microtubule-binding sites are blocked. The region of the motor that includes the mutated amino acid could transmit or undergo a conformational change required to convert the motor ATPase into a microtubule-stimulated state.
A three-dimensional structure for the monomeric iron-containing hydrogenase (CpI) from Clostridium pasteurianum was determined to 1.8 angstrom resolution by x-ray crystallography using multiwavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) phasing. CpI, an enzyme that catalyzes the two-electron reduction of two protons to yield dihydrogen, was found to contain 20 gram atoms of iron per mole of protein, arranged into five distinct [Fe-S] clusters. The probable active-site cluster, previously termed the H-cluster, was found to be an unexpected arrangement of six iron atoms existing as a [4Fe-4S] cubane subcluster covalently bridged by a cysteinate thiol to a [2Fe] subcluster. The iron atoms of the [2Fe] subcluster both exist with an octahedral coordination geometry and are bridged to each other by three non-protein atoms, assigned as two sulfide atoms and one carbonyl or cyanide molecule. This structure provides insights into the mechanism of biological hydrogen activation and has broader implications for [Fe-S] cluster structure and function in biological systems.
Plastids of higher plants are semi-autonomous cellular organelles that have their own genome and transcription-translation machinery. Examples of plastid functions are photosynthesis and biosynthesis of starch, amino acids, lipids and pigments. Plastid functions are encoded in approximately 120 plastid genes and approximately 3,000 nuclear genes. Although many embryo and seedling lethal nuclear genes are required for chloroplast biogenesis, until now deletion of plastid genes either had no phenotypic consequence (8 genes), or caused a mutant phenotype but did not affect viability (13 genes). Here we identify an essential plastid gene. By using the CRE-lox site-specific recombination system we have deleted clpP1 (caseinolytic protease P1), one of the three genes (clpP1, ycf1 and ycf2) whose disruption had previously only been possible in a fraction of the 1,000-10,000 plastid genome copies in a cell. Loss of the clpP1 gene product, the ClpP1 protease subunit, results in ablation of the shoot system of tobacco plants, suggesting that ClpP1-mediated protein degradation is essential for shoot development.
The nucleotide sequence has been determined for the first 53 bases of brome mosaic virus RNA4, the monocistronic messenger for brome mosaic virus coat protein. The sequence includes the binding site for wheat embryo ribosomes. The 5'-terminal base is a modified guanosine attached to the penultimate base through a 5' p-p-p 5' link. The initiating AUG codon is only 10 nucleotides from the 5'-terminus. The triplets following the AUG codon correspond to the known sequence of brome mosaic virus coat protein.
Solution structures of two Src homology 3 (SH3) domain-ligand complexes have been determined by nuclear magnetic resonance. Each complex consists of the SH3 domain and a nine-residue proline-rich peptide selected from a large library of ligands prepared by combinatorial synthesis. The bound ligands adopt a left-handed polyproline type II (PPII) helix, although the amino to carboxyl directionalities of their helices are opposite. The peptide orientation is determined by a salt bridge formed by the terminal arginine residues of the ligands and the conserved aspartate-99 of the SH3 domain. Residues at positions 3, 4, 6, and 7 of both peptides also intercalate into the ligand-binding site; however, the respective proline and nonproline residues show exchanged binding positions in the two complexes. These structural results led to a model for the interactions of SH3 domains with proline-rich peptides that can be used to predict critical residues in complexes of unknown structure. The model was used to identify correctly both the binding orientation and the contact and noncontact residues of a peptide derived from the nucleotide exchange factor Sos in association with the amino-terminal SH3 domain of the adaptor protein Grb2.
The biosynthesis of a bacterial polysaccharide-the surface O-antigen of Salmonella newington-differs in several respects from the more classical example of glycogen synthesis. Sugars are not transferred directly to the antigen from sugar nucleotide precursors but are transferred first into lipid-linked oligosaccharides. Growth of the polysaccharide chain then occurs by assembly of these lipid-linked precursors at the reducing end of the polymer rather than at its nonreducing end as in glycogen. This method of assembly, in which nascent chains are transferred to the next subunit, is analogous to the growth of proteins or fatty acids. It seems possible that these differences reflect the more complex requirements of a surface polysaccharide synthesized by membrane-bound enzymes. If this is the case, then several other polysaccharide systems may be synthesized by comparable mechanisms.
Glutathione, a tripeptide thiol found in virtually all cells, functions in metabolism, transport, and cellular protection. It participates in the reduction of disulfides and other molecules, and conjugates with compounds of exogenous and endogenous origin. It protects cells against the destructive effects of reactive oxygen intermediates and free radicals. Modifications of glutathione metabolism may be achieved by administration of selective enzyme inhibitors, and also by giving compounds that increase glutathione synthesis. Such effects are useful in chemotherapy and radiation therapy and in protecting cells against the toxic effects of drugs, other foreign compounds, and oxygen.
Countless millions of people have died from tuberculosis, a chronic infectious disease caused by the tubercle bacillus. The complete genome sequence of the best-characterized strain of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, H37Rv, has been determined and analysed in order to improve our understanding of the biology of this slow-growing pathogen and to help the conception of new prophylactic and therapeutic interventions. The genome comprises 4,411,529 base pairs, contains around 4,000 genes, and has a very high guanine + cytosine content that is reflected in the biased amino-acid content of the proteins. M. tuberculosis differs radically from other bacteria in that a very large portion of its coding capacity is devoted to the production of enzymes involved in lipogenesis and lipolysis, and to two new families of glycine-rich proteins with a repetitive structure that may represent a source of antigenic variation.
The receptors for erythropoietin and other cytokines constitute a new superfamily. They have no tyrosine-kinase or other enzyme motif and their signal-transducing mechanism is unclear. Here we describe two classes of activating mutations in the erythropoietin receptor (EPOR). A single point mutation in the exoplasmic domain enables it to induce hormone-independent cell growth and tumorigenesis after expression in nontumorigenic, interleukin-3-dependent haematopoietic cells. A C-terminal truncation in the cytoplasmic domain of the EPOR renders the receptor hyperresponsive to erythropoietin, but is insufficient to induce hormone-independent growth or tumorigenicity. The activating point mutation retards intracellular transport and turnover of the receptor. These alterations in metabolism and tumorigenicity caused by the EPOR with activating point mutations are similar to those observed in erythropoietin-independent activation of the wild type EPOR by association with gp55, the Friend spleen focus-forming virus glycoprotein.
T lymphocytes, essential for the generation of a normal immune response, require the presence of the lymphokine interleukin-2 (IL-2) in order to proliferate. Cells that respond to IL-2 possess a surface receptor glycoprotein specific for this lymphokine. We have recently purified and chemically characterized the IL-2 receptor from both phytohaemagglutinin-activated human T cells and the human T-cell lymphoma HUT-102 (ref. 5). From the NH2-terminal protein sequence obtained in that study, we have now used synthetic oligonucleotides to probe a complementary DNA library, prepared from HUT-102 messenger RNA, for the presence of cDNA clones that might code for the IL-2 receptor. Two cDNA clones were isolated which had closely related DNA sequences. Interestingly, only one coded for an active receptor when transfected into COS-7 cells. This clone contained a 216-base pair (bp) insert that was not present in the other clone. The insert was flanked by an 8-bp direct repeat reminiscent of a transposable element, and appeared to code for a region of marked structural homology to the NH2-terminal region of the receptor molecule.
We performed molecular dynamics simulations of the collapse of a two-domain protein, the BphC enzyme, into a globular structure to examine how water molecules mediate hydrophobic collapse of proteins. In the interdomain region, liquid water persists with a density 10 to 15% lower than in the bulk, even at small domain separations. Water depletion and hydrophobic collapse occur on a nanosecond time scale, which is two orders of magnitude slower than that found in the collapse of idealized paraffin-like plates. When the electrostatic protein-water forces are turned off, a dewetting transition occurs in the interdomain region and the collapse speeds up by more than an order of magnitude. When attractive van der Waals forces are turned off as well, the dewetting in the interdomain region is more profound, and the collapse is even faster.
It is now established that CD1 molecules present lipid antigens to T cells, although it is not clear how the exchange of lipids between membrane compartments and the CD1 binding groove is assisted. We report that mice deficient in prosaposin, the precursor to a family of endosomal lipid transfer proteins (LTP), exhibit specific defects in CD1d-mediated antigen presentation and lack Valpha14 NKT cells. In vitro, saposins extracted monomeric lipids from membranes and from CD1, thereby promoting the loading as well as the editing of lipids on CD1. Transient complexes between CD1, lipid, and LTP suggested a "tug-of-war" model in which lipid exchange between CD1 and LTP is on the basis of their respective affinities for lipids. LTPs constitute a previously unknown link between lipid metabolism and immunity and are likely to exert a profound influence on the repertoire of self, tumor, and microbial lipid antigens.
Somatomedins (SM) or insulin-like growth factors (IGF) constitute a heterogeneous group of peptides with important growth-promoting effects in vitro as well as in vivo. Amino acid sequences have been determined for only two of them, IGF-I and IGF-II, which are highly homologous. IGF-I, which is identical with SM-C, is composed of 70 amino acid residues and IGF-II contains 73 amino acids and may be identical with SM-A. Other peptides with different charge properties but with similar SM-like or insulin-like behaviour in biological and receptor assays, have been described but have not yet been fully characterized. The liver is known to be a major site of production of these peptides, but many other tissues--especially in the fetus--may synthesize them as well. We report here the nucleotide sequence of a human liver cDNA encoding the complete amino acid sequence of IGF-I. The IGF-I coding region is flanked by sequences encoding an amino-terminal peptide of at least 25 amino acid residues and a carboxyl-terminal peptide of 35 amino acids. This provides evidence that IGF-I is synthesized as a precursor protein and that formation of IGF-I from this precursor requires proteolytic processing at both ends.
Dynamin was initially identified in calf brain tissue as a protein of relative molecular mass 100,000 which induced nucleotide-sensitive bundling of microtubules. Purified dynamin showed only trace ATPase activity. But in combination with an activating factor removed during the purification, it exhibited microtubule-activated ATPase activity and dynamin-induced bundles showed evidence of ATP-dependent force production. Dynamin is the product of the Drosophila gene shibire, which has been implicated in synaptic vesicle recycling and, more generally, in the budding of endocytic vesicles from the plasma membrane. Dynamin also shows extensive homology with proteins that participate in vacuolar protein sorting and spindle pole-body separation in yeast, and in interferon-induced viral resistance in mammals. All members of this family contain consensus sequence elements consistent with GTP binding near their amino termini, although none has been shown to have GTPase activity. We report here that dynamin is a specific GTPase which can be stimulated to very high levels of activity by microtubules.
Noninfectious particles of a mutant of Rous sarcoma virus failed to exhibit DNA polymerase activity even with the use of the most sensitive synthetic template-primer complexes. A neutralization blocking test against antibody to DNA polymerase revealed that these mutants did not contain protein immunologically related to the DNA polymerase.
The targeting of proteins to mitochondria involves the recognition of the precursor proteins by receptors on the mitochondrial surface followed by insertion of the precursors into the outer membrane at the general insertion site GIP. Most mitochondrial proteins analyzed so far use a mitochondrial outer membrane protein of 19 kilodaltons (MOM19) as an import receptor. The gene encoding MOM19 has now been isolated. The deduced amino acid sequence predicts that MOM19 is anchored in the outer membrane by an NH2-terminal hydrophobic sequence, while the rest of the protein forms a hydrophilic domain exposed to the cytosol. MOM19 was targeted to the mitochondria via a pathway that is independent of protease-accessible surface receptors and controlled by direct assembly of the MOM19 precursor with GIP.
Reparts suggest that the activity of RNA polymerase I is modulated by a labile protein with a hlaf-life of 10 to 20 minutes. Ornithine decarboxylase is the only labile protein (half-life, 10 to 20 minutes) that increases in activity prior to increased RNA polymerase I activity. The addition of a small amount of a highly purified ornithine decarboxylase preparation to an RNA polymerase I assay increases the initial rate of the reaction as well as the time for which the assay is linear. The incorporation patterns of 14C-labeled adenosine triphosphate and 32P-labeled adenosine triphosphate into RNA indicate that the addition of ornithine decarboxylase to the RNA polymerase assay increases the rate of initiation. This report demonstrates a novel way to purify ornithine decarboxylase by RNA polymerase I affinity chromatography and presents data in support of the hypothesis that the labile protein which modulates RNA polymerase I activity is ornithine decarboxylase.
The sequence of the entire RNA genome of the type flavivirus, yellow fever virus, has been obtained. Inspection of this sequence reveals a single long open reading frame of 10,233 nucleotides, which could encode a polypeptide of 3411 amino acids. The structural proteins are found within the amino-terminal 780 residues of this polyprotein; the remainder of the open reading frame consists of nonstructural viral polypeptides. This genome organization implies that mature viral proteins are produced by posttranslational cleavage of a polyprotein precursor and has implications for flavivirus RNA replication and for the evolutionary relation of this virus family to other RNA viruses.
On the basis of available nucleotide sequence and genetic data; we present a model for RNA splicing in fungal mitochondria. Seven intron RNAs of two fungal species can form identical secondary structures, involving four conserved sequences, which bring the ends of each intron together and allow an internal guide RNA sequence to pair with exon bases adjacent to the splice junctions. The splicing sites are thus aligned precisely within a conserved structure, which we suggest could present specific recognition signals to the proteins that catalyse the splicing reaction.
The octamer sequence ATGCAAAT or its inverse complement ATTTGCAT is well-conserved in all immunoglobulin gene promoters and has been implicated in promoter function by deletion analysis. Although immunoglobulin promoters are tissue-specific, the octamer is also a functional element in non-tissue-specific upstream regions--like those controlling U1 and U2 small nuclear RNA and histone H2B genes--where it is associated with additional canonical elements. Specific interactions occur between the octamer motif and both lymphoid-specific and ubiquitous proteins. By using a synthetic octamer oligonucleotide inserted upstream of the beta-globin TATA box we show here that the octamer element by itself is sufficient for directing lymphocyte-specific RNA synthesis when within 70 base pairs of the start site of transcription. We also demonstrate that mutations in any position of the conserved motif interfere with this function.
The NPH1 gene of Arabidopsis thaliana encodes a 120-kilodalton serine-threonine protein kinase hypothesized to function as a photoreceptor for phototropism. When expressed in insect cells, the NPH1 protein is phosphorylated in response to blue light irradiation. The biochemical and photochemical properties of the photosensitive protein reflect those of the native protein in microsomal membranes. Recombinant NPH1 noncovalently binds flavin mononucleotide, a likely chromophore for light-dependent autophosphorylation. The fluorescence excitation spectrum of the recombinant protein is similar to the action spectrum for phototropism, consistent with the conclusion that NPH1 is an autophosphorylating flavoprotein photoreceptor mediating phototropic responses in higher plants.
The alpha 2 and beta 2 adrenergic receptors, both of which are activated by epinephrine, but which can be differentiated by selective drugs, have opposite effects (inhibitory and stimulatory) on the adenylyl cyclase system. The two receptors are homologous with each other, rhodopsin, and other receptors coupled to guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins and they contain seven hydrophobic domains, which may represent transmembrane spanning segments. The function of specific structural domains of these receptors was determined after construction and expression of a series of chimeric alpha 2-,beta 2-adrenergic receptor genes. The specificity for coupling to the stimulatory guanine nucleotide regulatory protein lies within a region extending from the amino terminus of the fifth hydrophobic domain to the carboxyl terminus of the sixth. Major determinants of alpha 2- and beta 2-adrenergic receptor agonist and antagonist ligand binding specificity are contained within the seventh membrane spanning domain. Chimeric receptors should prove useful for elucidating the structural basis of receptor function.
Caspase-8, a proapoptotic protease, has an essential role in lymphocyte activation and protective immunity. We show that caspase-8 deficiency (CED) in humans and mice specifically abolishes activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) after stimulation through antigen receptors, Fc receptors, or Toll-like receptor 4 in T, B, and natural killer cells. Caspase-8 also causes the alphabeta complex of the inhibitor of NF-kappaB kinase (IKK) to associate with the upstream Bcl10-MALT1 (mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue) adapter complex. Recruitment of the IKKalpha, beta complex, its activation, and the nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB require enzyme activity of full-length caspase-8. These findings thus explain the paradoxical association of defective apoptosis and combined immunodeficiency in human CED.
A distant relative of catalase that is specialized for metabolism of a fatty acid hydroperoxide was identified. This heme peroxidase occurs in coral as part of a fusion protein, the other component of which is a lipoxygenase that forms the hydroperoxide substrate. The end product is an unstable epoxide (an allene oxide) that is a potential precursor of prostaglandin-like molecules. These results extend the known chemistry of catalase-like proteins and reveal a distinct type of enzymatic construct involved in the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Contemporary phospholipid-based cell membranes are formidable barriers to the uptake of polar and charged molecules ranging from metal ions to complex nutrients. Modern cells therefore require sophisticated protein channels and pumps to mediate the exchange of molecules with their environment. The strong barrier function of membranes has made it difficult to understand the origin of cellular life and has been thought to preclude a heterotrophic lifestyle for primitive cells. Although nucleotides can cross dimyristoyl phosphatidylcholine membranes through defects formed at the gel-to-liquid transition temperature, phospholipid membranes lack the dynamic properties required for membrane growth. Fatty acids and their corresponding alcohols and glycerol monoesters are attractive candidates for the components of protocell membranes because they are simple amphiphiles that form bilayer membrane vesicles that retain encapsulated oligonucleotides and are capable of growth and division. Here we show that such membranes allow the passage of charged molecules such as nucleotides, so that activated nucleotides added to the outside of a model protocell spontaneously cross the membrane and take part in efficient template copying in the protocell interior. The permeability properties of prebiotically plausible membranes suggest that primitive protocells could have acquired complex nutrients from their environment in the absence of any macromolecular transport machinery; that is, they could have been obligate heterotrophs.
Although actinomycin D has been used to prevent protein synthesis in experiments of several hours' duration, its effects on the synthesis of adaptive enzymes which are induced over a period of several days have received less attention. Treatment of young rats with doses of actinomycin D, which permitted survival for a period of 5 days, resulted in marked increases in the activities of four hepatic enzymes known to be induced by cortisol: alanine transaminase, tyrosine transaminase, serine dehydrase, and tryptophan pyrrolase. Actinomycin D also induced responses of two of these enzymes in adrenalectomized rats.
Cyclic nucleotides are second messengers that are essential in vision, muscle contraction, neurotransmission, exocytosis, cell growth, and differentiation. These molecules are degraded by a family of enzymes known as phosphodiesterases, which serve a critical function by regulating the intracellular concentration of cyclic nucleotides. We have determined the three-dimensional structure of the catalytic domain of phosphodiesterase 4B2B to 1.77 angstrom resolution. The active site has been identified and contains a cluster of two metal atoms. The structure suggests the mechanism of action and basis for specificity and will provide a framework for structure-assisted drug design for members of the phosphodiesterase family.
Neurotrophins are growth factors that promote cell survival, differentiation, and cell death. They are synthesized as proforms that can be cleaved intracellularly to release mature, secreted ligands. Although proneurotrophins have been considered inactive precursors, we show here that the proforms of nerve growth factor (NGF) and the proforms of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) are secreted and cleaved extracellularly by the serine protease plasmin and by selective matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). ProNGF is a high-affinity ligand for p75(NTR) with high affinity and induced p75NTR-dependent apoptosis in cultured neurons with minimal activation of TrkA-mediated differentiation or survival. The biological action of neurotrophins is thus regulated by proteolytic cleavage, with proforms preferentially activating p75NTR to mediate apoptosis and mature forms activating Trk receptors to promote survival.
In eukaryotes, 21- to 24-nucleotide-long RNAs engage in sequence-specific interactions that inhibit gene expression by RNA silencing. This process has regulatory roles involving microRNAs and, in plants and insects, it also forms the basis of a defense mechanism directed by small interfering RNAs that derive from replicative or integrated viral genomes. We show that a cellular microRNA effectively restricts the accumulation of the retrovirus primate foamy virus type 1 (PFV-1) in human cells. PFV-1 also encodes a protein, Tas, that suppresses microRNA-directed functions in mammalian cells and displays cross-kingdom antisilencing activities. Therefore, through fortuitous recognition of foreign nucleic acids, cellular microRNAs have direct antiviral effects in addition to their regulatory functions.
The yeast retroviruslike element Ty3 inserts at the transcription initiation sites of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase III (Pol III). An in vitro integration assay was developed with the use of Ty3 viruslike particles and a modified SUP2 tyrosine transfer RNA (tRNA(Tyr)) gene target. Integration was position-specific and required Ty3 integrase, Pol III transcription factor (TF) IIIB-, TFIIIC-, and Pol III-containing fractions showed that TFIIIB and TFIIIC, together, were sufficient for position-specific Ty3 integration, but not for transcription. This report demonstrates that in vitro integration of a retroelement can be targeted by cellular proteins.
Mammalian cell-cycle control by antimitogenic signals involves p21Cip1/WAF1 (refs 1-4), p27Kip1 (refs 5, 6) and p57Kip2 (refs 7, 8), a family of proteins that bind to and inhibit cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) required for initiation of S phase. The protein p21 also binds to the DNA polymerase delta processivity factor, proliferating-cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), and inhibits in vitro PCNA-dependent DNA replication. The CDK and PCNA inhibitory activities of p21 are shown here to be functionally independent and to reside in separate protein domains. The PCNA binding and inhibitory activities, which are not observed with p27 or p57, reside in the C-terminal domain of p21, whereas the CDK inhibitory activity resides in the conserved N-terminal domains of these proteins. When separately overexpressed in mammalian cells, the CDK and PCNA inhibitory domains prevent DNA replication, demonstrating a dual function of p21 as a cell-cycle inhibitor in vivo.
The roles of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and phospholipase C (PLC) in chemoattractant-elicited responses were studied in mice lacking these key enzymes. PI3Kgamma was required for chemoattractant-induced production of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate [PtdIns (3,4,5)P3] and has an important role in chemoattractant-induced superoxide production and chemotaxis in mouse neutrophils and in production of T cell-independent antigen-specific antibodies composed of the immunoglobulin lambda light chain (TI-IglambdaL). The study of the mice lacking PLC-beta2 and -beta3 revealed that the PLC pathways have an important role in chemoattractant-mediated production of superoxide and regulation of protein kinases, but not chemotaxis. The PLC pathways also appear to inhibit the chemotactic activity induced by certain chemoattractants and to suppress TI-IglambdaL production.
Comparison of genomic DNA sequences from human and mouse revealed a new apolipoprotein (APO) gene (APOAV) located proximal to the well-characterized APOAI/CIII/AIV gene cluster on human 11q23. Mice expressing a human APOAV transgene showed a decrease in plasma triglyceride concentrations to one-third of those in control mice; conversely, knockout mice lacking Apoav had four times as much plasma triglycerides as controls. In humans, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across the APOAV locus were found to be significantly associated with plasma triglyceride levels in two independent studies. These findings indicate that APOAV is an important determinant of plasma triglyceride levels, a major risk factor for coronary artery disease.
In nonribosomal biosynthesis of peptide antibiotics by multimodular synthetases, amino acid monomers are activated by the adenylation domains of the synthetase and loaded onto the adjacent carrier protein domains as thioesters, then the formation of peptide bonds and translocation of the growing chain are effected by the synthetase's condensation domains. Whether the condensation domains have any editing function has been unknown. Synthesis of aminoacyl-coenzyme A (CoA) molecules and direct enzymatic transfer of aminoacyl-phosphopantetheine to the carrier domains allow the adenylation domain editing function to be bypassed. This method was used to demonstrate that the first condensation domain of tyrocidine synthetase shows low selectivity at the donor residue (D-phenylalanine) and higher selectivity at the acceptor residue (L-proline) in the formation of the chain-initiating D-Phe-L-Pro dipeptidyl-enzyme intermediate.
Most genes in higher organisms are activated by the binding of proteins called transcription factors. One such protein, transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA) from the frog, activates the gene for 5S RNA by binding to the region of the gene between nucleotides 45 and 97. This binding site has been defined by a variety of biochemical studies, including base-deletion experiments and DNase I footprinting. The protein also binds to the gene product: in immature frogs it is stored as a complex with 5S RNA. From the observation that TFIIIA can bind to either double-helical DNA or RNA, and from their own measurements, Rhodes and Klug have proposed that the DNA-binding site for TFIIIA has an RNA-like structure. Here we present the crystal structure analysis of a part of the DNA-binding site (nucleotides 81-89 of the gene) which forms a particularly strong interaction with the protein, and show that it has a conformation similar to the A' form of double-helical RNA.
The photoreceptor G protein, transducin, is one of the class of heterotrimeric G proteins that mediates between membrane receptors and intracellular enzymes or ion channels. Light-activated rhodopsin catalyses the exchange of GDP for GTP on multiple transducin molecules. Activated transducin then stimulates cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase by releasing an inhibitory action of the phosphodiesterase gamma-subunits. This leads to a decrease in cGMP levels in the rod, and closure of plasma membrane cationic channels gated by cGMP. In this and other systems, turn-off of the response requires the GTP bound to G protein to be hydrolysed by an intrinsic GTPase activity. Here we report that the interaction of transducin with cGMP phosphodiesterase, specifically with its gamma-subunits, accelerates GTPase activity by several fold. Thus the gamma-subunits of the phosphodiesterase serve a function analogous to the GTPase-activating proteins that regulate the class of small GTP-binding proteins. The acceleration can be partially suppressed by cGMP, most probably through the non-catalytic cGMP-binding sites of phosphodiesterase alpha and beta-subunits. This cGMP regulation may function in light-adaptation of the photo-response as a negative feedback that decreases the lifetime of activated cGMP phosphodiesterase as light causes decreases in cytoplasmic cGMP.
Genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II have been characterized as having several control regions upstream of the site at which transcription is initiated, and the 'CAAT' and 'TAATA' regulatory sequences are conserved in content and location in diverse eukaryotes. The transcription of 5S RNA and tRNA by polymerase III is regulated by promoters that are actually within the genes; these are also conserved in diverse eukaryotes. In addition, sequences upstream of tRNA genes can affect RNA synthesis. Recently, it has been determined that DNA sequences influencing the expression of the 18S and 28S ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA) lie upstream of the site of transcription initiation. We have shown that a major component of the promoter of Drosophila rRNA polymerase I activity involves the region -43 to -27, where initiation is at +1. Here we present evidence that another major component of the polymerase I promoter lies within the first four nucleotides of the external transcribed spacer (ETS). Drosophila polymerase I control signals, therefore, lie both upstream of and within the rRNA transcription unit.
The mechanism of inhibition of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase by three nonnucleoside inhibitors is described. Nevirapine, O-TIBO, and CI-TIBO each bind to a hydrophobic pocket in the enzyme-DNA complex close to the active site catalytic residues. Pre-steady-state kinetic analysis was used to establish the mechanism of inhibition by these noncompetitive inhibitors. Analysis of the pre-steady-state burst of DNA polymerization indicated that inhibitors blocked the chemical reaction, but did not interfere with nucleotide binding or the nucleotide-induced conformational change. Rather, in the presence of saturating concentrations of the inhibitors, the nucleoside triphosphate bound tightly (Kd, 100 nM), but nonproductively. The data suggest that an inhibitor combining the functionalities of a nonnucleoside inhibitor and a nucleotide analog could bind very tightly and specifically to reverse transcriptase and could be effective in the treatment of AIDS.
Selenocysteine is incorporated cotranslationally at UGA codons, normally read as stop codons, in several bacterial proteins and in the mammalian proteins glutathione peroxidase (GPX), selenoprotein P and Type I iodothyronine 5' deiodinase (5'DI). Previous analyses in bacteria have suggested that a stem-loop structure involving the UGA codon and adjacent sequences is necessary and sufficient for selenocysteine incorporation into formate dehydrogenase and glycine reductase. We used the recently cloned 5'DI to investigate selenoprotein synthesis in eukaryotes. We show that successful incorporation of selenocysteine into this enzyme requires a specific 3' untranslated (3'ut) segment of about 200 nucleotides, which is found in both rat and human 5'DI messenger RNAs. These sequences are not required for expression of a cysteine-mutant deiodinase. Although there is little primary sequence similarity between the 3'ut regions of these mRNAs and those encoding GPX, the 3'ut sequences of rat GPX can substitute for the 5'DI sequences in directing selenocysteine insertion. Computer analyses predict similar stem-loop structures in the 3'ut regions of the 5'DI and GPX mRNAs. Limited mutations in these structures reduce or eliminate their capacity to permit 5'DI translation. These results identify a 'selenocysteine-insertion sequence' motif in the 3'ut region of these mRNAs that is essential for successful translation of 5'DI, presumably GPX, and possibly other eukaryotic selenocysteine-containing proteins.
Neuronal cells express a pp60c-src variant that displays an altered electrophoretic mobility and a different V8 peptide pattern relative to pp60c-src expressed in tissues of non-neuronal origin. To determine whether the neuronal form of pp60c-src is encoded by a brain-specific messenger RNA, a mouse brain complementary DNA (cDNA) library was screened with a chicken c-src probe and a 3.8-kilobase c-src cDNA clone was isolated. This clone encodes a 60-kilodalton protein that differs from chicken or human pp60c-src primarily in having six extra amino acids (Arg-Lys-Val-Asp-Val-Arg) within the NH2-terminal 16 kilodaltons of the molecule. S1 nuclease protection analysis confirmed that brain c-src RNA contains an 18-nucleotide insertion at the position of the extra six amino acids. This insertion occurs at a position that corresponds to a splice junction in the chicken and human c-src genes. The isolated c-src cDNA clone encodes a protein that displays an identical V8 peptide pattern to that observed in pp60c-src isolated from tissues of neuronal origin.
Mammalian cells proteolytically release (shed) the extracellular domains of many cell-surface proteins. Modification of the cell surface in this way can alter the cell's responsiveness to its environment and release potent soluble regulatory factors. The release of soluble tumour-necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) from its membrane-bound precursor is one of the most intensively studied shedding events because this inflammatory cytokine is so physiologically important. The inhibition of TNF-alpha release (and many other shedding phenomena) by hydroxamic acid-based inhibitors indicates that one or more metalloproteinases is involved. We have now purified and cloned a metalloproteinase that specifically cleaves precursor TNF-alpha. Inactivation of the gene in mouse cells caused a marked decrease in soluble TNF-alpha production. This enzyme (called the TNF-alpha-converting enzyme, or TACE) is a new member of the family of mammalian adamalysins (or ADAMs), for which no physiological catalytic function has previously been identified. Our results should facilitate the development of therapeutically useful inhibitors of TNF-alpha release, and they indicate that an important function of adamalysins may be to shed cell-surface proteins.
The enteric pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium causes food poisoning resulting in gastroenteritis. The S. Typhimurium effector Salmonella invasion protein A (SipA) promotes gastroenteritis by functional motifs that trigger either mechanisms of inflammation or bacterial entry. During infection of intestinal epithelial cells, SipA was found to be responsible for the early activation of caspase-3, an enzyme that is required for SipA cleavage at a specific recognition motif that divided the protein into its two functional domains and activated SipA in a manner necessary for pathogenicity. Other caspase-3 cleavage sites identified in S. Typhimurium appeared to be restricted to secreted effector proteins, which indicates that this may be a general strategy used by this pathogen for processing of its secreted effectors.
An important question in protein folding is whether the natural amino and carboxyl termini and the given order of secondary structure segments are critical to the stability and to the folding pathway of proteins. Here it is shown that two circularly permuted versions of the gene of a single-domain beta alpha barrel enzyme can be expressed in Escherichia coli. The variants are enzymically active and are practically indistinguishable from the original enzyme by several structural and spectroscopic criteria, despite the creation of new termini and the cleavage of a surface loop. This novel genetic approach should be useful for protein folding studies both in vitro and in vivo.
Autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia is a rare human disease that shows a Mendelian inheritance pattern, but is characterized by large-scale mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions. We have identified two heterozygous missense mutations in the nuclear gene encoding the heart/skeletal muscle isoform of the adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT1) in five families and one sporadic patient. The familial mutation substitutes a proline for a highly conserved alanine at position 114 in the ANT1 protein. The analogous mutation in yeast caused a respiratory defect. These results indicate that ANT has a role in mtDNA maintenance and that a mitochondrial disease can be caused by a dominant mechanism.
Multivalent binding proteins, such as the yeast scaffold protein Sterile-5, coordinate the location of kinases by serving as platforms for the assembly of signaling units. Similarly, in mammalian cells the cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and phosphatase 2B [calcineurin (CaN)] are complexed by an A kinase anchoring protein, AKAP79. Deletion analysis and binding studies demonstrate that a third enzyme, protein kinase C (PKC), binds AKAP79 at a site distinct from those bound by PKA or CaN. The subcellular distributions of PKC and AKAP79 were similar in neurons. Thus, AKAP79 appears to function as a scaffold protein for three multifunctional enzymes.
Intramembrane proteolysis is increasingly seen as a regulatory step in a range of diverse processes, including development, organelle shaping, metabolism, pathogenicity and degenerative disease. Initial scepticism over the existence of intramembrane proteases was soon replaced by intense exploration of their catalytic mechanisms, substrate specificities, regulation and structures. Crystal structures of metal-dependent and serine intramembrane proteases have revealed active sites embedded in the plane of the membrane but accessible by water, a requirement for hydrolytic reactions. Efforts to understand how these membrane-bound proteases carry out their reactions have started to yield results.
The high-mobility group protein 14 (HMG-14) is a non-histone chromosomal protein that is preferentially associated with transcriptionally active chromatin. To assess the effect of HMG-14 on transcription by RNA polymerase II, in vivo-assembled chromatin with elevated amounts of HMG-14 was obtained. Here it is shown that HMG-14 enhanced transcription on chromatin templates but not on DNA templates. This protein stimulated the rate of elongation by RNA polymerase II but not the level of initiation of transcription. These findings suggest that the association of HMG-14 with nucleosomes is part of the cellular process involved in the generation of transcriptionally active chromatin.
Auxin is a plant hormone that regulates many aspects of plant growth and development. We used a chemical genetics approach to identify SIR1, a regulator of many auxin-inducible genes. The sir1 mutant was resistant to sirtinol, a small molecule that activates many auxin-inducible genes and promotes auxin-related developmental phenotypes. SIR1 is predicted to encode a protein composed of a ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1-like domain and a Rhodanese-like domain homologous to that of prolyl isomerase. We suggest a molecular context for how the auxin signal is propagated to exert its biological effects.
Treatment of rats with methylcholanthrene and phenobarbital, two compounds known to enhance microsomal enzyme activity, stimulates the incorporation of free or soluble ribonucleic acid bound amino acid into proteins of cell-free liver preparations. Mitochondria, microsomes, and cell sap all contribute to the methylcholanthrene effect on the incorporation of free amino acid.
Activation of receptor tyrosine kinases such as those for epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor, or nerve growth factor converts the inactive, GDP-bound form of Ras to the active, GTP-bound form, and a dominant negative mutant of Ras interferes with signalling from such receptors. The mechanisms by which receptor tyrosine kinases and Ras are coupled, however, are not well understood. Many cytoplasmic proteins regulated by such receptors contain Src-homology (SH) 2 and 3 domains, and the SH2- and SH3-containing protein Grb2, like its homologue from Caenorhabditis elegans, Sem-5, appears to play an important role in the control of Ras by receptor tyrosine kinases. Here we show that overexpression of Grb2 potentiates the EGF-induced activation of Ras and mitogen-activated protein kinase by enhancing the rate of guanine nucleotide exchange on Ras. Cellular Grb2 appears to form a complex with a guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor for Ras, which binds to the ligand-activated EGF receptor, allowing the tyrosine kinase to modulate Ras activity.
Ultraviolet light has been linked with the development of human skin cancers. Such cancers often exhibit mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction was used to analyze at nucleotide resolution the repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers along the p53 gene in ultraviolet-irradiated human fibroblasts. Repair rates at individual nucleotides were highly variable and sequence-dependent. Slow repair was seen at seven of eight positions frequently mutated in skin cancer, suggesting that repair efficiency may strongly contribute to the mutation spectrum in a cancer-associated gene.
With many genomes sequenced, a pressing challenge in biology is predicting the function of the proteins that the genes encode. When proteins are unrelated to others of known activity, bioinformatics inference for function becomes problematic. It would thus be useful to interrogate protein structures for function directly. Here, we predict the function of an enzyme of unknown activity, Tm0936 from Thermotoga maritima, by docking high-energy intermediate forms of thousands of candidate metabolites. The docking hit list was dominated by adenine analogues, which appeared to undergo C6-deamination. Four of these, including 5-methylthioadenosine and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), were tested as substrates, and three had substantial catalytic rate constants (10(5) M(-1 )s(-1)). The X-ray crystal structure of the complex between Tm0936 and the product resulting from the deamination of SAH, S-inosylhomocysteine, was determined, and it corresponded closely to the predicted structure. The deaminated products can be further metabolized by T. maritima in a previously uncharacterized SAH degradation pathway. Structure-based docking with high-energy forms of potential substrates may be a useful tool to annotate enzymes for function.
Nuclear hormone receptors are ligand-activated transcription factors that regulate the expression of genes that are essential for development, reproduction and homeostasis. The hormone response is mediated through recruitment of p160 receptor coactivators and the general transcriptional coactivator CBP/p300, which function synergistically to activate transcription. These coactivators exhibit intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity, function in the remodelling of chromatin, and facilitate the recruitment of RNA polymerase II and the basal transcription machinery. The activities of the p160 coactivators are dependent on CBP. Both coactivators are essential for proper cell-cycle control, differentiation and apoptosis, and are implicated in cancer and other diseases. To elucidate the molecular basis of assembling the multiprotein activation complex, we undertook a structural and thermodynamic analysis of the interaction domains of CBP and the activator for thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors. Here we show that although the isolated domains are intrinsically disordered, they combine with high affinity to form a cooperatively folded helical heterodimer. Our study uncovers a unique mechanism, called 'synergistic folding', through which p160 coactivators recruit CBP/p300 to allow transmission of the hormonal signal to the transcriptional machinery.
Methyl-coenzyme M reductase (MCR), the enzyme responsible for the microbial formation of methane, is a 300-kilodalton protein organized as a hexamer in an alpha2beta2gamma2 arrangement. The crystal structure of the enzyme from Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum, determined at 1.45 angstrom resolution for the inactive enzyme state MCRox1-silent, reveals that two molecules of the nickel porphinoid coenzyme F430 are embedded between the subunits alpha, alpha', beta, and gamma and alpha', alpha, beta', and gamma', forming two identical active sites. Each site is accessible for the substrate methyl-coenzyme M through a narrow channel locked after binding of the second substrate coenzyme B. Together with a second structurally characterized enzyme state (MCRsilent) containing the heterodisulfide of coenzymes M and B, a reaction mechanism is proposed that uses a radical intermediate and a nickel organic compound.
The mammalian shc gene encodes two overlapping, widely expressed proteins of 46 and 52K, with a carboxy-terminal SH2 domain that binds activated growth factor receptors, and a more amino-terminal glycine/proline-rich region. These shc gene products (Shc) are transforming when overexpressed in fibroblasts. Shc proteins become phosphorylated on tyrosine in cells stimulated with a variety of growth factors, and in cells transformed by v-src (ref. 2), suggesting that they are tyrosine kinase targets that control a mitogenic signalling pathway. Here we report that tyrosine-phosphorylated Shc proteins form a specific complex with a non-phosphorylated 23K polypeptide encoded by the grb2/sem-5 gene. The grb2/sem-5 gene product itself contains an SH2 domain, which mediates binding to Shc, and is implicated in activation of the Ras guanine nucleotide-binding protein by tyrosine kinases in both Caenorhabditis elegans and mammalian cells. Consistent with a role in signalling through Ras, shc overexpression induced Ras-dependent neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells. These results suggest that Shc tyrosine phosphorylation can couple tyrosine kinases to Grb2/Sem-5, through formation of a Shc-Grb2/Sem-5 complex, and thereby regulate the mammalian Ras signalling pathway.
Spectinomycin selectively inhibits protein synthesis in cells and in extracts of Escherichia coli. Mutations to high-level resistance to this antibiotic map close to the streptomycin locus, and the site of action of spectinomycin, like that of streptomycin, is the 30S ribosomal subunit, as shown by experiments with reconstituted 70S ribosomes containing subunits from sensitive and from resistant ribosomes. In contrast to streptomycin, however, spectinomycin is not bactericidal and causes no detectable misreading of polyribonucleotides.
Interleukin-8 (IL-8) is an inflammatory cytokine that activates neutrophil chemotaxis, degranulation, and the respiratory burst. Neutrophils express receptors for IL-8 that are coupled to guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins); binding of IL-8 to its receptor induces the mobilization of intracellular calcium stores. A cDNA clone from HL-60 neutrophils, designated p2, has now been isolated that encodes a human IL-8 receptor. When p2 is expressed in oocytes from Xenopus laevis, the oocytes bind 125I-labeled IL-8 specifically and respond to IL-8 by mobilizing calcium stores with an EC50 of 20 nM. This IL-8 receptor has 77% amino acid identity with a second human neutrophil receptor isotype that binds IL-8 with higher affinity. It also exhibits 69% amino acid identity with a protein reported to be an N-formyl peptide receptor from rabbit neutrophils, but less than 30% identity with all other known G protein-coupled receptors, including the human N-formyl peptide receptor.
One of the most complex biosynthetic processes in metallobiochemistry is the assembly of nitrogenase, the key enzyme in biological nitrogen fixation. We describe here the crystal structure of an iron-molybdenum cofactor-deficient form of the nitrogenase MoFe protein, into which the cofactor is inserted in the final step of MoFe protein assembly. The MoFe protein folds as a heterotetramer containing two copies each of the homologous alpha and beta subunits. In this structure, one of the three alpha subunit domains exhibits a substantially changed conformation, whereas the rest of the protein remains essentially unchanged. A predominantly positively charged funnel is revealed; this funnel is of sufficient size to accommodate insertion of the negatively charged cofactor.
Bacteriophage fd is a class I filamentous virus (others are M13 and f1) that comprises a circular, single-stranded DNA molecule enclosed in a cylindrical protein sheath to form a flexible particle approximately 890 nm long and 7 nm in diameter. The viral DNA contains 6,408 nucleotides incorporating 10 genes, and the protein sheath is composed of about 2,700 major coat protein subunits in a shingled helical array, the symmetry of which is defined by a fivefold rotational axis combined with a twofold screw axis of pitch 3.2 nm. The DNA extends throughout the length of the particle but is not base-paired and has a symmetry different from that of the protein helix. How the DNA is packed remains unclear but the number (2.4) of nucleotides packaged per major coat protein subunit is certainly not integral, in contrast with, say, the packaging of RNA in tobacco mosaic virus. The coat protein subunit is 50 amino-acid residues in length and, in the virus particle, adopts a largely alpha-helical conformation, with the long axis of the helix aligned close to the long axis of the filament. This protein is arranged with its negatively charged N-terminal region on the outside of the filament and its positively charged C-terminal region on the inside abutting the DNA. We report here that positive charge on one of the four lysine side chains in the latter region has a direct effect on DNA packaging, because when this charge is absent, elongated particles are produced with lengths that can be correlated with the residual positive charge in the C-terminal region of the coat protein subunit.
Cytogenetic analysis has identified chromosome 11p13 as the smallest overlap region for deletions found in individuals with WAGR syndrome, which includes Wilms tumour (a recessive childhood nephroblastoma), aniridia, genito-urinary abnormalities and mental retardation. The underlying loci have since been resolved into an aniridia (AN2) locus at a telomeric position, and a locus of closely spaced genes or a single pleiotropic gene involved in genito-urinary tract abnormalities and Wilms tumour at a more centromeric position. Pulsed-field gel analysis of the 11p13 region has revealed the presence of several putative CpG islands, structures which are frequently associated with the 5' ends of expressed sequences, mainly housekeeping genes and some tissue-specific genes. Starting from a CpG island, we have now isolated four neighbouring CpG islands, all within 650 kilobases (kb), by means of two consecutive bidirectional jumps in rare-cutting restriction-enzyme jumping libraries. In two instances, flanking sequences were conserved in other species and RNA transcripts were identified. A complementary DNA clone isolated for one of them derives from an RNA highly expressed in fetal kidney, and is predicted to encode a Kruppel-like zinc-finger protein that is probably a transcription factor. The entire cDNA region is included in two partially overlapping homozygous deletions found in Wilms tumour DNA samples. Cloning of the breakpoints in one tumour revealed a deletion size of 170 kb, one-third of which is covered by the cDNA. The expression pattern and sequence of this cDNA could point to an important role for its corresponding gene in the normal development of the renal system as well as in Wilms tumour.
Ubiquitination of receptor protein-tyrosine kinases (RPTKs) terminates signaling by marking active receptors for degradation. c-Cbl, an adapter protein for RPTKs, positively regulates RPTK ubiquitination in a manner dependent on its variant SRC homology 2 (SH2) and RING finger domains. Ubiquitin-protein ligases (or E3s) are the components of ubiquitination pathways that recognize target substrates and promote their ligation to ubiquitin. The c-Cbl protein acted as an E3 that can recognize tyrosine-phosphorylated substrates, such as the activated platelet-derived growth factor receptor, through its SH2 domain and that recruits and allosterically activates an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme through its RING domain. These results reveal an SH2-containing protein that functions as a ubiquitin-protein ligase and thus provide a distinct mechanism for substrate targeting in the ubiquitin system.
The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor is a transmembrane glycoprotein of relative molecular mass 170,000 with intrinsic ligand-dependent protein tyrosine kinase activity. Binding of EGF to its receptor activates a number of immediate biochemical processes, such as alterations of intracellular free calcium, pH, and increased transcription of several responsive genes, which usually culminate many hours later in DNA replication and cell division. Abolishing the tyrosine kinase activity of three related oncogenes, v-src, v-mos, and v-fps, eliminates their capacity to transform cell. Several reports have suggested that specific aspects of EGF receptor function are independent of the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity; however, these studies used an antibody against EGF receptor which failed to activate phosphorylation of exogenous substrates and an insertional mutation in the EGF receptor tyrosine kinase domain which had not been shown to abolish protein kinase activity in cells. Because many transmembrane receptors interact with intrinsic membrane proteins to activate second messenger systems, it is important to resolve experimentally whether mechanisms, in addition to activation of the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, mediate some EGF actions. From functional analyses of an EGF receptor containing a single amino-acid mutation at a site required for phosphate transfer from ATP, we conclude that the tyrosine kinase activity of the EGF receptor is essential for the diverse biochemical effects of EGF, including rapid alterations in intracellular calcium, activation of gene transcription, receptor down-regulation and the ultimate stimulatory effects on cell proliferation.
All mammals produce heparin, a negatively charged glycosaminoglycan that is a major constituent of the secretory granules of mast cells which are found in the peritoneal cavity and most connective tissues. Although heparin is one of the most studied molecules in the body, its physiological function has yet to be determined. Here we describe transgenic mice, generated by disrupting the N-deacetylase/N-sulphotransferase-2 gene, that cannot express fully sulphated heparin. The mast cells in the skeletal muscle that normally contain heparin lacked metachromatic granules and failed to store appreciable amounts of mouse mast-cell protease (mMCP)-4, mMCP-5 and carboxypeptidase A (mMC-CPA), even though they contained substantial amounts of mMCP-7. We developed mast cells from the bone marrow of the transgenic mice. Although these cultured cells contained high levels of various protease transcripts and had substantial amounts of mMCP-6 protein in their granules, they also failed to express mMCP-5 and mMC-CPA. Our data show that heparin controls, through a post-translational mechanism, the levels of specific cassettes of positively charged proteases inside mast cells.
Nucleosomes must be deacetylated behind elongating RNA polymerase II to prevent cryptic initiation of transcription within the coding region. RNA polymerase II signals for deacetylation through the methylation of histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36), which provides the recruitment signal for the Rpd3S histone deacetylase complex (HDAC). The recognition of methyl H3K36 by Rpd3S requires the chromodomain of its Eaf3 subunit. Paradoxically, Eaf3 is also a subunit of the NuA4 acetyltransferase complex, yet NuA4 does not recognize methyl H3K36 nucleosomes. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we found that methyl H3K36 nucleosome recognition by Rpd3S also requires the plant homeobox domain (PHD) of its Rco1 subunit. Thus, the coupled chromo and PHD domains of Rpd3S specify recognition of the methyl H3K36 mark, demonstrating the first combinatorial domain requirement within a protein complex to read a specific histone code.
In the traditional view of molecular evolution, the rate of point mutation is uniform over the genome of an organism and variation in the rate of nucleotide substitution among DNA regions reflects differential selective constraints. Here we provide evidence for significant variation in mutation rate among regions in the mammalian genome. We show first that substitutions at silent (degenerate) sites in protein-coding genes in mammals seem to be effectively neutral (or nearly so) as they do not occur significantly less frequently than substitutions in pseudogenes. We then show that the rate of silent substitution varies among genes and is correlated with the base composition of genes and their flanking DNA. This implies that the variation in both silent substitution rate and base composition can be attributed to systematic differences in the rate and pattern of mutation over regions of the genome. We propose that the differences arise because mutation patterns vary with the timing of replication of different chromosomal regions in the germline. This hypothesis can account for both the origin of isochores in mammalian genomes and the observation that silent nucleotide substitutions in different mammalian genes do not have the same molecular clock.
Inward rectifier K+ channels, which modulate electrical activity in many cell types, are regulated by protein kinases, guanine-nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and probably actin cytoskeleton. Generation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) by ATP-dependent lipid kinases is known to activate inward rectifier K+ channels in cardiac membrane patches. Here we report that several cloned inward rectifier K+ channels directly bind PIP2, and that this binding correlates with channel activity. Application of ATP or PIP2 liposomes activates the cloned channels. Stabilized by lipid phosphatase inhibitors, PIP2 antibodies potently inhibit each channel with a unique rate (GIRK1/4 approximately GIRK2 >> IRK1 approximately ROMK. Consistent with the faster dissociation of PIP2 from the GIRK channels, the carboxy terminus of GIRK1 binds 3H-PIP2 liposomes more weakly than does that of IRK1 or ROMK1. Mutation of a conserved arginine to glutamine at position 188 reduces the ability of ROMK1 to bind PIP2 and increases its sensitivity to inhibition by PIP2 antibodies. Interactions between GIRK channels and PIP2 are modulated by the betagamma subunits of the G protein (Gbetagamma). When GIRK1/4 channels are allowed to run down completely, they are not activated by addition of Gbetagamma alone, but application of PIP2 activates them in minutes without Gbetagamma and in just seconds with Gbetagamma. Finally, coexpression of Gbetagamma with GIRK channels slows the inhibition of K+ currents by PIP2 antibodies by more than 10-fold. Thus Gbetagamma activates GIRK channels by stabilizing interactions between PIP2 and the K+ channel.
Cyclins, originally discovered in the eggs of marine invertebrates, are proteins which undergo dramatic cycles of synthesis followed by degradation at the metaphase-anaphase transition of cell division. That they participate in the G2-M transition is supported by the fact that when synthetic cyclin messenger RNAs from clam and sea urchin are microinjected into the G2-arrested oocytes of Xenopus, they induce maturation. The cyclin of fission yeast is the product of the cdc13 gene, which is known to interact with cdc2, a gene required for the entry into mitosis. We have cloned the genes that encode A-type and B-type cyclins from Drosophila melanogaster by virtue of their sequence similarity to oligonucleotides corresponding to conserved regions of the cyclin genes. We show that both genes encode abundant maternal mRNAs, but whereas the cyclin A mRNA is relatively uniformly distributed before cell formation, the cyclin B mRNA becomes localized to the developing pole cells. In larvae, cyclin A is expressed predominantly in brain and imaginal disks, whereas cyclin B transcripts are abundant in testes.
E1 enzymes activate ubiquitin (Ub) and ubiquitin-like (Ubl) proteins in two steps by carboxy-terminal adenylation and thioester bond formation to a conserved catalytic cysteine in the E1 Cys domain. The structural basis for these intermediates remains unknown. Here we report crystal structures for human SUMO E1 in complex with SUMO adenylate and tetrahedral intermediate analogues at 2.45 and 2.6 A, respectively. These structures show that side chain contacts to ATP.Mg are released after adenylation to facilitate a 130 degree rotation of the Cys domain during thioester bond formation that is accompanied by remodelling of key structural elements including the helix that contains the E1 catalytic cysteine, the crossover and re-entry loops, and refolding of two helices that are required for adenylation. These changes displace side chains required for adenylation with side chains required for thioester bond formation. Mutational and biochemical analyses indicate these mechanisms are conserved in other E1s.
The FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) complex is required for transcript elongation through nucleosomes by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) in vitro. Here, we show that FACT facilitates Pol II-driven transcription by destabilizing nucleosomal structure so that one histone H2A-H2B dimer is removed during enzyme passage. We also demonstrate that FACT possesses intrinsic histone chaperone activity and can deposit core histones onto DNA. Importantly, FACT activity requires both of its constituent subunits and is dependent on the highly acidic C terminus of its larger subunit, Spt16. These findings define the mechanism by which Pol II can transcribe through chromatin without disrupting its epigenetic status.
Hypocalcemic vitamin D-resistant rickets is a human genetic disease resulting from target organ resistance to the action of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Two families with affected children homozygous for this autosomal recessive disorder were studied for abnormalities in the intracellular vitamin D receptor (VDR) and its gene. Although the receptor displays normal binding of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 hormone, VDR from affected family members has a decreased affinity for DNA. Genomic DNA isolated from these families was subjected to oligonucleotide-primed DNA amplification, and each of the nine exons encoding the receptor protein was sequenced for a genetic mutation. In each family, a different single nucleotide mutation was found in the DNA binding domain of the protein; one family near the tip of the first zinc finger (Gly----Asp) and one at the tip of the second zinc finger (Arg----Gly). The mutant residues were created in vitro by oligonucleotide directed point mutagenesis of wild-type VDR complementary DNA and this cDNA was transfected into COS-1 cells. The produced protein is biochemically indistinguishable from the receptor isolated from patients.
The complete nucleotide sequence of two human T-cell leukaemia type III (HTLV-III) proviral DNAs each have four long open reading frames, the first two corresponding to the gag and pol genes. The fourth open reading frame encodes two functional polypeptides, a large precursor of the major envelope glycoprotein and a smaller protein derived from the 3'-terminus long open reading frame analogous to the long open reading frame (lor) product of HTLV-I and -II.
Analogs of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP) inhibit the growth of cultured cell lines. The effects of 8-bromo- and N6-butyryl-substituted analogs of cyclic and noncyclic AMP on six cell lines were examined and were equally inhibitory. Variant cell lines with altered cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase were more resistant to both cyclic and noncyclic nucleotides. We conclude that growth inhibition by analogs of cyclic AMP (i) does not require a 3',5' phosphodiester bond and (ii) may be mediated by a pathway involving endogenous cyclic AMP.
The incorporation of uridine into RNA in lymphocytes undergoing transformation induced by phytohemagglutinin parallels its incorporation into the intratcellular pool of acid-soluble nucleotides and coincides with a 20-fold increase in the specific activity of uridine kinase. This increase is dependent upon synthesis of both RNA and protein and is subject to both repression and end-product inhibition by cytidine.
Cardiac hypertrophy and failure are characterized by transcriptional reprogramming of gene expression. Adult cardiomyocytes in mice primarily express alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC, also known as Myh6), whereas embryonic cardiomyocytes express beta-MHC (also known as Myh7). Cardiac stress triggers adult hearts to undergo hypertrophy and a shift from alpha-MHC to fetal beta-MHC expression. Here we show that Brg1, a chromatin-remodelling protein, has a critical role in regulating cardiac growth, differentiation and gene expression. In embryos, Brg1 promotes myocyte proliferation by maintaining Bmp10 and suppressing p57(kip2) expression. It preserves fetal cardiac differentiation by interacting with histone deacetylase (HDAC) and poly (ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP) to repress alpha-MHC and activate beta-MHC. In adults, Brg1 (also known as Smarca4) is turned off in cardiomyocytes. It is reactivated by cardiac stresses and forms a complex with its embryonic partners, HDAC and PARP, to induce a pathological alpha-MHC to beta-MHC shift. Preventing Brg1 re-expression decreases hypertrophy and reverses this MHC switch. BRG1 is activated in certain patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, its level correlating with disease severity and MHC changes. Our studies show that Brg1 maintains cardiomyocytes in an embryonic state, and demonstrate an epigenetic mechanism by which three classes of chromatin-modifying factors-Brg1, HDAC and PARP-cooperate to control developmental and pathological gene expression.
The three-dimensional structure of acetylcholinesterase from Torpedo californica electric organ has been determined by x-ray analysis to 2.8 angstrom resolution. The form crystallized is the glycolipid-anchored homodimer that was purified subsequent to solubilization with a bacterial phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C. The enzyme monomer is an alpha/beta protein that contains 537 amino acids. It consists of a 12-stranded mixed beta sheet surrounded by 14 alpha helices and bears a striking resemblance to several hydrolase structures including dienelactone hydrolase, serine carboxypeptidase-II, three neutral lipases, and haloalkane dehalogenase. The active site is unusual because it contains Glu, not Asp, in the Ser-His-acid catalytic triad and because the relation of the triad to the rest of the protein approximates a mirror image of that seen in the serine proteases. Furthermore, the active site lies near the bottom of a deep and narrow gorge that reaches halfway into the protein. Modeling of acetylcholine binding to the enzyme suggests that the quaternary ammonium ion is bound not to a negatively charged "anionic" site, but rather to some of the 14 aromatic residues that line the gorge.
One of the most important current scientific paradoxes is the economy with which nature uses genes. In all higher animals studied, we have found many fewer genes than we would have previously expected. The functional outputs of the eventual products of genes seem to be far more complex than the more restricted blueprint. In higher organisms, the functions of many proteins are modulated by post-translational modifications (PTMs). These alterations of amino-acid side chains lead to higher structural and functional protein diversity and are, therefore, a leading contender for an explanation for this seeming incongruity. Natural protein production methods typically produce PTM mixtures within which function is difficult to dissect or control. Until now it has not been possible to access pure mimics of complex PTMs. Here we report a chemical tagging approach that enables the attachment of multiple modifications to bacterially expressed (bare) protein scaffolds: this approach allows reconstitution of functionally effective mimics of higher organism PTMs. By attaching appropriate modifications at suitable distances in the widely-used LacZ reporter enzyme scaffold, we created protein probes that included sensitive systems for detection of mammalian brain inflammation and disease. Through target synthesis of the desired modification, chemistry provides a structural precision and an ability to retool with a chosen PTM in a manner not available to other approaches. In this way, combining chemical control of PTM with readily available protein scaffolds provides a systematic platform for creating probes of protein-PTM interactions. We therefore anticipate that this ability to build model systems will allow some of this gene product complexity to be dissected, with the aim of eventually being able to completely duplicate the patterns of a particular protein's PTMs from an in vivo assay into an in vitro system.
BCL-2 family proteins constitute a critical control point for the regulation of apoptosis. Protein interaction between BCL-2 members is a prominent mechanism of control and is mediated through the amphipathic alpha-helical BH3 segment, an essential death domain. We used a chemical strategy, termed hydrocarbon stapling, to generate BH3 peptides with improved pharmacologic properties. The stapled peptides, called "stabilized alpha-helix of BCL-2 domains" (SAHBs), proved to be helical, protease-resistant, and cell-permeable molecules that bound with increased affinity to multidomain BCL-2 member pockets. A SAHB of the BH3 domain from the BID protein specifically activated the apoptotic pathway to kill leukemia cells. In addition, SAHB effectively inhibited the growth of human leukemia xenografts in vivo. Hydrocarbon stapling of native peptides may provide a useful strategy for experimental and therapeutic modulation of protein-protein interactions in many signaling pathways.
Certain single base substitutions causing genetic diseases or resulting in polymorphisms linked to mutant alleles, alter a restriction enzyme cleavage site and can therefore be detected in total genomic DNA using DNA blots. Many base substitutions do not lead to an altered restriction site, but these can be detected using synthetic oligonucleotides as hybridization probes if the DNA sequence surrounding the base substitution is known. In the case of beta-thalassaemia, where 22 different single base mutations have been identified, a large number of probes would be required for diagnosis. An approach which was used to detect mutations in viral DNA involves the S1 nuclease treatment of heteroduplexes formed between wild-type and mutant DNA. Although certain single base mismatches are cleaved by S1 nuclease (ref. 11 and T. Shenk, personal communication), many other mismatches examined by this procedure are not cleaved (B. Seed, personal communication; R.M.M., unpublished data). Heteroduplexes between mutant and wild-type subgenomic fragments of double-stranded reovirus RNA migrate slower than the corresponding homoduplexes in polyacrylamide gels containing 7 M urea, but it is not known whether this method is applicable to DNA heteroduplexes containing single base mismatches. Here we describe a procedure that involves the electrophoretic separation of DNA heteroduplexes in a well-characterized gel system. We show that four different human beta-thalassaemia alleles with known single base mutations can be detected with as little as 5 micrograms of total genomic DNA. The method should be useful in the localization and diagnosis of mutations associated with genetic diseases.
Several human bacterial pathogens, including the Gram-negative diplococcus Neisseria gonorrhoeae, produce extracellular proteases that are specific for human immunoglobulin IgA1. Immunoglobulin A (IgA) proteases have been studied extensively and the genes of some species cloned in Escherichia coli, but their role in pathogenesis remains unclear. Recently we derived a DNA fragment of 5 kilobases (kb) from N. gonorrhoeae MS11 directing extracellular active enzyme in E. coli. Although the mature enzyme of strain MS11 was shown to have a relative molecular mass of 106,000 (Mr 106K) in gels, the DNA sequence of this cloned fragment reveals a single gene coding for a 169K precursor of IgA protease. The precursor contains three functional domains, the amino-terminal leader which is assumed to initiate the inner membrane transport of the precursor, the protease, and a carboxyl-terminal 'helper' domain apparently required for extracellular secretion (excretion). Based on the structural features of the precursor, we propose a model in which the helper serves as a pore for excretion of the protease domain through the outer membrane. IgA protease acquires an active conformation as its extracellular transport proceeds and is released as a proform from the membrane-bound helper by autoproteolysis. The soluble proform further matures into the 106 K IgA protease and a small stable alpha-protein.
Many secreted proteins are synthesised as a large precursor with an additional hydrophobic N-terminal signal sequence that is cleaved by a membrane-bound enzyme. The proteins are secreted as nascent chains. The work leading to the current models of protein secretion is reviewed and the value of bacterial systems in the study of protein transfer across membranes is stressed.
Chymodenin, a peptide newly isolated from porcine duodenum, elicited a rapid threefold increase in secretion of chymotrypsinogen while increasing secrelion of total protein by only, about 40 percent; lipase secretion was unaffected. The pancreas appears able, under chymodenin stimulation, to rapidly alter the transport of an individual enzyme as opposed to producing en masse secretion of enzyme.
Although the structure of rabbit skeletal muscle dihydropyridine (DHP) receptor, deduced from cDNA sequence, indicates that this protein is the channel-forming subunit of voltage-dependent calcium channel (VDCC), no functional proof for this prediction has been presented. Two DNA oligonucleotides complementary to DHP-receptor RNA sequences coding for putative membrane-spanning regions of the DHP receptor specifically suppress the expression of the DHP-sensitive VDCC from rabbit and rat heart in Xenopus oocytes. However, these oligonucleotides do not suppress the expression of the DHP-insensitive VDCC and of voltage-dependent sodium and potassium channels. Thus, the gene for DHP receptor of rabbit skeletal muscle is closely related, or identical to, a gene expressed in heart that encodes a component of the DHP-sensitive VDCC. The DHP-sensitive and DHP-insensitive VDCCs are distinct molecular entities.
Exoribonuclease purified from Ehrlich ascites tumor cell nuclei and in intact HeLa cell nuclei is irreversibly inactivated by tow concentrations of p-bromo- and p-iodoacetamidophenyl nucleotides and by thymidine-3'-fluorophosphate. Iodoacetate, bromoacetate, and thymidine-5'-fluorophosphate do not affect the enzyme. Although p-haloacetamidophenyl nucleotides inactivate ribonucleic acid polymerase of isolated HeLa cell nuclei, thymidine-3'-fluorophosphate does not affect the activity of this enzyme in vitro.
Polyoma virus middle T-antigen converts normal fibroblasts to a fully transformed, tumorigenic phenotype. It achieves this, at least in part, by binding and activating one of the non-receptor tyrosine kinases, pp60c-src, pp62c-yes or pp59c-fyn (reviewed in refs 2 and 3). As a result, middle T-antigen itself is phosphorylated on tyrosine residues, one of which (Tyr 315) acts as a binding site for the SH2 domains of phosphatidylinositol-3'OH kinase 85K subunit. Here we show that another tyrosine phosphorylation site in middle T-antigen (Tyr 250; refs 4, 5) acts as a binding region for the SH2 domain of the transforming protein Shc. This results in Shc also becoming tyrosine-phosphorylated and binding to the SH2 domain of Grb2 (ref. 10). This probably stimulates p21ras activity through the mammalian homologue of the Drosophila guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor Sos (reviewed in ref. 11). We suggest that middle T-antigen transforms cells by acting as a functional homologue of an activated tyrosine kinase-associated growth-factor receptor.
Amide bonds are of central importance for biochemistry; in the guise of peptide bonds, they form the backbone of proteins. The formation of amide bonds without the assistance of enzymes poses a major challenge for theories of the origin of life. Enzyme-free formation of amide bonds between amino acids has been demonstrated in the presence of condensing agents such as cyanamide. Here we report the formation of amide bonds in aqueous solution in the absence of any condensing agent. We find that the formation of pyrite (FeS2) from FeS and H2S can provide the driving force for reductive acetylation of amino acids with mercaptoacetic acid (HSCH2COOH). The redox energy of pyrite formation permits the activation of the carboxylic acid group, which is converted to a species that reacts readily with amines. This process provides support for the chemo-autotrophic theory for the origin of life, in which pyrite formation supplies the energy source for the first autocatalytic reproduction cycle.
Protein tyrosine phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are central reactions for control of cellular division, differentiation and development. Here we describe the crystal structure of a low-molecular-weight phosphotyrosine protein phosphatase (PTPase), a cytosolic phosphatase present in many mammalian cells. The enzyme catalyses the dephosphorylation of phosphotyrosine-containing substrates, and overexpression of the protein in normal and transformed cells inhibits cell proliferation. The structure of the low-molecular-weight PTPase reveals an alpha/beta protein containing a phosphate-binding loop motif at the amino end of helix alpha 1. This motif includes the essential active-site residues Cys 12 and Arg 18 and bears striking similarities to the active-site motif recently described in the structure of human PTP1B. The structure of the low-molecular-weight PTPase supports a reaction mechanism involving the conserved Cys 12 as an attacking nucleophile in an in-line associative mechanism. The structure also suggests a catalytic role for Asp 129 in the reaction cycle.
The major coat protein of bacteriophage M13 is synthesized as a precursor, the procoat, with a typical leader (signal) sequence of 23 residues at its NH2-terminus. A fusion protein that contains the NH2-terminal 141 residues of cytoplasmic ribulokinase and all but the first ten residues of M13 procoat was made. The fusion protein inserts into the plasma membrane of Escherichia coli and is processed by leader peptidase to give rise to a leader peptide of 155 residues and the mature coat protein of 50 residues. The NH2-terminus of the leader peptide remains in the cytoplasm and is protected from protease added to the medium outside of the cell. This indicates that M13 procoat inserts into the membrane as a loop structure and that the NH2-terminus of a leader peptide remains within the cytoplasm during membrane insertion.
Telomere dysfunction may result in chromosomal abnormalities, DNA damage responses, and even cancer. Early studies in lower organisms have helped to establish the crucial role of telomerase and telomeric proteins in maintaining telomere length and protecting telomere ends. In Oxytricha nova, telomere G-overhangs are protected by the TEBP-alpha/beta heterodimer. Human telomeres contain duplex telomeric repeats with 3' single-stranded G-overhangs, and may fold into a t-loop structure that helps to shield them from being recognized as DNA breaks. Additionally, the TEBP-alpha homologue, POT1, which binds telomeric single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), associates with multiple telomeric proteins (for example, TPP1, TIN2, TRF1, TRF2 and RAP1) to form the six-protein telosome/shelterin and other subcomplexes. These telomeric protein complexes in turn interact with diverse pathways to form the telomere interactome for telomere maintenance. However, the mechanisms by which the POT1-containing telosome communicates with telomerase to regulate telomeres remain to be elucidated. Here we demonstrate that TPP1 is a putative mammalian homologue of TEBP-beta and contains a predicted amino-terminal oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide binding (OB) fold. TPP1-POT1 association enhanced POT1 affinity for telomeric ssDNA. In addition, the TPP1 OB fold, as well as POT1-TPP1 binding, seemed critical for POT1-mediated telomere-length control and telomere-end protection in human cells. Disruption of POT1-TPP1 interaction by dominant negative TPP1 expression or RNA interference (RNAi) resulted in telomere-length alteration and DNA damage responses. Furthermore, we offer evidence that TPP1 associates with the telomerase in a TPP1-OB-fold-dependent manner, providing a physical link between telomerase and the telosome/shelterin complex. Our findings highlight the critical role of TPP1 in telomere maintenance, and support a yin-yang model in which TPP1 and POT1 function as a unit to protect human telomeres, by both positively and negatively regulating telomerase access to telomere DNA.
Certain problems usually associated with the histochemistry of lipases are obviated by a technique that utilizes the endogenous blood chylomicrons and the cellular stores of triglyceride as substrates for the histochemical demonstration of lipolytic enzyme activity in situ. In spreads of mesenteric adipose tissue, the technique makes it possible to distinguish between lipoprotein lipase activity at sites in the capillaries and lipolysis occurring in the adipocytes. The selective anatomic lolization of the lipase reaction correlated with the functional state of the tissue, and the absence of reaction product in control mesenteries from starved mice or in heat-inactivated controls, support the validity of this histochemical reaction.
The mammalian cytoskeletal proteins b- and g-actin are highly homologous, but only b-actin is amino-terminally arginylated in vivo, which regulates its function. We examined the metabolic fate of exogenously expressed arginylated and nonarginylated actin isoforms. Arginylated g-actin, unlike b-, was highly unstable and was selectively ubiquitinated and degraded in vivo. This instability was regulated by the differences in the nucleotide coding sequence between the two actin isoforms, which conferred different translation rates. g-actin was translated more slowly than b-actin, and this slower processing resulted in the exposure of a normally hidden lysine residue for ubiquitination, leading to the preferential degradation of g-actin upon arginylation. This degradation mechanism, coupled to nucleotide coding sequence, may regulate protein arginylation in vivo.
We have isolated a mutant, mts2, in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe which is defective in chromosome segregation. The predicted amino-acid sequence of the cloned mts2+ gene product is 75% identical to the S4 subunit of the human 26S ATP/ubiquitin-dependent protease. The human S4 subunit complementary DNA expressed from an S. pombe expression plasmid can rescue an S. pombe mts2 gene disruption. Both observations demonstrate that the mts2+ gene is the S. pombe homologue of the human S4 subunit. In addition, we provide genetic evidence for a physical interaction between the S4 and the related S7 subunit in the 26S multiprotein protease. We show that polyubiquitin-conjugated proteins accumulate in the mts2 mutant at the restrictive temperature, demonstrating that the mutant has an in vivo defect in the ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis pathway. Finally, the phenotype for the mts2 mutant indicates that protein degradation by the 26S protease is essential not for entry into but for the completion of mitosis.
The tumour suppressor protein merlin (encoded by the neurofibromatosis type 2 gene NF2) is an important regulator of proliferation in many cell and tissue types. Merlin is activated by dephosphorylation at serine 518 (S518), which occurs on serum withdrawal or on cell-cell or cell-matrix contact. However, the relevant phosphatase that activates merlin's tumour suppressor function is unknown. Here we identify this enzyme as the myosin phosphatase (MYPT-1-PP1delta). The cellular MYPT-1-PP1delta-specific inhibitor CPI-17 causes a loss of merlin function characterized by merlin phosphorylation, Ras activation and transformation. Constitutively active merlin (S518A) reverses CPI-17-induced transformation, showing that merlin is the decisive substrate of MYPT-1-PP1delta in tumour suppression. In addition we show that CPI-17 levels are raised in several human tumour cell lines and that the downregulation of CPI-17 induces merlin dephosphorylation, inhibits Ras activation and abolishes the transformed phenotype. MYPT-1-PP1delta and its substrate merlin are part of a previously undescribed tumour suppressor cascade that can be hindered in two ways, by mutation of the NF2 gene and by upregulation of the oncoprotein CPI-17.
Mutations of APC appear to initiate sporadic and inherited forms of human colorectal cancer. Although these mutations have been well characterized, little is known about the function of the APC gene product. Two cellular proteins that associate with APC were identified by nucleotide sequence analysis and peptide mapping as the E-cadherin-associated proteins alpha- and beta-catenin. A 27-residue fragment of APC containing a 15-amino acid repeat was sufficient for the interaction with the catenins. These results suggest an important link between tumor initiation and cell adhesion.
Adipsin is a serine protease that is secreted by adipocytes into the bloodstream; it is deficient in several animal models of obesity, representing a striking example of defective gene expression in this disorder. Recombinant mouse adipsin was purified and its biochemical and enzymatic properties were studied in order to elucidate the function of this protein. Activated adipsin has little or no proteolytic activity toward most substrates but has the same activity as human complement factor D, cleaving complement factor B when it is complexed with activated complement component C3. Like authentic factor D, adipsin can activate the alternative pathway of complement, resulting in red blood cell lysis. Decreased (58 to 80 percent) complement factor D activity, relative to lean controls, was observed as a common feature of several experimental models of obesity, including the ob/ob, db/db, and monosodium glutamate (MSG)-injected mouse and the fa/fa rat. These results suggest that adipsin and the alternative pathway of complement may play an unexpected but important role in the regulation of systemic energy balance in vivo.
Cadmium is a potent poison for living cells. In man, chronic exposure to low levels of cadmium results in damage to kidneys and has been linked to neoplastic disease and ageing, and acute exposure can cause damage to a variety of organs and tissues. Cadmium reacts with thiol groups and can substitute for zinc in certain proteins, but the reason for its toxicity in vivo remains uncertain. In eukaryotes, an important selective proteolysis pathway for the elimination of abnormal proteins that are generated under normal or stress conditions is ATP-dependent and mediated by the ubiquitin system. Substrates of this pathway are first recognized by ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (or auxiliary factors) which covalently attach ubiquitin, a small and highly conserved protein, to specific internal lysine residues of proteolytic substrates. Ubiquitinated substrates are then degraded by the proteasome, a multisubunit protease complex. Here we show that expression of this ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis pathway in yeast is activated in response to cadmium exposure and that mutants deficient in specific ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes are hypersensitive to cadmium. Moreover, mutants in the proteasome are hypersensitive to cadmium, suggesting that cadmium resistance is mediated in part by degradation of abnormal proteins. This indicates that a major reason for cadmium toxicity may be cadmium-induced formation of abnormal proteins.
Transcription terminators recognized by several RNA polymerases include a DNA segment encoding uridine-rich RNA and, for bacterial RNA polymerase, a hairpin loop located immediately upstream. Here, mutationally altered Escherichia coli RNA polymerase enzymes that have different termination efficiencies were used to show that the extent of transcription through the uridine-rich encoding segment is controlled by the substrate concentration of nucleoside triphosphate. This result implies that the rate of elongation determines the probability of transcript release. Moreover, the position of release sites suggests an important spatial relation between the RNA hairpin and the boundary of the terminator.
The Fos protein complex and several Fos-related antigens (FRA) bind specifically to a sequence element referred to as the HeLa cell activator protein 1 (AP-1) binding site. A combination of structural and immunological comparisons has identified the Fos-associated protein (p39) as the protein product of the jun proto-oncogene (c-Jun). The p39/Jun protein is one of the major polypeptides identified in AP-1 oligonucleotide affinity chromatography extracts of cellular proteins. These preparations of AP-1 also contain Fos and several FRA's. Some of these proteins bind to the AP-1 site directly whereas others, like Fos, appear to bind indirectly via protein-protein interactions. Cell-surface stimulation results in an increase in c-fos and c-jun products. Thus, the products of two protooncogenes (and several related proteins), induced by extracellular stimuli, form a complex that associates with transcriptional control elements containing AP-1 sites, thereby potentially mediating the long-term responses to signals that regulate growth control and development.
Two DNA strand transfer reactions occur during retroviral reverse transcription. The mechanism of the first, minus strand strong-stop DNA, transfer has been studied in vitro with human immunodeficiency virus 1 reverse transcriptase (HIV-1 RT) and a model template-primer system derived from the HIV-1 genome. The results reveal that HIV-1 RT alone can catalyze DNA strand transfer reactions. Two kinetically distinct ribonuclease (RNase) H activities associated with HIV-1 RT are required for removal of RNA fragments annealed to the nascent DNA strand. Examination of the binding of DNA.RNA duplex and single-stranded RNA to HIV-1 RT during strand transfer supports a model where the enzyme accommodates both the acceptor RNA template and the nascent DNA strand before the transfer event is completed. The polymerase activity incorporated additional bases beyond the 5' end of the RNA template, resulting in a base misincorporation upon DNA strand transfer. Such a process occurring in vivo during retroviral homologous recombination could contribute to the hypermutability of the HIV-1 genome.
Copper active sites play a major role in enzymatic activation of dioxygen. We trapped the copper-dioxygen complex in the enzyme peptidylglycine-alphahydroxylating monooxygenase (PHM) by freezing protein crystals that had been soaked with a slow substrate and ascorbate in the presence of oxygen. The x-ray crystal structure of this precatalytic complex, determined to 1.85-angstrom resolution, shows that oxygen binds to one of the coppers in the enzyme with an end-on geometry. Given this structure, it is likely that dioxygen is directly involved in the electron transfer and hydrogen abstraction steps of the PHM reaction. These insights may apply to other copper oxygen-activating enzymes, such as dopamine beta-monooxygenase, and to the design of biomimetic complexes.
Ligand-induced allosteric changes in proteins are important in their cellular functions and regulation, and both concerted and sequential examples are known. The distinction has entailed elaborate analysis, however, and only a few systems have been unequivocally analysed. We have investigated the coupling between ATP usage and DNA transport by type II DNA topoisomerases, and one key question concerning allostery in these dyadic enzymes is whether ATP binding to one protomer can induce a concerted conformational change in the entire enzyme. Here we use an enzyme with one immunotagged subunit defective in ATP binding and one wild-type subunit to show that it can. Our approach should be generally applicable in the study of allostery and communication between members of a macromolecular assembly.
Nitric oxide (NO), synthesized in eukaryotes by the NO synthases, has multiple roles in signalling pathways and in protection against pathogens. Pathogenic microorganisms have apparently evolved defence mechanisms that counteract the effects of NO and related reactive nitrogen species. Regulatory proteins that sense NO mediate the primary response to NO and nitrosative stress. The only regulatory protein in enteric bacteria known to serve exclusively as an NO-responsive transcription factor is the enhancer binding protein NorR (refs 9, 10-11). In Escherichia coli, NorR activates the transcription of the norVW genes encoding a flavorubredoxin (FlRd) and an associated flavoprotein, respectively, which together have NADH-dependent NO reductase activity. The NO-responsive activity of NorR raises important questions concerning the mechanism of NO sensing. Here we show that the regulatory domain of NorR contains a mononuclear non-haem iron centre, which reversibly binds NO. Binding of NO stimulates the ATPase activity of NorR, enabling the activation of transcription by RNA polymerase. The mechanism of NorR reveals an unprecedented biological role for a non-haem mononitrosyl-iron complex in NO sensing.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) was long considered to be the only compartment of the eukaryotic cell in which protein folding is accompanied by enzyme-catalyzed disulfide bond formation. However, it has recently become evident that cells harbor a second oxidizing compartment, the mitochondrial intermembrane space, where disulfide formation facilitates protein translocation from the cytosol. Moreover, protein oxidation has been implicated in many mitochondria-associated processes central for human health such as apoptosis, aging, and regulation of the respiratory chain. Whereas the machineries of ER and mitochondria both form disulfides between cysteine residues, they do not share evolutionary origins and exhibit distinct mechanistic properties. Here, we summarize the current knowledge of these oxidation systems and discuss their functional similarities and differences.
Transducin is a guanyl nucleotide-binding protein that couples rhodopsin photolysis to hydrolysis of guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate in rod photoreceptor cells of vertebrate retinas. Several complementary DNA clones encoding transducin subunits have recently been characterized. One clone, isolated from a bovine retina complementary DNA library, encodes a previously unidentified polypeptide with an amino acid sequence 78% identical to the sequence of the alpha subunit of bovine rod outer segment transducin. Antibodies to a synthetic peptide with amino acid sequence derived specifically from this novel polypeptide recognize a 41-kilodalton polypeptide in homogenates of bovine retina. Localization of this polypeptide in bovine retina by indirect immunofluorescence demonstrates that it is expressed only in cone outer segments. Antibodies to specific sequences found only in the rod transducin alpha subunit recognize a polypeptide localized only in the rod outer segment. Therefore, bovine rod and cone cells each express structurally related yet significantly different forms of transducin.
Fumarate reductase couples the reduction of fumarate to succinate to the oxidation of quinol to quinone, in a reaction opposite to that catalysed by the related complex II of the respiratory chain (succinate dehydrogenase). Here we describe the crystal structure at 2.2 A resolution of the three protein subunits containing fumarate reductase from the anaerobic bacterium Wolinella succinogenes. Subunit A contains the site of fumarate reduction and a covalently bound flavin adenine dinucleotide prosthetic group. Subunit B contains three iron-sulphur centres. The menaquinol-oxidizing subunit C consists of five membrane-spanning, primarily helical segments and binds two haem b molecules. On the basis of the structure, we propose a pathway of electron transfer from the dihaem cytochrome b to the site of fumarate reduction and a mechanism of fumarate reduction. The relative orientations of the soluble and membrane-embedded subunits of succinate:quinone oxidoreductases appear to be unique.
The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor is a tyrosine-specific protein kinase with autophosphorylating activity. A 300 amino acid-long region of the receptor's cytoplasmic domain matches (35-90% homology) sequences of transforming proteins from the src family and includes a putative nucleotide binding site. Several of the src transforming proteins have tyrosine kinase activity, but v-erb-B, which appears to be a truncated EGF receptor, is virtually identical to the receptor over this region and yet lacks detectable kinase activity. To locate possible acceptor sites in the v-erb-B protein, we have mapped these sites in the human EGF receptor. We report here that three tyrosine sites near the C-terminus are phosphorylated in vitro. In intact cells, we find that EGF stimulates phosphorylation of several sites, the tyrosine 14 residues from the C-terminus being modified the most extensively. The equivalent site is absent in the v-erb-B protein of avian erythroblastosis virus (AEV) and may influence tyrosine kinase activity.
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD; also called spinocerebellar ataxia type 3) is a dominantly inherited late-onset neurodegenerative disorder caused by expansion of polyglutamine (polyQ)-encoding CAG repeats in the MJD1 gene (also known as ATXN3). Proteolytic liberation of highly aggregation-prone polyQ fragments from the protective sequence of the MJD1 gene product ataxin 3 (ATXN3) has been proposed to trigger the formation of ATXN3-containing aggregates, the neuropathological hallmark of MJD. ATXN3 fragments are detected in brain tissue of MJD patients and transgenic mice expressing mutant human ATXN3(Q71), and their amount increases with disease severity, supporting a relationship between ATXN3 processing and disease progression. The formation of early aggregation intermediates is thought to have a critical role in disease initiation, but the precise pathogenic mechanism operating in MJD has remained elusive. Here we show that L-glutamate-induced excitation of patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons initiates Ca(2+)-dependent proteolysis of ATXN3 followed by the formation of SDS-insoluble aggregates. This phenotype could be abolished by calpain inhibition, confirming a key role of this protease in ATXN3 aggregation. Aggregate formation was further dependent on functional Na(+) and K(+) channels as well as ionotropic and voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels, and was not observed in iPSCs, fibroblasts or glia, thereby providing an explanation for the neuron-specific phenotype of this disease. Our data illustrate that iPSCs enable the study of aberrant protein processing associated with late-onset neurodegenerative disorders in patient-specific neurons.
Various heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins have been identified on the basis of the individual subtypes of their alpha subunits. The beta gamma complexes, composed of beta and gamma subunits, remain tightly associated under physiological conditions and have been assumed to constitute a common pool shared among various guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding (G) protein heterotrimers. Particular alpha and beta subunit subtypes participate in the signal transduction processes between somatostatin or muscarinic receptors and the voltage-sensitive L-type calcium channel in rat pituitary GH3 cells. Among gamma subunits the gamma 3 subtype was found to be required for coupling of the somatostatin receptor to voltage-sensitive calcium channels, whereas the gamma 4 subtype was found to be required for coupling of the muscarinic receptor to those channels.
Advanced (long-chain) fuels and chemicals are generated from short-chain metabolic intermediates through pathways that require carbon-chain elongation. The condensation reactions mediating this carbon-carbon bond formation can be catalysed by enzymes from the thiolase superfamily, including b-ketoacyl-acyl-carrier protein (ACP) synthases, polyketide synthases, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthases, and biosynthetic thiolases. Pathways involving these enzymes have been exploited for fuel and chemical production, with fatty-acid biosynthesis (b-ketoacyl-ACP synthases) attracting the most attention in recent years. Degradative thiolases, which are part of the thiolase superfamily and naturally function in the b-oxidation of fatty acids, can also operate in the synthetic direction and thus enable carbon-chain elongation. Here we demonstrate that a functional reversal of the b-oxidation cycle can be used as a metabolic platform for the synthesis of alcohols and carboxylic acids with various chain lengths and functionalities. This pathway operates with coenzyme A (CoA) thioester intermediates and directly uses acetyl-CoA for acyl-chain elongation (rather than first requiring ATP-dependent activation to malonyl-CoA), characteristics that enable product synthesis at maximum carbon and energy efficiency. The reversal of the b-oxidation cycle was engineered in Escherichia coli and used in combination with endogenous dehydrogenases and thioesterases to synthesize n-alcohols, fatty acids and 3-hydroxy-, 3-keto- and trans-D(2)-carboxylic acids. The superior nature of the engineered pathway was demonstrated by producing higher-chain linear n-alcohols (C >= 4) and extracellular long-chain fatty acids (C > 10) at higher efficiency than previously reported. The ubiquitous nature of b-oxidation, aldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase and thioesterase enzymes has the potential to enable the efficient synthesis of these products in other industrial organisms.
Katanin, a member of the AAA adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) superfamily, uses nucleotide hydrolysis energy to sever and disassemble microtubules. Many AAA enzymes disassemble stable protein-protein complexes, but their mechanisms are not well understood. A fluorescence resonance energy transfer assay demonstrated that the p60 subunit of katanin oligomerized in an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)- and microtubule-dependent manner. Oligomerization increased the affinity of katanin for microtubules and stimulated its ATPase activity. After hydrolysis of ATP, microtubule-bound katanin oligomers disassembled microtubules and then dissociated into free katanin monomers. Coupling a nucleotide-dependent oligomerization cycle to the disassembly of a target protein complex may be a general feature of ATP-hydrolyzing AAA domains.
The molecular size of the plasma LDL (low density lipoprotein) receptor synthesized by cultured fibroblasts from a patient with the internalization-defective form of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH 274) was smaller by 10,000 daltons than the size of the normal LDL receptor. The segment of the gene encoding the truncated portion of the FH 274 receptor was cloned into bacteriophage lambda. Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of the normal and FH 274 genes revealed a 5-kilobase deletion, which eliminated the exons encoding the membrane-spanning region and the carboxyl terminal cytoplasmic domain of the receptor. The deletion appeared to be caused by a novel intrastrand recombination between two repetitive sequences of the Alu family that were oriented in opposite directions. The truncated receptors lack membrane-spanning regions and cytoplasmic domains; they are largely secreted into the culture medium, but a small fraction remains adherent to the cell surface. The surface-adherent receptors bind LDL, but they are unable to cluster in coated pits, thus explaining the internalization-defective phenotype.
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase is a eukaryotic chromosomal enzyme which utilizes the ADP-ribose moiety of NAD to synthesize the nucleic acid homopolymer (ADP-ribose)n (ref. 1). The precise function of (ADP-ribose)n has not been fully established although it does covalently modify chromosomal proteins by ADP-ribosylation. Here we demonstrate that gamma-ray irradiation of lymphoblastoid cells from normal subjects results in depressed DNA synthesis and increased (ADP-ribose)n synthesis. Irradiation of lymphoblastoid cells from patients with the autosomal recessive disease ataxia telangiectasia (AT), however, failed to depress DNA synthesis and did not elevate (ADP-ribose)n levels. We have confirmed that (ADP-ribose)n is synthesized in response to DNA damage and we propose that this polymer may function in the recovery from DNA damage by suppressing DNA synthesis.
The cDNA for human gamma-glutamyl carboxylase, which accomplishes the post-translational modification required for the activity of all of the vitamin K-dependent proteins, was cloned. The enzyme is a 758-residue integral membrane protein and appears to have three transmembrane domains near its amino terminus. The hydrophilic COOH-terminal half of the carboxylase has 19.3 percent identity with soybean seed lipoxygenase. Expression of the cloned cDNA resulted in an increase in carboxylase activity in microsomes of transfected cells compared to mock-transfected cells.
Apoptosis, an evolutionarily conserved form of cell suicide, requires specialized machinery. The central component of this machinery is a proteolytic system involving a family of proteases called caspases. These enzymes participate in a cascade that is triggered in response to proapoptotic signals and culminates in cleavage of a set of proteins, resulting in disassembly of the cell. Understanding caspase regulation is intimately linked to the ability to rationally manipulate apoptosis for therapeutic gain.
Mammalian cells have three ATP-dependent DNA ligases, which are required for DNA replication and repair. Homologues of ligase I (Lig1) and ligase IV (Lig4) are ubiquitous in Eukarya, whereas ligase III (Lig3), which has nuclear and mitochondrial forms, appears to be restricted to vertebrates. Lig3 is implicated in various DNA repair pathways with its partner protein Xrcc1 (ref. 1). Deletion of Lig3 results in early embryonic lethality in mice, as well as apparent cellular lethality, which has precluded definitive characterization of Lig3 function. Here we used pre-emptive complementation to determine the viability requirement for Lig3 in mammalian cells and its requirement in DNA repair. Various forms of Lig3 were introduced stably into mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells containing a conditional allele of Lig3 that could be deleted with Cre recombinase. With this approach, we find that the mitochondrial, but not nuclear, Lig3 is required for cellular viability. Although the catalytic function of Lig3 is required, the zinc finger (ZnF) and BRCA1 carboxy (C)-terminal-related (BRCT) domains of Lig3 are not. Remarkably, the viability requirement for Lig3 can be circumvented by targeting Lig1 to the mitochondria or expressing Chlorella virus DNA ligase, the minimal eukaryal nick-sealing enzyme, or Escherichia coli LigA, an NAD(+)-dependent ligase. Lig3-null cells are not sensitive to several DNA-damaging agents that sensitize Xrcc1-deficient cells. Our results establish a role for Lig3 in mitochondria, but distinguish it from its interacting protein Xrcc1.
The Xlsirts are a family of transcribed repeat sequence genes that do not code for protein. Xlsirt RNAs become localized to the vegetal cortex of Xenopus oocytes early in oogenesis, before the localization of the messenger RNA Vg1, which encodes a transforming growth factor-beta-like molecule involved in mesoderm formation, and coincident with the localization of Xcat2 transcripts, which encode a nanos-like molecule. Destruction of the localized Xlsirts by injection of antisense oligodeoxynucleotides into stage 4 oocytes resulted in the release of Vg1 transcripts but not Xcat2 transcripts from the vegetal cortex. Xlsirt RNAs, which may be a structural component of the vegetal cortex, are a crucial part of a genetic pathway necessary for the proper localization of Vg1 that leads to subsequent normal pattern formation.
Experiments with analogs of the coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide demonstrate that the molecular forms of malate dehydrogenase in Euglena vary with the nutritional environment. Electrophoretic separations on starch gel show that Euglena grown on autotrophic medium has a malate dehydrogenase which is lacking in Euglena grown on heterotrophic medium.
In studies of the genetics of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), the product of the nef gene, formerly known as F, 3'-orf, or B-ORF, was a negative regulator of HIV-1 replication. Proviruses with mutations in the nef gene replicated better than their standard counterparts during transient expression, and the mutant virus maintained its enhanced replication even after serial passages in T lymphocytes. The nef protein trans-suppressed, in a dose-dependent manner, the replication of wild-type and nef mutant proviruses and the expression of reporter genes linked to the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR). The repression induced by the nef protein was mediated by inhibition of transcription from the HIV-1 LTR, which contains a far upstream cis element (previously recognized to be a negative regulatory element) between 340 and 156 nucleotides upstream of the RNA initiation site.
The catalytic (C) subunit of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKA) is inhibited by two classes of regulatory subunits, RI and RII. The RII subunits are substrates as well as inhibitors and do not require adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to form holoenzyme, which distinguishes them from RI subunits. To understand the molecular basis for isoform diversity, we solved the crystal structure of an RIIalpha holoenzyme and compared it to the RIalpha holoenzyme. Unphosphorylated RIIalpha(90-400), a deletion mutant, undergoes major conformational changes as both of the cAMP-binding domains wrap around the C subunit's large lobe. The hallmark of this conformational reorganization is the helix switch in domain A. The C subunit is in an open conformation, and its carboxyl-terminal tail is disordered. This structure demonstrates the conserved and isoform-specific features of RI and RII and the importance of ATP, and also provides a new paradigm for designing isoform-specific activators or antagonists for PKA.
Members of the regulators of G protein signaling (RGS) family stimulate the intrinsic guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity of the alpha subunits of certain heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins). The guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for Rho, p115 RhoGEF, has an amino-terminal region with similarity to RGS proteins. Recombinant p115 RhoGEF and a fusion protein containing the amino terminus of p115 had specific activity as GTPase activating proteins toward the alpha subunits of the G proteins G12 and G13, but not toward members of the Gs, Gi, or Gq subfamilies of Galpha proteins. This GEF may act as an intermediary in the regulation of Rho proteins by G13 and G12.
Bacterial promoters are the sites at the 5' end of each gene that bind RNA polymerase and direct the initiation of transcription. The functional elements of Escherichia coli promoters are two highly conserved sequences, each about six nucleotides long, usually centred at sites -10 and -35, +1 being the initiating nucleotide. We have been interested in the structure of promoters of genes that are subject to stringent control, that is whose expression is reduced in conditions of amino acid shortage, such as rRNA and tRNA genes. We have therefore mapped the sequences involved in promoting in vivo transcription of a bacterial tRNATyr (tyrT) gene by fusing the tyrT promoter region to a galactokinase (galK) gene, and using in vivo expression of galactokinase activity to measure promoter strength. We show here that efficient expression from the tyrT promoter requires specific sequences upstream of the canonical promoter elements, and we suggest that these sequences constitute an extended promoter structure.
Ribonucleotide reductase, an essential enzyme for the synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides, is formed by the association of two nonidentical subunits in almost all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. The same model probably holds for the herpes simplex virus (HSV)-encoded ribonucleotide reductase; two polypeptides of relative molecular mass 136,000 (136K; H1) and 40K (H2) (referred to elsewhere as RR1 and RR2; see for example, Dutia et al.) have been associated with the viral enzyme by both genetic and immunological studies. Furthermore, DNA sequence analyses have shown significant stretches of amino-acid homology between these viral polypeptides and those of, respectively, subunit 1 (ref. 12) and subunit 2 (ref. 13) of the Escherichia coli and mammalian enzymes. To assess the involvement of the 40K polypeptide in reductase activity, we synthesized a nonapeptide corresponding to the sequence of its carboxy terminus with the intention of raising neutralizing antibodies specific for the viral activity (E.A.C. et al., in preparation). We report here the unexpected finding that the nonapeptide itself specifically inhibits the HSV ribonucleotide reductase activity in a reversible, non-competitive manner, and we suggest that it does this by impairment of the correct association of the two subunits. This phenomenon emphasizes the potential usefulness of synthetic peptides in probing critical sites involved in macromolecular interactions.
The enzyme ribonucleotide reductase furnishes precursors for the DNA synthesis of all living cells. One of its constituents, the free radical protein, has an unusual alpha-helical structure. There are two iron centres that are about 25 A apart in the dimeric molecule. Tyrosine 122, which harbours the stable free radical necessary for the activity of ribonucleotide reductase, is buried inside the protein and is located 5 A from the closest iron atom.
The function of the 30-kilodalton movement protein (MP) of tobacco mosaic virus is to facilitate cell-to-cell movement of viral progeny in an infected plant. A novel method for delivering non-plasmalemma-permeable fluorescent probes to the cytosol of spongy mesophyll cells of tobacco leaves was used to study plasmodesmatal size exclusion limits in transgenic plants that express the MP gene. Movement of fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled dextran (F-dextran) with an average molecular mass of 9400 daltons and an approximate Stokes radius of 2.4 nanometers was detected between cells of the transgenic plants, whereas the size exclusion limit for the control plants was 700 to 800 daltons. No evidence of F-dextran metabolism in the leaves of the transgenic plants was found. Thus, the tobacco mosaic virus movement protein has a direct effect on a plasmodesmatal function.
Thromboxane A2 is a very unstable arachidonate metabolite, yet a potent stimulator of platelet aggregation and a constrictor of vascular and respiratory smooth muscles. It has been implicated as a mediator in diseases such as myocardial infarction, stroke and bronchial asthma. Using a stable analogue of this compound we recently purified the human platelet thromboxane A2 receptor to apparent homogeneity. Using an oligonucleotide probe corresponding to its partial amino-acid sequence, we have obtained a complementary DNA clone encoding this receptor from human placenta and a partial clone from cultured human megakaryocytic leukaemia cells. The placenta cDNA encodes a protein of 343 amino acids with seven putative transmembrane domains. The protein expressed in COS-7 cells binds drugs with affinities identical to those of the platelet receptor, and that in Xenopus oocytes opens Ca2(+)-activated Cl- channel on agonist stimulation. Northern blot analysis and nucleotide sequences of the two clones suggest that an identical species of the thromboxane A2 receptor is present in platelets and vascular tissues. This first report on the molecular structure of an eicosanoid receptor will promote the molecular pharmacology and pathophysiology of these bioactive compounds.
A drug-induced stimulation of heme biosynthesis in mouse liver was accompanied by altered fumarate metabolism. In liver homogenate, fumarate 1,4-C(14) was incorporated, via succinate and succinyl coenzyme A, into heme at an accelerated rate. This pathway of fumarate utilization was inhibited by acetoacetate but not by beta-hydroxybutyrate. Fumarate reduction to succinate required reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. The enzyme fumarate reductase is suggested as a link between terminal oxidation and cellular control of the heme biosynthetic pathway.
Penicillin acylase (penicillin amidohydrolase, EC 3.5.1.11) is widely distributed among microorganisms, including bacteria, yeast and filamentous fungi. It is used on an industrial scale for the production of 6-aminopenicillanic acid, the starting material for the synthesis of semi-synthetic penicillins. Its in vivo role remains unclear, however, and the observation that expression of the Escherichia coli enzyme in vivo is regulated by both temperature and phenylacetic acid has prompted speculation that the enzyme could be involved in the assimilation of aromatic compounds as carbon sources in the organism's free-living mode. The mature E. coli enzyme is a periplasmic 80K heterodimer of A and B chains (209 and 566 amino acids, respectively) synthesized as a single cytoplasmic precursor containing a 26-amino-acid signal sequence to direct export to the cytoplasm and a 54-amino-acid spacer between the A and B chains which may influence the final folding of the chains. The N-terminal serine of the B chain reacts with phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride, which is consistent with a catalytic role for the serine hydroxyl group. Modifying this serine to a cysteine inactivates the enzyme, whereas threonine, arginine or glycine substitution prevents in vivo processing of the enzyme, indicating that this must be an important recognition site for cleavage. Here we report the crystal structure of penicillin acylase at 1.9 A resolution. Our analysis shows that the environment of the catalytically active N-terminal serine of the B chain contains no adjacent histidine equivalent to that found in the serine proteases. The nearest base to the hydroxyl of this serine is its own alpha-amino group, which may act by a new mechanism to endow the enzyme with its catalytic properties.
Light absorption by rhodopsin generates metarhodopsin, which activates heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) in photoreceptor cells of vertebrates and invertebrates. In contrast to vertebrate metarhodopsins, most invertebrate metarhodopsins are thermally stable and regenerate rhodopsin by absorption of a second photon. In experiments with Rh1 Drosophila rhodopsin, the thermal stability of metarhodopsin was found not to be an intrinsic property of the visual pigment but a consequence of its interaction with arrestin (49 kilodaltons). The stabilization of metarhodopsin resulted in a large decrease in the efficiency of G protein activation. Light absorption by thermally stable metarhodopsin initially regenerated an inactive rhodopsin-like intermediate, which was subsequently converted in the dark to active rhodopsin. The accumulation of inactive rhodopsin at higher light levels may represent a mechanism for gain regulation in the insect visual cycle.
The UmuD'2C protein complex (Escherichia coli pol V) is a low-fidelity DNA polymerase (pol) that copies damaged DNA in the presence of RecA, single-stranded-DNA binding protein (SSB) and the beta,gamma-processivity complex of E. coli pol III (ref. 4). Here we propose a model to explain SOS-lesion-targeted mutagenesis, assigning specific biochemical functions for each protein during translesion synthesis. (SOS lesion-targeted mutagenesis occurs when pol V is induced as part of the SOS response to DNA damage and incorrectly incorporates nucleotides opposite template lesions.) Pol V plus SSB catalyses RecA filament disassembly in the 3' to 5' direction on the template, ahead of the polymerase, in a reaction that does not involve ATP hydrolysis. Concurrent ATP-hydrolysis-driven filament disassembly in the 5' to 3' direction results in a bidirectional stripping of RecA from the template strand. The bidirectional collapse of the RecA filament restricts DNA synthesis by pol V to template sites that are proximal to the lesion, thereby minimizing the occurrence of untargeted mutations at undamaged template sites.
Based on precedents from other retroviruses, the precursor of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase is predicted to be a polyprotein with a relative molecular mass (Mr) of 160,000 (160K) encoded by both the viral pol gene and the upstream gag gene. These two genes lie in different translational reading frames, with the 3' end of gag overlapping the 5' end of pol by 205 or 241 nucleotides. Thus, production of the gag-pol fusion protein would require either messenger RNA processing or translational frameshifting. The latter mechanism has been shown in the synthesis of the gag-pol proteins of two other retroviruses, Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) and mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV). Here we report that translation of HIV-1 RNA synthesized in vitro by SP6 RNA polymerase yields significant amounts of a gag-pol fusion protein, indicating that efficient ribosomal frameshifting also occurs within the HIV-1 gag-pol overlap region. Site-directed mutagenesis and amino-acid sequencing localized the site of frameshifting to a UUA leucine codon near the 5' end of the overlap.
In the ovules of most sexual flowering plants female gametogenesis is initiated from a single surviving gametic cell, the functional megaspore, formed after meiosis of the somatically derived megaspore mother cell (MMC). Because some mutants and certain sexual species exhibit more than one MMC, and many others are able to form gametes without meiosis (by apomixis), it has been suggested that somatic cells in the ovule are competent to respond to a local signal likely to have an important function in determination. Here we show that the Arabidopsis protein ARGONAUTE 9 (AGO9) controls female gamete formation by restricting the specification of gametophyte precursors in a dosage-dependent, non-cell-autonomous manner. Mutations in AGO9 lead to the differentiation of multiple gametic cells that are able to initiate gametogenesis. The AGO9 protein is not expressed in the gamete lineage; instead, it is expressed in cytoplasmic foci of somatic companion cells. Mutations in SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING 3 and RNA-DEPENDENT RNA POLYMERASE 6 exhibit an identical defect to ago9 mutants, indicating that the movement of small RNA (sRNAs) silencing out of somatic companion cells is necessary for controlling the specification of gametic cells. AGO9 preferentially interacts with 24-nucleotide sRNAs derived from transposable elements (TEs), and its activity is necessary to silence TEs in female gametes and their accessory cells. Our results show that AGO9-dependent sRNA silencing is crucial to specify cell fate in the Arabidopsis ovule, and that epigenetic reprogramming in companion cells is necessary for sRNA-dependent silencing in plant gametes.
The hydrogen-bonding status of His57 in the catalytic triad (Asp-His-Ser) of serine protease has important mechanistic implications for this class of enzymes. Recent nitrogen-15 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies of alpha-lytic protease find His57 and Ser195 to be strongly hydrogen-bonded, a result that conflicts with the corresponding crystallographic studies, thereby suggesting that the crystal and solution structures may differ. This discrepancy is addressed and resolved in a nitrogen-15 NMR study of the enzyme in the crystalline state. The results show that the His-Ser and Asp-His interactions are identical in crystals and solutions, but that in crystals His57 titrates with a pKa of 7.9, nearly one pKa unit higher than in solution. This elevated pKa accounts for the absence of the His-Ser hydrogen bond in previous x-ray studies.
Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis of the codons for glutamine-68 (Gln68), lysine-72 (Lys72), isoleucine-79 (Ile79), alanine-80 (Ala80), and threonine-81 (Thr81) of the Escherichia coli trpR (tryptophan aporepressor) gene was used to make mutant repressors with each of 36 different amino acid changes. Mutant repressors were tested for binding to each member of a set of 28 different operators closely related to the consensus trp operator. Of the 36 mutant repressors, 11 bind a subset of the 28 operators; 5 of these have new binding specificities. These new specificities indicate that the hydroxyl group of Thr81 makes a specific contact with one of the four critical base pairs in a trp operator half-site, and the methyl group of Thr81 determines specificity at a second, critical base pair. The Trp repressor does not use the first two amino acids of its "recognition alpha-helix," Ile79 and Ala80, to make sequence-specific DNA contacts, and interacts with its operator in vivo in a way fundamentally different from the way that phage lambda repressor, lambda Cro protein, and coliphage 434 repressor contact their respective binding sites.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a trophic agent that promotes the outgrowth of nerve fibers from sympathetic and sensory ganglia. The neuronal differentiation stimulated by this hormone was examined in the NGF-responsive cell line PC12. Differential hybridization was used to screen a complementary DNA library constructed from PC12 cells treated with NGF and cycloheximide. One of the complementary DNA clones that was rapidly induced by NGF was found to have a nucleotide sequence that predicts a 54-kilodalton protein with homology to transcriptional regulatory proteins. This clone, NGFI-A, contains three tandemly repeated copies of the 28- to 30-amino acid "zinc finger" domain present in Xenopus laevis TFIIIA and other DNA-binding proteins. It also contains another highly conserved unit of eight amino acids that is repeated at least 11 times. The NGFI-A gene is expressed at relatively high levels in the brain, lung, and superior cervical ganglion of the adult rat.
Nucleosome organization is critical for gene regulation. In living cells this organization is determined by multiple factors, including the action of chromatin remodellers, competition with site-specific DNA-binding proteins, and the DNA sequence preferences of the nucleosomes themselves. However, it has been difficult to estimate the relative importance of each of these mechanisms in vivo, because in vivo nucleosome maps reflect the combined action of all influencing factors. Here we determine the importance of nucleosome DNA sequence preferences experimentally by measuring the genome-wide occupancy of nucleosomes assembled on purified yeast genomic DNA. The resulting map, in which nucleosome occupancy is governed only by the intrinsic sequence preferences of nucleosomes, is similar to in vivo nucleosome maps generated in three different growth conditions. In vitro, nucleosome depletion is evident at many transcription factor binding sites and around gene start and end sites, indicating that nucleosome depletion at these sites in vivo is partly encoded in the genome. We confirm these results with a micrococcal nuclease-independent experiment that measures the relative affinity of nucleosomes for approximately 40,000 double-stranded 150-base-pair oligonucleotides. Using our in vitro data, we devise a computational model of nucleosome sequence preferences that is significantly correlated with in vivo nucleosome occupancy in Caenorhabditis elegans. Our results indicate that the intrinsic DNA sequence preferences of nucleosomes have a central role in determining the organization of nucleosomes in vivo.
Resistance to isoniazid in Mycobacterium tuberculosis can be mediated by substitution of alanine for serine 94 in the InhA protein, the drug's primary target. InhA was shown to catalyze the beta-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)-specific reduction of 2-trans-enoyl-acyl carrier protein, an essential step in fatty acid elongation. Kinetic analyses suggested that isoniazid resistance is due to a decreased affinity of the mutant protein for NADH. The three-dimensional structures of wild-type and mutant InhA, refined to 2.2 and 2.7 angstroms, respectively, revealed that drug resistance is directly related to a perturbation in the hydrogen-bonding network that stabilizes NADH binding.
CRM1 (also known as XPO1 and exportin 1) mediates nuclear export of hundreds of proteins through the recognition of the leucine-rich nuclear export signal (LR-NES). Here we present the 2.9 A structure of CRM1 bound to snurportin 1 (SNUPN). Snurportin 1 binds CRM1 in a bipartite manner by means of an amino-terminal LR-NES and its nucleotide-binding domain. The LR-NES is a combined alpha-helical-extended structure that occupies a hydrophobic groove between two CRM1 outer helices. The LR-NES interface explains the consensus hydrophobic pattern, preference for intervening electronegative residues and inhibition by leptomycin B. The second nuclear export signal epitope is a basic surface on the snurportin 1 nucleotide-binding domain, which binds an acidic patch on CRM1 adjacent to the LR-NES site. Multipartite recognition of individually weak nuclear export signal epitopes may be common to CRM1 substrates, enhancing CRM1 binding beyond the generally low affinity LR-NES. Similar energetic construction is also used in multipartite nuclear localization signals to provide broad substrate specificity and rapid evolution in nuclear transport.
TMV RNA is not an efficient template for translation of the viral coat protein, in spite of containing nucleotide sequences coding for the protein. Efficient translation requires the prior synthesis within infected cells of a smaller RNA carrying only a portion of the information encoded in the whole genome.
The degradation of cytoplasmic proteins is an ATP-dependent process. Substrates are targeted to a single soluble protease, the 26S proteasome, in eukaryotes and to a number of unrelated proteases in prokaryotes. A surprising link emerged with the discovery of the ATP-dependent protease HslVU (heat shock locus VU) in Escherichia coli. Its protease component HslV shares approximately 20% sequence similarity and a conserved fold with 20S proteasome beta-subunits. HslU is a member of the Hsp100 (Clp) family of ATPases. Here we report the crystal structures of free HslU and an 820,000 relative molecular mass complex of HslU and HslV-the first structure of a complete set of components of an ATP-dependent protease. HslV and HslU display sixfold symmetry, ruling out mechanisms of protease activation that require a symmetry mismatch between the two components. Instead, there is conformational flexibility and domain motion in HslU and a localized order-disorder transition in HslV. Individual subunits of HslU contain two globular domains in relative orientations that correlate with nucleotide bound and unbound states. They are surprisingly similar to their counterparts in N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein, the prototype of an AAA-ATPase. A third, mostly alpha-helical domain in HslU mediates the contact with HslV and may be the structural equivalent of the amino-terminal domains in proteasomal AAA-ATPases.
Two triglyceride lipases, lipoprotein lipase and hepatic triglyceride lipase, participate in the metabolism of plasma lipoproteins. A single recessive mutation, cld, on mouse chromosome 17 causes an apparent deficiency of both lipoprotein lipase and hepatic triglyceride lipase activities. Mice homozygous for this defect develop lethal hyperchylomicronemia within 2 days postpartum as a consequence of nursing. Plasma triglyceride values in affected mice often reach 20,000 milligrams per deciliter (100 times higher than that in normal littermates), and total lipase activity in plasma or tissues is 5 to 20 percent of that in controls.
The structure of the general transcription factor IIB (TFIIB) in a complex with RNA polymerase II reveals three features crucial for transcription initiation: an N-terminal zinc ribbon domain of TFIIB that contacts the "dock" domain of the polymerase, near the path of RNA exit from a transcribing enzyme; a "finger" domain of TFIIB that is inserted into the polymerase active center; and a C-terminal domain, whose interaction with both the polymerase and with a TATA box-binding protein (TBP)-promoter DNA complex orients the DNA for unwinding and transcription. TFIIB stabilizes an early initiation complex, containing an incomplete RNA-DNA hybrid region. It may interact with the template strand, which sets the location of the transcription start site, and may interfere with RNA exit, which leads to abortive initiation or promoter escape. The trajectory of promoter DNA determined by the C-terminal domain of TFIIB traverses sites of interaction with TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH, serving to define their roles in the transcription initiation process.
Urea is the principal end product of nitrogen metabolism in mammals. Movement of urea across cell membranes was originally thought to occur by lipid-phase permeation, but recent studies have revealed the existence of specialized transporters with a low affinity for urea (Km > 200 mM)2. Here we report the isolation of a complementary DNA from rabbit renal medulla that encodes a 397-amino-acid membrane glycoprotein, UT2, with the functional characteristics of the vasopressin-sensitive urea transporter previously described in in vitro-perfused inner medullary collecting ducts. UT2 is not homologous to any known protein and displays a unique pattern of hydrophobicity. Because of the central role of this transporter in fluid balance and nitrogen metabolism, the study of this protein will provide important insights into the urinary concentrating mechanism and nitrogen balance.
Many helicases modulate recombination, an essential process that needs to be tightly controlled. Mutations in some human disease helicases cause increased recombination, genome instability and cancer. To elucidate the potential mode of action of these enzymes, here we developed a single-molecule fluorescence assay that can visualize DNA binding and translocation of Escherichia coli Rep, a superfamily 1 DNA helicase homologous to Saccharomyces cerevisiae Srs2. Individual Rep monomers were observed to move on single-stranded (ss)DNA in the 3' to 5' direction using ATP hydrolysis. Strikingly, on hitting a blockade, such as duplex DNA or streptavidin, the protein abruptly snapped back close to its initial position, followed by further cycles of translocation and snapback. This repetitive shuttling is likely to be caused by a blockade-induced protein conformational change that enhances DNA affinity for the protein's secondary DNA binding site, thereby resulting in a transient DNA loop. Repetitive shuttling was also observed on ssDNA bounded by a stalled replication fork and an Okazaki fragment analogue, and the presence of Rep delayed formation of a filament of recombination protein RecA on ssDNA. Thus, the binding of a single Rep monomer to a stalled replication fork can lead to repetitive shuttling along the single-stranded region, possibly keeping the DNA clear of toxic recombination intermediates.
The hypothesis that cyclic nucleotides are intracellular second messengers mediating the generation of synaptic potentials was studied in the sympathetic ganglia of the bullfrog. Synaptic potentials and the effect of administering cyclic nucleotides and agents which affect cyclic nucleotide metabolism were recorded by the sucrose gap technique. The administration of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP), guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic GMP), or several of their derivatives produced little or no change in membrane potential. Prostaglandin E1 did not block the generation of postsynaptic potentials. Theophylline produced membrane effects that were different from those associated with postsynaptic potential generation; it also reduced the slow excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) and potentiated the slow inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP). The administration of papaverine, however, reduced both the slow EPSP and the slow IPSP. Although synaptic stimulation increases both cyclic GMP and cyclic AMP in these neurons, these results raise the possibility that these cyclic nucleotides may have functionla roles other than mediation of synaptic potentials.
Regression of the fetal rat Mullerian duct in vitro was stimulated by sodium fluoride in the absence of Mullerian inhibiting substance. The action of Mullerian inhibiting substance was inhibited by sodium vanadate, adenosine 5'-triphosphate, and several related nucleotides in the presence of manganese ions. Epidermal growth factor specifically inhibited the substance, but only with manganese ions present. Insulin, platelet-derived growth factor, and nerve growth factor had no effect. These results suggest that dephosphorylation of membrane proteins mediates the action of Mullerian inhibiting substance.
Many protein enzymes use general acid-base catalysis as a way to increase reaction rates. The amino acid histidine is optimized for this function because it has a pK(a) (where K(a) is the acid dissociation constant) near physiological pH. The RNA enzyme (ribozyme) from hepatitis delta virus catalyzes self-cleavage of a phosphodiester bond. Reactivity-pH profiles in monovalent or divalent cations, as well as distance to the leaving-group oxygen, implicate cytosine 75 (C75) of the ribozyme as the general acid and ribozyme-bound hydrated metal hydroxide as the general base in the self-cleavage reaction. Moreover, C75 has a pK(a) perturbed to neutrality, making it "histidine-like." Anticooperative interaction is observed between protonated C75 and a metal ion, which serves to modulate the pK(a) of C75. General acid-base catalysis expands the catalytic repertoire of RNA and may provide improved rate acceleration.
Signalling by means of toll-like receptors (TLRs) is essential for the development of innate and adaptive immune responses. UNC93B1, essential for signalling of TLR3, TLR7 and TLR9 in both humans and mice, physically interacts with these TLRs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Here we show that the function of the polytopic membrane protein UNC93B1 is to deliver the nucleotide-sensing receptors TLR7 and TLR9 from the ER to endolysosomes. In dendritic cells of 3d mice, which express an UNC93B1 missense mutant (H412R) incapable of TLR binding, neither TLR7 nor TLR9 exits the ER. Furthermore, the trafficking and signalling defects of the nucleotide-sensing TLRs in 3d dendritic cells are corrected by expression of wild-type UNC93B1. However, UNC93B1 is dispensable for ligand recognition and signal initiation by TLRs. To our knowledge, UNC93B1 is the first protein to be identified as a molecule specifically involved in trafficking of nucleotide-sensing TLRs. By inhibiting the interaction between UNC93B1 and TLRs it should be possible to achieve specific regulation of the nucleotide-sensing TLRs without compromising signalling via the cell-surface-disposed TLRs.
Single particles of the mediator of transcriptional regulation (Mediator) and of RNA polymerase II holoenzyme were revealed by electron microscopy and image processing. Mediator alone appeared compact, but at high pH or in the presence of RNA polymerase II it displayed an extended conformation. Holoenzyme contained Mediator in a fully extended state, partially enveloping the globular polymerase, with points of apparent contact in the vicinity of the polymerase carboxyl-terminal domain and the DNA-binding channel. A similarity in appearance and conformational behavior of yeast and murine complexes indicates a conservation of Mediator structure among eukaryotes.
Dynamin-related proteins (DRPs) are multi-domain GTPases that function via oligomerization and GTP-dependent conformational changes to play central roles in regulating membrane structure across phylogenetic kingdoms. How DRPs harness self-assembly and GTP-dependent conformational changes to remodel membranes is not understood. Here we present the crystal structure of an assembly-deficient mammalian endocytic DRP, dynamin 1, lacking the proline-rich domain, in its nucleotide-free state. The dynamin 1 monomer is an extended structure with the GTPase domain and bundle signalling element positioned on top of a long helical stalk with the pleckstrin homology domain flexibly attached on its opposing end. Dynamin 1 dimer and higher order dimer multimers form via interfaces located in the stalk. Analysis of these interfaces provides insight into DRP family member specificity and regulation and provides a framework for understanding the biogenesis of higher order DRP structures and the mechanism of DRP-mediated membrane scission events.
Alzheimer's disease is characterized by the extracellular deposition in the brain and its blood vessels of insoluble aggregates of the amyloid beta-peptide (A beta), a fragment, of about 40 amino acids in length, of the integral membrane protein beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP). The mechanism of extracellular accumulation of A beta in brain is unknown and no simple in vitro or in vivo model systems that produce extracellular A beta have been described. We report here the unexpected identification of the 4K (M(r) 4,000) A beta and a truncated form of A beta (approximately 3K) in media from cultures of primary cells and untransfected and beta-APP-transfected cell lines grown under normal conditions. These peptides were immunoprecipitated readily from culture medium by A beta-specific antibodies and their identities confirmed by sequencing. The concept that pathological processes are responsible for the production of A beta must not be reassessed in light of the observation that A beta is produced in soluble form in vitro and in vivo during normal cellular metabolism. Further, these findings provide the basis for using simple cell culture systems to identify drugs that block the formation or release of A beta, the primary protein constituent of the senile plaques of Alzheimer's disease.
Cholera toxin (CT) and the Escherichia coli heat-labile toxin (LT) are functionally, structurally and immunologically similar enterotoxins. Both toxins cause the elevation of cyclic AMP levels in gut epithelial cells by catalysing the NAD-dependent ADP ribosylation of membrane proteins. Each toxin is composed of two dissimilar subunits. The A subunit has an enzymatic activity and is the adenylate cyclase-activating component of the enterotoxin. The B subunit recognizes membrane components and binds the holotoxin to the target call juxtaposing the A subunit with its substrates. Binding studies and competition experiments indicate that the membrane receptors for cholera toxin B subunit (CT-B) and LT-B are similar but not identical (these studies were performed before by LT was purified to homogeneity). The monosialosylganglioside GMI has been shown to be the receptor for the cholera toxin, and it probably composes part of the receptor for LT. Gyles and Barnum, first reported that LT and cholera toxin were immunologically related, and it has subsequently been shown that they share common antigenic determinants in both A and B subunits. The primary structure of CT-B has been determined. We report here a comparison between the amino acid sequences of LT-B and CT-B. The nucleotide sequence of the LT-B cistron (eltB) was determined using a recombinant plasmid encoding LT. Translation of this sequence revealed that LT-B and CT-B show significant amino acid sequence homology. In addition, several features of the eltB cistron were revealed by the sequence analysis.
A transition state analogue was used to produce a mouse antibody that catalyzes transesterification in water. The antibody behaves as a highly efficient catalyst with a covalent intermediate and the characteristic of induced fit. While some features of the catalytic pathway were programmed when the hapten was designed and reflect favorable substrate-antibody interactions, other features are a manifestation of the chemical potential of antibody diversity. The fact that antibodies recapitulate mechanisms and pathways previously thought to be a characteristic of highly evolved enzymes suggests that once an appropriate binding cavity is achieved, reaction pathways commensurate with the intrinsic chemical potential of proteins ensue.
Heterochromatin in eukaryotic genomes regulates diverse chromosomal processes including transcriptional silencing. However, in Schizosaccharomyces pombe RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) transcription of centromeric repeats is essential for RNA-interference-mediated heterochromatin assembly. Here we study heterochromatin dynamics during the cell cycle and its effect on RNAPII transcription. We describe a brief period during the S phase of the cell cycle in which RNAPII preferentially transcribes centromeric repeats. This period is enforced by heterochromatin, which restricts RNAPII accessibility at centromeric repeats for most of the cell cycle. RNAPII transcription during S phase is linked to loading of RNA interference and heterochromatin factors such as the Ago1 subunit of the RITS complex and the Clr4 methyltransferase complex subunit Rik1 (ref. 7). Moreover, Set2, an RNAPII-associated methyltransferase that methylates histone H3 lysine 36 at repeat loci during S phase, acts in a pathway parallel to Clr4 to promote heterochromatin assembly. We also show that phosphorylation of histone H3 serine 10 alters heterochromatin during mitosis, correlating with recruitment of condensin that affects silencing of centromeric repeats. Our analyses suggest at least two distinct modes of heterochromatin targeting to centromeric repeats, whereby RNAPII transcription of repeats and chromodomain proteins bound to methylated histone H3 lysine 9 mediate recruitment of silencing factors. Together, these processes probably facilitate heterochromatin maintenance through successive cell divisions.
Human apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease (APE1) is an essential enzyme in DNA base excision repair that cuts the DNA backbone immediately adjacent to the 5' side of abasic sites to facilitate repair synthesis by DNA polymerase beta (ref. 1). Mice lacking the murine homologue of APE1 die at an early embryonic stage. Here we report that APE1 has a DNA exonuclease activity on mismatched deoxyribonucleotides at the 3' termini of nicked or gapped DNA molecules. The efficiency of this activity is inversely proportional to the gap size in DNA. In a base excision repair system reconstituted in vitro, the rejoining of nicked mismatched DNA depended on the presence of APE1, indicating that APE1 may increase the fidelity of base excision repair and may represent a new 3' mispaired DNA repair mechanism. The exonuclease activity of APE1 can remove the anti-HIV nucleoside analogues 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine and 2',3'-didehydro-2', 3'-dideoxythymidine from DNA, suggesting that APE1 might have an impact on the therapeutic index of antiviral compounds in this category.
A triple helix is formed upon binding of an oligodeoxynucleotide to the major groove of duplex DNA. A benzo[e]pyridoindole derivative (BePI) strongly stabilized this structure and showed preferential binding to a triplex rather than to a duplex. Energy transfer experiments suggest that BePI intercalates within the triple helix. Sequence-specific inhibition of transcription initiation of a specific gene by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase by a triplex-forming oligodeoxynucleotide is strongly enhanced when the triplex is stabilized by BePI. Upon irradiation with ultraviolet light, BePI induces covalent modifications of the target within the triple helix structure.
The cascade of biochemical events triggered by growth factors and their receptors is central to understanding normal cell-growth regulation and its subversion in cancer. Ras proteins (p21ras) have been implicated in signal transduction pathways used by several growth factors, including platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). These guanine nucleotide-binding Ras proteins specifically interact with a cellular GTPase-activating protein (GAP). Here we report that in intact quiescent fibroblasts, both AA and BB homodimers of PDGF rapidly induce tyrosine phosphorylation of GAP under conditions in which insulin and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) are ineffective. Although GAP is located predominantly in the cytosol, most tyrosine-phosphorylated GAP is associated with the cell membrane, the site of p21ras biological activity. These results provide a direct biochemical link between activated PDGF-receptor tyrosine kinases and the p21ras-GAP mitogenic signalling system.
Two general models have been proposed for DNA replication. In one model, DNA polymerase moves along the DNA (like a train on a track); in the other model, the polymerase is stationary (like a factory), and DNA is pulled through. To distinguish between these models, we visualized DNA polymerase of the bacterium Bacillus subtilis in living cells by the creation of a fusion protein containing the catalytic subunit (PolC) and green fluorescent protein (GFP). PolC-GFP was localized at discrete intracellular positions, predominantly at or near midcell, rather than being distributed randomly. These results suggest that the polymerase is anchored in place and thus support the model in which the DNA template moves through the polymerase.
Much attention has focused on the aetiology of oxidative damage in cellular and organismal ageing. Especially toxic are the reactive oxygen byproducts of respiration and other biological processes. A mev-1(kn1) mutant of Caenorhabditis elegans has been found to be hypersensitive to raised oxygen concentrations. Unlike the wild type, its lifespan decreases dramatically as oxygen concentrations are increased from 1 to 60%. Strains bearing this mutation accumulate markers of ageing (such as fluorescent materials and protein carbonyls) faster than the wild type. We show here that mev-1 encodes a subunit of the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase cytochrome b, which is a component of complex II of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. We found that the ability of complex II to catalyse electron transport from succinate to ubiquinone is compromised in mev-1 animals. This may cause an indirect increase in superoxide levels, which in turn leads to oxygen hypersensitivity and premature ageing. Our results indicate that mev-1 governs the rate of ageing by modulating the cellular response to oxidative stress.
Angiotensin I convertase activity has been found in human alveolar macrophages from normal volunteers and patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis. This activity is higher in the alveolar macrophages from smokers than from nonsmokers, and is even more elevated in sarcoid patients. The activity can be detected with both angiotensin I and bradykinin analogs and appears to require protein synthesis, but the enzyme is not secreted by alveolar macrophages in culture.
Human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is the etiological agent for adult T cell leukemia (ATL). The HTLV-I trans-activator protein Tax can activate the expression of its own long terminal repeat (LTR) and many cellular and viral genes. Tax down-regulated the expression of human beta-polymerase (hu beta-pol), a cellular enzyme involved in host cell DNA repair. This finding suggests a possible correlation between HTLV-I infection and host chromosomal damage, which is often seen in ATL cells.
Host defence and inflammatory responses are controlled and amplified by receptor-mediated events often initiated by a chemotactic factor that directs the approach of phagocytic cells. Complement receptors CR1 and CR3 are responsible for the phagocytic and adhesive properties of neutrophils, whereas the C5a receptor mediates the pro-inflammatory and chemotactic actions of the complement anaphylatoxin C5a. In addition to stimulating chemotaxis, granule enzyme release and superoxide anion production, this receptor stimulates upregulation of expression and activity of the adhesion molecule MAC-1, and of CR1, and a decrease in cell-surface glycoprotein 100MEL-14 on neutrophils. In vivo, the C5a receptor may participate in anaphylactoid and septic shock. The human C5a receptor was cloned from U937 and HL-60 cells and identified by high affinity binding when expressed in COS-7 cells. The deduced amino-acid sequence of the receptor reveals the expected motifs befitting its interaction with cellular GTP-binding proteins.
The tumour suppressor p53 specifically interferes with the onset of S phase. The mechanism of the growth suppression action of the protein is unclear, though recent evidence points to transcriptional activation and repression functions of the protein. A competing hypothesis suggests that p53 interacts with the DNA replication apparatus and directly interferes with DNA replication. The major evidence for this hypothesis is that p53 interacts with the simian virus 40 (SV40)-encoded protein T antigen and interferes with the ability of T antigen to unwind the SV40 origin of DNA replication, and recruit DNA polymerase alpha to the replication initiation complex. Here we report that p53 physically interacts with and inhibits the function of a cellular DNA replication factor, the single-stranded DNA-binding protein complex RPA.
Frozen and thawed granules of human, peripheral-blood leukocytes rapidly produce hemorrhage when injected into animal tissues. The effect is blocked by inhibitors of proteolysis. The granule extract can digest vascular basement membrane in vitro at neutral pH. In addition, basement membranes of blood vessels damaged in vivo by the leukocyte fraction are found to be attenuated when examined by electron microscopy. The proteases of human leukocyte granules differ in several important respects from known lysosomal cathepsins and trypsin-like esterases. Polymorphonuclear neutrophils are a major source of the neutral proteases present in circulating white cells, and release these enzymes during phagocytosis of immune complexes.
TAL effectors of plant pathogenic bacteria in the genus Xanthomonas bind host DNA and activate genes that contribute to disease or turn on defense. Target specificity depends on an effector-variable number of typically 34 amino acid repeats, but the mechanism of recognition is not understood. We show that a repeat-variable pair of residues specifies the nucleotides in the target site, one pair to one nucleotide, with no apparent context dependence. Our finding represents a previously unknown mechanism for protein-DNA recognition that explains TAL effector specificity, enables target site prediction, and opens prospects for use of TAL effectors in research and biotechnology.
Eukaryotic DNA polymerase beta (pol beta) can catalyze DNA synthesis during base excision DNA repair. It is shown here that pol beta also catalyzes release of 5'-terminal deoxyribose phosphate (dRP) residues from incised apurinic-apyrimidinic sites, which are common intermediate products in base excision repair. The catalytic domain for this activity resides within an amino-terminal 8-kilodalton fragment of pol beta, which comprises a distinct structural domain of the enzyme. Magnesium is required for the release of dRP from double-stranded DNA but not from a single-stranded oligonucleotide. Analysis of the released products indicates that the excision reaction occurs by beta-elimination rather than hydrolysis.
In eight highly inducible strains of Staphylococcus aureus repression of the formation of penicillinase was temperature-sensitive under conditions suggesting direct thermal inactivation of the repressor. Restoration of repression required protein synthesis. These strains were resistant to benzylpenicillin and to many other antibiotics. One auxotrophic mutant had gredtly reduced temperature sensitivity but was still normally inducible. Six strains were relatively poorly inducible, exhibited a proportionately smaller increase in enzyme after exposure to elevated temperature, and were sensitive to antibiotics other than benzylpenicillin. Temperature sensitivity may be a useful character in studies of the physiology and genetics of the repression of staphylococcal penicillinase.
Uridine at the first anticodon position (U34) of glutamate, lysine and glutamine transfer RNAs is universally modified by thiouridylase into 2-thiouridine (s2U34), which is crucial for precise translation by restricting codon-anticodon wobble during protein synthesis on the ribosome. However, it remains unclear how the enzyme incorporates reactive sulphur into the correct position of the uridine base. Here we present the crystal structures of the MnmA thiouridylase-tRNA complex in three discrete forms, which provide snapshots of the sequential chemical reactions during RNA sulphuration. On enzyme activation, an alpha-helix overhanging the active site is restructured into an idiosyncratic beta-hairpin-containing loop, which packs the flipped-out U34 deeply into the catalytic pocket and triggers the activation of the catalytic cysteine residues. The adenylated RNA intermediate is trapped. Thus, the active closed-conformation of the complex ensures accurate sulphur incorporation into the activated uridine carbon by forming a catalytic chamber to prevent solvent from accessing the catalytic site. The structures of the complex with glutamate tRNA further reveal how MnmA specifically recognizes its three different tRNA substrates. These findings provide the structural basis for a general mechanism whereby an enzyme incorporates a reactive atom at a precise position in a biological molecule.
In a conventional class I ribonucleotide reductase (RNR), a diiron(II/II) cofactor in the R2 subunit reacts with oxygen to produce a diiron(III/IV) intermediate, which generates a stable tyrosyl radical (Y*). The Y* reversibly oxidizes a cysteine residue in the R1 subunit to a cysteinyl radical (C*), which abstracts the 3'-hydrogen of the substrate to initiate its reduction. The RNR from Chlamydia trachomatis lacks the Y*, and it had been proposed that the diiron(III/IV) complex in R2 directly generates the C* in R1. By enzyme activity measurements and spectroscopic methods, we show that this RNR actually uses a previously unknown stable manganese(IV)/iron(III) cofactor for radical initiation.
The enzyme shown in the photo on page 1363 accompanying the 11 March ScienceScope item "Lobbying backfires on LBL, Berkeley" was not a "designed enzyme" or an engineered protein, nor was it human glutathione S-transferase. It is a representation of the mu 3-3 isozyme of rat liver glutathione S-transferase with an inhibitor, 9-(S-glutathionyl)-10-hydroxy-9, 10-dihydrophenanthrene. The structure was determined at the Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnology as a result of collaborative work between the laboratory of Gary L. Gilliland and that of Richard Armstrong in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Maryland, College Park [X. Ji et al., Biochemistry 33, 1043 (1994)].
Yersinia species use a variety of type III effector proteins to target eukaryotic signaling systems. The effector YopJ inhibits mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and the nuclear factor kappaB (NFkappaB) signaling pathways used in innate immune response by preventing activation of the family of MAPK kinases (MAPKK). We show that YopJ acted as an acetyltransferase, using acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) to modify the critical serine and threonine residues in the activation loop of MAPKK6 and thereby blocking phosphorylation. The acetylation on MAPKK6 directly competed with phosphorylation, preventing activation of the modified protein. This covalent modification may be used as a general regulatory mechanism in biological signaling.
In addition to its well-established inhibitory effect on uric acid synthesis, allopurinol appears to alter substantially pyrimidine metabolism, as evidenced by a striking increase in the urinary excretion of orotidine and orotic acid. Allopurinol ribonucleotide and xanthosine 5'-monophosphate are potent inhibitors of human erythrocyte orotidylic decarboxylase and provide a possible mechanism for this effect.
When sulfur-35-labeled sodium sulfate is injected intraocularly in the goldfish, labeled sulfated mucopolysaccharides rapidly appear in the contra-lateral optic tectum of the brain, demonstrating the axonal flow of sulfated mucopolysaccharides. The transport rate is the same as that observed for proteins labeled after intraocular injection of tritiated proline. Treatment of the sulfur-35-labeled material with precipitants and enzymes reveals the presence of substances with properties similar to those of heparan sulfate (the major component) and chondroitin sulfate. Dermatan sulfate was not detected.
The various events which result in modification of a primary RNA transcipt may have a role in choosing transcripts which are to be processed into mRNA. If there is a stepwise and interdependent nature to each of the modifications then it is important to place the various steps in temporal order. We show here that the formation of a capped 5' terminus seems to be a very early event for adenovirus type 2 (Ad-2) nuclear RNA that is initiated at the major late Ad-2 promoter. There is an equally rapid entry of 3H-adenosine into the cap and the first dozen or so adenylate residues in the RNA chain. Taken together with evidence on general mRNA metabolism in Chinese hamster cells, it seems unlikely that capping has any differential role in successful RNA processing rather is an automatic event for all RNA polymerase II products.
Features of the physical environment surrounding an ancestral organism can be inferred by reconstructing sequences of ancient proteins made by those organisms, resurrecting these proteins in the laboratory, and measuring their properties. Here, we resurrect candidate sequences for elongation factors of the Tu family (EF-Tu) found at ancient nodes in the bacterial evolutionary tree, and measure their activities as a function of temperature. The ancient EF-Tu proteins have temperature optima of 55-65 degrees C. This value seems to be robust with respect to uncertainties in the ancestral reconstruction. This suggests that the ancient bacteria that hosted these particular genes were thermophiles, and neither hyperthermophiles nor mesophiles. This conclusion can be compared and contrasted with inferences drawn from an analysis of the lengths of branches in trees joining proteins from contemporary bacteria, the distribution of thermophily in derived bacterial lineages, the inferred G + C content of ancient ribosomal RNA, and the geological record combined with assumptions concerning molecular clocks. The study illustrates the use of experimental palaeobiochemistry and assumptions about deep phylogenetic relationships between bacteria to explore the character of ancient life.
Disulfide bonds are rarely found in cytoplasmic proteins. Mutations were selected for in Escherichia coli that allow disulfide bond formation in the cytoplasm. In the presence of these mutations, export-defective versions of alkaline phosphatase and mouse urokinase were able to fold into their enzymatically active conformations in the cytoplasm because their disulfide bonds were formed. The mutations were mapped to the gene for thioredoxin reductase and diminish or eliminate the activity of this enzyme. Thioredoxin itself was found to be unnecessary for this disulfide bond formation. Thioredoxin reductase, but not thioredoxin, is thus implicated in keeping cysteines reduced in cytoplasmic proteins.
The long-standing assumption that messenger RNA (mRNA) degradation in Escherichia coli begins with endonucleolytic cleavage has been challenged by the recent discovery that RNA decay can be triggered by a prior non-nucleolytic event that marks transcripts for rapid turnover: the rate-determining conversion of the 5' terminus from a triphosphate to a monophosphate. This modification creates better substrates for the endonuclease RNase E, whose cleavage activity at internal sites is greatly enhanced when the RNA 5' end is monophosphorylated. Moreover, it suggests an explanation for the influence of 5' termini on the endonucleolytic cleavage of primary transcripts, which are triphosphorylated. However, no enzyme capable of removing pyrophosphate from RNA 5' ends has been identified in any bacterial species. Here we show that the E. coli protein RppH (formerly NudH/YgdP) is the RNA pyrophosphohydrolase that initiates mRNA decay by this 5'-end-dependent pathway. In vitro, RppH efficiently removes pyrophosphate from the 5' end of triphosphorylated RNA, irrespective of the identity of the 5'-terminal nucleotide. In vivo, it accelerates the degradation of hundreds of E. coli transcripts by converting their triphosphorylated 5' ends to a more labile monophosphorylated state that can stimulate subsequent ribonuclease cleavage. That the action of the pyrophosphohydrolase is impeded when the 5' end is structurally sequestered by a stem-loop helps to explain the stabilizing influence of 5'-terminal base pairing on mRNA lifetimes. Together, these findings suggest a possible basis for the effect of RppH and its orthologues on the invasiveness of bacterial pathogens. Interestingly, this master regulator of 5'-end-dependent mRNA degradation in E. coli not only catalyses a process functionally reminiscent of eukaryotic mRNA decapping but also bears an evolutionary relationship to the eukaryotic decapping enzyme Dcp2.
The coagulation protease thrombin triggers fibrin formation, platelet activation, and other cellular responses at sites of tissue injury. We report a role for PAR1, a protease-activated G protein-coupled receptor for thrombin, in embryonic development. Approximately half of Par1-/- mouse embryos died at midgestation with bleeding from multiple sites. PAR1 is expressed in endothelial cells, and a PAR1 transgene driven by an endothelial-specific promoter prevented death of Par1-/- embryos. Our results suggest that the coagulation cascade and PAR1 modulate endothelial cell function in developing blood vessels and that thrombin's actions on endothelial cells-rather than on platelets, mesenchymal cells, or fibrinogen-contribute to vascular development and hemostasis in the mouse embryo.
Neandertals, the closest evolutionary relatives of present-day humans, lived in large parts of Europe and western Asia before disappearing 30,000 years ago. We present a draft sequence of the Neandertal genome composed of more than 4 billion nucleotides from three individuals. Comparisons of the Neandertal genome to the genomes of five present-day humans from different parts of the world identify a number of genomic regions that may have been affected by positive selection in ancestral modern humans, including genes involved in metabolism and in cognitive and skeletal development. We show that Neandertals shared more genetic variants with present-day humans in Eurasia than with present-day humans in sub-Saharan Africa, suggesting that gene flow from Neandertals into the ancestors of non-Africans occurred before the divergence of Eurasian groups from each other.
The protein product of oncogene c-myc is believed to be important in regulation of the cell cycle. However, its direct role in DNA synthesis has not been explored. Experiments presented here show that the addition of affinity-purified antibodies against the human c-myc protein to nuclei isolated from several types of human cells reversibly inhibited DNA synthesis and DNA polymerase activity of these nuclei. This suggests that c-myc encodes a protein that is functionally involved in DNA synthesis.
The Wilms' tumor locus (WTL) at 11p13 contains a gene that encodes a zinc finger-containing protein that has characteristics of a DNA-binding protein. However, binding of this protein to DNA in a sequence-specific manner has not been demonstrated. A synthetic gene was constructed that contained the zinc finger region, and the protein was expressed in Escherichia coli. The recombinant protein was used to identify a specific DNA binding site from a pool of degenerate oligonucleotides. The binding sites obtained were similar to the sequence recognized by the early growth response-1 (EGR-1) gene product, a zinc finger-containing protein that is induced by mitogenic stimuli. A mutation in the zinc finger region of the protein originally identified in a Wilms' tumor patient abolished its DNA-binding activity. These results suggest that the WTL protein may act at the DNA binding site of a growth factor-inducible gene and that loss of DNA-binding activity contributes to the tumorigenic process.
A four-component system has been designed that makes it possible to prepare a double-stranded (ds) DNA fragment; one fragment end is predesigned (by the use of a class-IIS restriction enzyme and adapter-primer), and the other end corresponds to any normal restriction cut. The system is composed of the phage M13mp7 single-stranded (ss) target DNA; the Fok I restriction enzyme; an oligodeoxynucleotide adapter-primer, which permits one to introduce Fok I cuts at any specified site in the target DNA; and DNA polymerase, which converts the ss target into a ds form ready for cloning. In this system, the oligodeoxynucleotide adapter-primer serves several purposes. The 5' hairpin ds domain of the adapter-primer contains the Fok I recognition site. Its 3' ss domain selects a complementary site on the target ss DNA, hybridizes with it to form the ds cleavage site, and serves as a primer to convert the ss M13mp7 target to ds DNA.
Previous measurements of the hydroxyl (OH-) ion content of the calcium phosphate crystals of bone mineral have indicated a substantial depletion or near-absence of OH-, despite its presumed status as a constituent of the hydroxyapatite lattice. Analytical methods for determining bone crystal OH- content have depended on procedures or assumptions that may have biased the results, such as chemical pretreatment to eliminate interference from the organic matrix. We demonstrate a two-dimensional solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy technique that detects the proton spectrum of bone crystals while suppressing the interfering matrix signals, eliminating the need for specimen pretreatment other than cryogenic grinding. Results on fresh-frozen and ground whole bone of several mammalian species show that the bone crystal OH- is readily detectable; a rough estimate yields an OH- content of human cortical bone of about 20% of the amount expected in stoichiometric hydroxyapatite. This finding sheds light on the biochemical processes underlying normal and abnormal bone mineral metabolism.
All steps of fatty acid synthesis in fungi are catalyzed by the fatty acid synthase, which forms a 2.6-megadalton alpha6beta6 complex. We have determined the molecular architecture of this multienzyme by fitting the structures of homologous enzymes that catalyze the individual steps of the reaction pathway into a 5 angstrom x-ray crystallographic electron density map. The huge assembly contains two separated reaction chambers, each equipped with three sets of active sites separated by distances up to approximately 130 angstroms, across which acyl carrier protein shuttles substrates during the reaction cycle. Regions of the electron density arising from well-defined structural features outside the catalytic domains separate the two reaction chambers and serve as a matrix in which domains carrying the various active sites are embedded. The structure rationalizes the compartmentalization of fatty acid synthesis, and the spatial arrangement of the active sites has specific implications for our understanding of the reaction cycle mechanism and of the architecture of multienzymes in general.
The technique of whole-genome polymerase chain reaction was used to study the DNA binding properties of the product of the wt1 gene. The zinc finger region of this gene is alternatively spliced such that the major transcript encodes a protein with three extra amino acids between the third and fourth fingers. The minor form of the protein binds specifically to DNA. It is now shown that the major form of wt1 messenger RNA encodes a protein that binds to DNA with a specificity that differs from that of the minor form. Therefore, alternative splicing within the DNA binding domain of a transcription factor can generate proteins with distinct DNA binding specificities and probably different physiological targets.
The sensing of reactive oxygen species is essential for cellular responses to oxidative stress. The sensing of peroxides is typically mediated by redox-active cysteines in sensors such as the bacterial OxyR, OhrR, and Hsp33 proteins. Bacillus subtilis PerR is the prototype for a widespread family of metal-dependent peroxide sensors that regulate inducible peroxide-defence genes. Here we show that PerR senses peroxides by metal-catalysed oxidation. PerR contains two metal-binding sites: a structural Zn2+ site and a regulatory divalent metal ion site that preferentially binds Fe2+ or Mn2+ (ref. 5). Protein oxidation, catalysed by a bound ferrous ion, leads to the rapid and direct incorporation of one oxygen atom into histidine 37 (H37) or H91, two of the residues that coordinate the bound Fe2+. This mechanism accounts for the ability of PerR to sense low levels of hydrogen peroxide in vivo. The reduction of hydrogen peroxide by metal ions to generate highly reactive hydroxyl radicals underlies the genotoxic effects of peroxides, and has been shown to contribute to enzyme inactivation, but has not previously been shown to provide a regulatory mechanism for peroxide sensing.
Laser capture microdissection (LCM) under direct microscopic visualization permits rapid one-step procurement of selected human cell populations from a section of complex, heterogeneous tissue. In this technique, a transparent thermoplastic film (ethylene vinyl acetate polymer) is applied to the surface of the tissue section on a standard glass histopathology slide; a carbon dioxide laser pulse then specifically activates the film above the cells of interest. Strong focal adhesion allows selective procurement of the targeted cells. Multiple examples of LCM transfer and tissue analysis, including polymerase chain reaction amplification of DNA and RNA, and enzyme recovery from transferred tissue are demonstrated.
Angiotensin II is an important effector molecule controlling blood pressure and volume in the cardiovascular system. Its importance is manifested by the efficacy of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in the treatment of hypertension and congestive heart failure. Angiotensin II interacts with two pharmacologically distinct subtypes of cell-surface receptors, AT1 and AT2. AT1 receptors seem to mediate the major cardiovascular effects of angiotensin II. Here we report the isolation by expression cloning of a complementary DNA encoding a unique protein with the pharmacological specificity of a vascular AT1 receptor. Hydropathic modelling of the deduced protein suggests that it shares the seven-transmembrane-region motif with the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. Knowledge of the AT1 receptor primary sequence should now permit structural analysis, definition of the angiotensin II receptor gene family and delineation of the contribution of AT receptors to the genetic component of hypertension.
We describe a sensitive mRNA profiling technology, PMAGE (for "polony multiplex analysis of gene expression"), which detects messenger RNAs (mRNAs) as rare as one transcript per three cells. PMAGE incorporates an improved ligation-based method to sequence 14-nucleotide tags derived from individual mRNA molecules. One sequence tag from each mRNA molecule is amplified onto a separate 1-micrometer bead, denoted as a polymerase colony or polony, and about 5 million polonies are arrayed in a flow cell for parallel sequencing. Using PMAGE, we identified early transcriptional changes that preceded pathological manifestations of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in mice carrying a disease-causing mutation. PMAGE provided a comprehensive profile of cardiac mRNAs, including low-abundance mRNAs encoding signaling molecules and transcription factors that are likely to participate in disease pathogenesis.
The binding of substrates to lactate dehydrogenases induces a marked rearrangement of the protein structure in which a 'loop' of polypeptide (residues 98-110) closes over the active site of the enzyme. In this rearrangement, arginine 109 (a basic residue conserved in all known lactate dehydrogenase sequences and in the homologous malate dehydrogenases) moves 0.8 nm from a position in the solvent to one in the active site where its guanidinium group resides within hydrogen bonding distance of both the reactive carbonyl of pyruvate and imidazole ring of the catalytic histidine 195 (see Fig. 1). Whilst this feature of the enzyme has been commented upon previously, the function of this mobile arginine residue during catalysis has not been tested experimentally. The advent of protein engineering has now enabled us to define the role of this basic residue by substituting it with the neutral glutamine. Transient kinetic and equilibrium studies of the mutant enzyme indicate that arginine 109 enhances the polarization of the pyruvate carbonyl group in the ground state and stabilizes the transition state. The gross active-site structure of the enzyme is not altered by the mutation since an alternative catalytic function of the enzyme (rate of addition of sulphite to NAD+), which does not require hydride transfer, is insensitive to the arginine----glutamine substitution.
In physiological settings, nucleic-acid translocases must act on substrates occupied by other proteins, and an increasingly appreciated role of translocases is to catalyse protein displacement from RNA and DNA. However, little is known regarding the inevitable collisions that must occur, and the fate of protein obstacles and the mechanisms by which they are evicted from DNA remain unexplored. Here we sought to establish the mechanistic basis for protein displacement from DNA using RecBCD as a model system. Using nanofabricated curtains of DNA and multicolour single-molecule microscopy, we visualized collisions between a model translocase and different DNA-bound proteins in real time. We show that the DNA translocase RecBCD can disrupt core RNA polymerase, holoenzymes, stalled elongation complexes and transcribing RNA polymerases in either head-to-head or head-to-tail orientations, as well as EcoRI(E111Q), lac repressor and even nucleosomes. RecBCD did not pause during collisions and often pushed proteins thousands of base pairs before evicting them from DNA. We conclude that RecBCD overwhelms obstacles through direct transduction of chemomechanical force with no need for specific protein-protein interactions, and that proteins can be removed from DNA through active disruption mechanisms that act on a transition state intermediate as they are pushed from one nonspecific site to the next.
Organisms amenable to easy genetic analysis should prove helpful in assessing the function of at least those proto-oncogene products which are highly conserved in different eukaryotic cells. One obvious possibility is to pursue the matter in Drosophila melanogaster DNA, which has sequences homologous to several vertebrate oncogenes. Another is to turn to the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, if it contains proto-oncogene sequences. Here we report the identification of a gene in S. cerevisiae which codes for a 206 amino acid protein (YP2) that exhibits striking homology to the p21 products of the human c-has/bas proto-oncogenes and the transforming p21 proteins of the Harvey (v-rasH) and Kirsten (v-rasK) murine sarcoma viral oncogenes. The YP2 gene is located between the actin and the tubulin gene on chromosome VI and is expressed in growing cells. The protein it encodes might share the nucleotide-binding capacity of p21 proteins.
Biological reactions in protein complexes involve structural dynamics spanning many orders of magnitude in time. In standard descriptions of catalysis by enzymes, the transition state between reactant and product is reached by thermal, stochastic motion. In the ultrashort time domain, however, the protein moiety and cofactor motions leading to altered conformations can be coherent rather than stochastic in nature. Such coherent motions may play a key role in controlling the accessibility of the transition state and explain the high efficiency of the reaction. Here we present evidence for coherent population transfer to the product state during an ultrafast reaction catalysed by a key enzyme in aerobic organisms. Using the enzyme cytochrome c oxidase aa3 from the bacterium Paracoccus denitrificans, we have studied haem dynamics during the photo-initiated ultrafast transfer of carbon monoxide from haem a3 to CuB by femtosecond spectroscopy. The ground state of the unliganded a3 species is populated in a stepwise manner in time, indicating that the reaction is mainly governed by coherent vibrations (47cm(-1)). The reaction coordinate involves conformational relaxation of the haem group and we suggest that ligand transfer also contributes.
The gene for glycoprotein D of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) was expressed in stable mammalian cell lines. Glycoprotein D produced in these cells has a number of antigenic determinants in common with the native glycoprotein. Cell lines expressing glycoprotein D were used in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to detect human antibodies to glycoprotein D. This strategy should prove useful in determining the extent to which the immune response to HSV-1 is directed toward glycoprotein D.
Polyoma virus can transform the growth properties of rodent cells grown in culture and form tumours in susceptible animals, an activity largely due to one of the virus-encoded proteins, called middle T. Middle T has an associated tyrosine-specific protein kinase activity in vitro and interacts with cellular membranes, but the biochemical basis of its ability to transform remains unclear. Although there is some correlation between the transforming activity of different polyoma virus mutants and their ability to accept phosphate on tyrosine in middle T in the in vitro kinase reaction, the abundance of phosphotyrosine in protein is not elevated in polyoma virus-transformed cells and no cellular substrates for the putative kinase have been identified. It is also not yet known whether the tyrosine kinase of middle T is an intrinsic activity of the protein itself or the property of an associated enzyme. The experiments described here indicate that a fraction of middle T forms a stable complex with pp60c-src, the product of a cellular oncogene, and lead us to propose that the middle T associated kinase at least in part is a property of pp60c-src rather than middle T itself.
The neu oncogene is repeatedly activated in neuro- and glioblastomas derived by transplacental mutagenesis of the BDIX strain of rat with ethylnitrosourea. Foci induced by the DNAs from such tumours on NIH 3T3 cells contain the neu oncogene and an associated phosphoprotein of relative molecular mass 185,000 (p185). Previous work has shown that the neu gene is related to, but distinct from, the gene encoding the EGF receptor (c-erb-B). Here we describe a neu complementary DNA clone isolated from a cell line transformed by this oncogene; the clone has biological activity in a focus-forming assay. The nucleotide sequence of this clone predicts a 1,260-amino-acid transmembrane protein product similar in overall structure to the EGF receptor. We found that 50% of the predicted amino acids of neu and the EGF receptor are identical; greater than 80% of the amino acids in the tyrosine kinase domain are identical. Our results suggest strongly that the neu gene encodes the receptor for an as yet unidentified growth factor.
Heme is essential for cell respiration, energy generation, and oxidative biotransformations. The latter function is exemplified by the oxidative metabolism of various endogenous and exogenous chemicals catalyzed by the heme protein cytochrome P-450. Recent studies have established that metal ions directly regulate cellular content of heme, and thus of heme proteins by controlling production of delta-aminolevulinate synthetase and heme oxygenase, the rate-limiting enzymes for heme synthesis and degradation, respectively. Metal ions also alter cellular content of glutathione. In excess amounts, metal ions greatly accelerate the turnover and degradation of heme and substantially impair the oxidative functions of cells--particularly those dependent on cytochrone P-450. As a result, the biological impact of chemicals which are detoxified or metabolically transformed by the P-450 system is greatly altered.
In order to enhance the yield and productivity of metabolite production, researchers have focused almost exclusively on enzyme amplification or other modifications of the product pathway. However, overproduction of many metabolites requires significant redirection of flux distributions in the primary metabolism, which may not readily occur following product deregulation because metabolic pathways have evolved to exhibit control architectures that resist flux alterations at branch points. This problem can be addressed through the use of some general concepts of metabolic rigidity, which include a means for identifying and removing rigid branch points within an experimental framework.
We have determined the complete primary structure of an intermediate filament subunit, the 59,000 molecular weight subunit of mouse epidermal keratin, from the nucleotide sequence of cDNA clones. The central portion of the sequence forms extended tracts of a coiled-coil alpha-helical conformation. This is flanked at both termini by similar non-alpha-helical sequences that are extremely rich in glycine residues, frequently configured in tandem peptide repeats. Limited chymotryptic digestion of keratin filaments containing this protein suggests a structural organization whereby the terminal glycine-rich sequences protrude from a conserved core structure into which the coiled-coil alpha-helical segments are packed.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK, also known as SNF1A) has been primarily studied as a metabolic regulator that is activated in response to energy deprivation. Although there is relatively ample information on the biochemical characteristics of AMPK, not enough data exist on the in vivo function of the kinase. Here, using the Drosophila model system, we generated the first animal model with no AMPK activity and discovered physiological functions of the kinase. Surprisingly, AMPK-null mutants were lethal with severe abnormalities in cell polarity and mitosis, similar to those of lkb1-null mutants. Constitutive activation of AMPK restored many of the phenotypes of lkb1-null mutants, suggesting that AMPK mediates the polarity- and mitosis-controlling functions of the LKB1 serine/threonine kinase. Interestingly, the regulatory site of non-muscle myosin regulatory light chain (MRLC; also known as MLC2) was directly phosphorylated by AMPK. Moreover, the phosphomimetic mutant of MRLC rescued the AMPK-null defects in cell polarity and mitosis, suggesting MRLC is a critical downstream target of AMPK. Furthermore, the activation of AMPK by energy deprivation was sufficient to cause dramatic changes in cell shape, inducing complete polarization and brush border formation in the human LS174T cell line, through the phosphorylation of MRLC. Taken together, our results demonstrate that AMPK has highly conserved roles across metazoan species not only in the control of metabolism, but also in the regulation of cellular structures.
Natural killer (NK) cells are a subpopulation of large granular lymphocytes characterized by densely staining azurophilic granules. NK cells are able to recognize and lyse various virally infected or neoplastic target cells without previous sensitization or major histocompatibility complex restriction. A 60-kD disulfide-linked dimer, highly expressed on NK cells, was found capable of mediating transmembrane signaling. The gene encoding this signal transduction molecule was cloned and its nucleotide sequence determined. The encoded protein showed significant homology with a number of lectin-related membrane proteins that share receptor characteristics. This protein may function as a receptor able to selectively trigger NK cell activity.
Infection of tobacco plants with tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) results in an increase in the activities of several enzymes and induces the de novo synthesis of about 10 proteins that are protease-resistant and soluble at pH 3. These proteins accumulate in the intracellular leaf space. The appearance of pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins is closely associated with the phenomenon of 'systemic acquired resistance' and it has been suggested that such proteins have an antiviral function. Previously, we cloned complementary DNAs to the messenger RNAs for the three smallest PR proteins, PR-1a, -1b and -1c, and these clones were used to show that there is an increase of more than 100-fold in the concentration of PR-1 mRNAs following TMV infection of tobacco. Here, we describe the cDNA cloning of another mRNA whose synthesis is induced by TMV infection. Sequencing of the cDNA showed that the encoded protein is highly homologous to thaumatin, the intensely sweet-tasting protein from the fruits of the monocot Thaumatococcus daniellii Benth, a West African rainforest shrub. The conservation of a gene encoding a thaumatin-like protein in tobacco suggests that the encoded protein may have a more general function than that of being sweet-tasting.
Insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE), a Zn2+-metalloprotease, is involved in the clearance of insulin and amyloid-beta (refs 1-3). Loss-of-function mutations of IDE in rodents cause glucose intolerance and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta, whereas enhanced IDE activity effectively reduces brain amyloid-beta (refs 4-7). Here we report structures of human IDE in complex with four substrates (insulin B chain, amyloid-beta peptide (1-40), amylin and glucagon). The amino- and carboxy-terminal domains of IDE (IDE-N and IDE-C, respectively) form an enclosed cage just large enough to encapsulate insulin. Extensive contacts between IDE-N and IDE-C keep the degradation chamber of IDE inaccessible to substrates. Repositioning of the IDE domains enables substrate access to the catalytic cavity. IDE uses size and charge distribution of the substrate-binding cavity selectively to entrap structurally diverse polypeptides. The enclosed substrate undergoes conformational changes to form beta-sheets with two discrete regions of IDE for its degradation. Consistent with this model, mutations disrupting the contacts between IDE-N and IDE-C increase IDE catalytic activity 40-fold. The molecular basis for substrate recognition and allosteric regulation of IDE could aid in designing IDE-based therapies to control cerebral amyloid-beta and blood sugar concentrations.
A DNA probe that spanned a domain conserved among the proto-oncogene c-rel, the Drosophila morphogen dorsal, and the p50 DNA binding subunit of NF-kappa B was generated from Jurkat T cell complementary DNA with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and degenerate oligonucleotides. This probe was used to identify a rel-related complementary DNA that hybridized to a 2.6-kilobase messenger RNA present in human T and B lymphocytes. In vitro transcription and translation of the complementary DNA resulted in the synthesis of a protein with an apparent molecular size of 65 kilodaltons (kD). The translated protein showed weak DNA binding with a specificity for the kappa B binding motif. This protein-DNA complex comigrated with the complex obtained with the purified human p65 NF-kappa B subunit and binding was inhibited by I kappa B-alpha and -beta proteins. In addition, the 65-kD protein associated with the p50 subunit of NF-kappa B and the kappa B probe to form a complex with the same electrophoretic mobility as the NF-kappa B-DNA complex. Therefore the rel-related 65-kD protein may represent the p65 subunit of the active NF-kappa B transcription factor complex.
There are a wide variety of helicases that unwind helical DNA and RNA substrates. The twelve helicases that have been identified in Escherichia coli play a role in almost all cellular processes involving nucleic acids. We have solved the crystal structure of a monomeric form of a DNA helicase from Bacillus stearothermophilus, alone and in a complex with ADP, at 2.5 and 2.9 A resolution, respectively. The enzyme comprises two domains with a deep cleft running between them. The ATP-binding site, which is situated at the bottom of this cleft, is formed by motifs that are conserved across the superfamily of related helicases. Unexpected structural homology with the DNA recombination protein, RecA, suggests how ATP binding and hydrolysis may drive conformational changes of the enzyme during catalysis, and implies that there is a common mechanism for all helicases.
Cell-surface proteins are associated with the lipid bilayer either as membrane-spanning molecules or as glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPtdIns)-linked proteins. Proteins destined for GPtdIns anchoring are synthesized as precursors with a hydrophobic C-terminal transmembrane domain, which is removed during the processing of these proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ref. 1). We have investigated the structural requirements for GPtdIns anchoring through the study of two closely related proteins which exhibit alternative membrane attachment. The IgG Fc receptor, Fc gamma RIII, is GPtdIns-linked on neurophils (III-1) whereas on natural killer (NK) cells and macrophages it is found as a transmembrane-anchored molecule (III-2), able to mediate antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and phagocytosis. At the primary structural level, the III-1 gene differs from that encoding III-2 by only nine nucleotide substitutions, which result in six amino-acid differences, and the absence of 21 amino acids at the C terminus. We have analysed a series of III-1 and III-2 mutants in transient expression assays, and show that Ser 203 in the GPtdIns attachment domain is the dominant residue in determining whether the molecule can be GPtdIns-anchored. As in the case of its murine homologue, Fc gamma RII alpha, surface expression of the III-2 molecule is dependent on co-expression of a second subunit, the gamma chain of F epsilon RI. Our data also suggest that gamma chain can associate with the III-1 precursor, preventing GPtdIns attachment, favouring instead a transmembrane form.
Recombinant mouse prion protein (recMoPrP) produced in Escherichia coli was polymerized into amyloid fibrils that represent a subset of beta sheet-rich structures. Fibrils consisting of recMoPrP(89-230) were inoculated intracerebrally into transgenic (Tg) mice expressing MoPrP(89-231). The mice developed neurologic dysfunction between 380 and 660 days after inoculation. Brain extracts showed protease-resistant PrP by Western blotting; these extracts transmitted disease to wild-type FVB mice and Tg mice overexpressing PrP, with incubation times of 150 and 90 days, respectively. Neuropathological findings suggest that a novel prion strain was created. Our results provide compelling evidence that prions are infectious proteins.
Stem cells within diverse tissues share the need for a chromatin configuration that promotes self-renewal, yet few chromatin proteins are known to regulate multiple types of stem cells. We describe a Drosophila gene, scrawny (scny), encoding a ubiquitin-specific protease, which is required in germline, epithelial, and intestinal stem cells. Like its yeast relative UBP10, Scrawny deubiquitylates histone H2B and functions in gene silencing. Consistent with previous studies of this conserved pathway of chromatin regulation, scny mutant cells have elevated levels of ubiquitinylated H2B and trimethylated H3K4. Our findings suggest that inhibiting H2B ubiquitylation through scny represents a common mechanism within stem cells that is used to repress the premature expression of key differentiation genes, including Notch target genes.
Isoniazid (isonicotinic acid hydrazide, INH) is one of the most widely used antituberculosis drugs, yet its precise target of action on Mycobacterium tuberculosis is unknown. A missense mutation within the mycobacterial inhA gene was shown to confer resistance to both INH and ethionamide (ETH) in M. smegmatis and in M. bovis. The wild-type inhA gene also conferred INH and ETH resistance when transferred on a multicopy plasmid vector to M. smegmatis and M. bovis BCG. The InhA protein shows significant sequence conservation with the Escherichia coli enzyme EnvM, and cell-free assays indicate that it may be involved in mycolic acid biosynthesis. These results suggest that InhA is likely a primary target of action for INH and ETH.
Xeroderma pigmentosum patients with a defect in the nucleotide-excision repair gene XPA are characterized by, for example, a > 1,000-fold higher risk of developing sunlight-induced skin cancer. Nucleotide-excision repair (NER) is involved in the removal of a wide spectrum of DNA lesions. The XPA protein functions in a pre-incision step, the recognition of DNA damage. To permit the functional analysis of the XPA gene in vivo, we have generated XPA-deficient mice by gene targeting in embryonic stem cells. The XPA-/-mice appear normal, at least until the age of 13 months. XPA-/-mice are highly susceptible to ultraviolet (UV)-B-induced skin and eye tumours and to 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-induced skin tumours. We conclude that the XPA-deficient mice strongly mimic the phenotype of humans with xeroderma pigmentosum.
The Drosophila cuticle is essential for maintaining the surface barrier defenses of the fly. Integral to cuticle resilience is the transcription factor grainy head, which regulates production of the enzyme required for covalent cross-linking of the cuticular structural components. We report that formation and maintenance of the epidermal barrier in mice are dependent on a mammalian homolog of grainy head, Grainy head-like 3. Mice lacking this factor display defective skin barrier function and deficient wound repair, accompanied by reduced expression of transglutaminase 1, the key enzyme involved in cross-linking the structural components of the superficial epidermis. These findings suggest that the functional mechanisms involving protein cross-linking that maintain the epidermal barrier and induce tissue repair are conserved across 700 million years of evolution.
The machinery that transcribes protein-coding genes in eukaryotic cells must contend with repressive chromatin structures in order to find its target DNA sequences. Diverse arrays of proteins modify the structure of chromatin at gene promoters to help transcriptional regulatory proteins access their DNA recognition sites. The way in which disruption of chromatin structure at a promoter is transmitted through a whole gene has not been defined. Recent breakthroughs suggest that the passage of an RNA polymerase through a gene is coupled to mechanisms that propagate the breakdown of chromatin.
Chromosomes are segregated by two antiparallel arrays of microtubules arranged to form the spindle apparatus. During cell division, the nucleation of cytosolic microtubules is prevented and spindle microtubules nucleate from centrosomes (in mitotic animal cells) or around chromosomes (in plants and some meiotic cells). The molecular mechanism by which chromosomes induce local microtubule nucleation in the absence of centrosomes is unknown, but it can be studied by adding chromatin beads to Xenopus egg extracts. The beads nucleate microtubules that eventually reorganize into a bipolar spindle. RCC1, the guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor for the GTPase protein Ran, is a component of chromatin. Using the chromatin bead assay, we show here that the activity of chromosome-associated RCC1 protein is required for spindle formation. Ran itself, when in the GTP-bound state (Ran-GTP), induces microtubule nucleation and spindle-like structures in M-phase extract. We propose that RCC1 generates a high local concentration of Ran-GTP around chromatin which in turn induces the local nucleation of microtubules.
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) activity is crucial for leukocyte function, but the roles of the four receptor-activated isoforms are unclear. Mice lacking heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled PI3Kgamma were viable and had fully differentiated neutrophils and macrophages. Chemoattractant-stimulated PI3Kgamma-/- neutrophils did not produce phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate, did not activate protein kinase B, and displayed impaired respiratory burst and motility. Peritoneal PI3Kgamma-null macrophages showed a reduced migration toward a wide range of chemotactic stimuli and a severely defective accumulation in a septic peritonitis model. These results demonstrate that PI3Kgamma is a crucial signaling molecule required for macrophage accumulation in inflammation.
Human tryptase, a mast-cell-specific serine proteinase that may be involved in causing asthma and other allergic and inflammatory disorders, is unique in two respects: it is enzymatically active only as a heparin-stabilized tetramer, and it is resistant to all known endogenous proteinase inhibitors. The 3-A crystal structure of human beta-tryptase in a complex with 4-amidinophenyl pyruvic acid shows four quasi-equivalent monomers arranged in a square flat ring of pseudo 222 symmetry. Each monomer contacts its neighbours at two different interfaces through six loop segments. These loops are located around the active site of beta-tryptase and differ considerably in length and conformation from loops of other trypsin-like proteinases. The four active centres of the tetramer are directed towards an oval central pore, restricting access for macromolecular substrates and enzyme inhibitors. Heparin chains might stabilize the complex by binding to an elongated patch of positively charged residues spanning two adjacent monomers. The nature of this unique tetrameric architecture explains many of tryptase's biochemical properties and provides a basis for the rational design of monofunctional and bifunctional tryptase inhibitors.
In the past two decades, biochemistry and molecular biology have demonstrated the existence of potentially exploitable biochemical differences between etiologic agents of disease and their hosts. Known differences between organism and host with respect to metabolism and polymer structure point to the detailed characterization of key proteins as the focus for the development of potential inhibitors. In the last decade, the methodology of the isolation, characterization, and inactivation of proteins and enzymes has been advanced. The present scientific and technological base suggests that new efforts toward the development of selective chemotherapeutic agents for infections caused by bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and higher eukaryotes should exploit the known differences in proteins or other specific biopolymers serving crucial structural or metabolic roles in the economy of the parasite.
Structural data are now available for comparing a penicillin target enzyme, the D-alanyl-D-alanine-peptidase from Streptomyces R61, with a penicillin-hydrolyzing enzyme, the beta-lactamase from Bacillus licheniformis 749/C. Although the two enzymes have distinct catalytic properties and lack relatedness in their overall amino acid sequences except near the active-site serine, the significant similarity found by x-ray crystallography in the spatial arrangement of the elements of secondary structure provides strong support for earlier hypotheses that beta-lactamases arose from penicillin-sensitive D-alanyl-D-alanine-peptidases involved in bacterial wall peptidoglycan metabolism.
In many organisms, developmentally programmed double-strand breaks (DSBs) formed by the SPO11 transesterase initiate meiotic recombination, which promotes pairing and segregation of homologous chromosomes. Because every chromosome must receive a minimum number of DSBs, attention has focused on factors that support DSB formation. However, improperly repaired DSBs can cause meiotic arrest or mutation; thus, having too many DSBs is probably as deleterious as having too few. Only a small fraction of SPO11 protein ever makes a DSB in yeast or mouse and SPO11 and its accessory factors remain abundant long after most DSB formation ceases, implying the existence of mechanisms that restrain SPO11 activity to limit DSB numbers. Here we report that the number of meiotic DSBs in mouse is controlled by ATM, a kinase activated by DNA damage to trigger checkpoint signalling and promote DSB repair. Levels of SPO11-oligonucleotide complexes, by-products of meiotic DSB formation, are elevated at least tenfold in spermatocytes lacking ATM. Moreover, Atm mutation renders SPO11-oligonucleotide levels sensitive to genetic manipulations that modulate SPO11 protein levels. We propose that ATM restrains SPO11 via a negative feedback loop in which kinase activation by DSBs suppresses further DSB formation. Our findings explain previously puzzling phenotypes of Atm-null mice and provide a molecular basis for the gonadal dysgenesis observed in ataxia telangiectasia, the human syndrome caused by ATM deficiency.
Physical mapping of chromosomes would be facilitated by methods of breaking large DNA into manageable fragments, or cutting uniquely at genetic markers of interest. Key issues in the design of sequence-specific DNA cleaving reagents are the specificity of binding, the generalizability of the recognition motif, and the cleavage yield. Oligonucleotide-directed triple helix formation is a generalizable motif for specific binding to sequences longer than 12 base pairs within DNA of high complexity. Studies with plasmid DNA show that triple helix formation can limit the operational specificity of restriction enzymes to endonuclease recognition sequences that overlap oligonucleotide-binding sites. Triple helix formation, followed by methylase protection, triple helix-disruption, and restriction endonuclease digestion produces near quantitative cleavage at the single overlapping triple helix-endonuclease site. As a demonstration that this technique may be applicable to the orchestrated cleavage of large genomic DNA, we report the near quantitative single-site enzymatic cleavage of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome mediated by triple helix formation. The 340-kilobase yeast chromosome III was cut uniquely at an overlapping homopurine-EcoRI target site 27 base pairs long to produce two expected cleavage products of 110 and 230 kilobases. No cleavage of any other chromosome was detected. The potential generalizability of this technique, which is capable of near quantitative cleavage at a single site in at least 14 megabase pairs of DNA, could enable selected regions of chromosomal DNA to be isolated without extensive screening of genomic libraries.
Slug, a vertebrate gene encoding a zinc finger protein of the Snail family, is expressed in the neural crest and in mesodermal cells emigrating from the primitive streak. Early chick embryos were incubated with antisense oligonucleotides to chick Slug. These oligonucleotides specifically inhibit the normal change in cell behavior that occurs at the two sites in the emerging body plan in which the gene is expressed. This change, which is the transition from epithelial to mesenchymal character, occurs at the formation of mesoderm during gastrulation and on emigration of the neutral crest from the neural tube.
Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) are ubiquitous lipid kinases that function both as signal transducers downstream of cell-surface receptors and in constitutive intracellular membrane and protein trafficking pathways. All PI3Ks are dual-specificity enzymes with a lipid kinase activity which phosphorylates phosphoinositides at the 3-hydroxyl, and a protein kinase activity. The products of PI3K-catalysed reactions, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3), PtdIns(3,4)P2 and PtdIns(3)P, are second messengers in a variety of signal transduction pathways, including those essential to cell proliferation, adhesion, survival, cytoskeletal rearrangement and vesicle trafficking. Here we report the 2.2 A X-ray crystallographic structure of the catalytic subunit of PI3Kgamma, the class I enzyme that is activated by heterotrimeric G-protein betagamma subunits and Ras. PI3Kgamma has a modular organization centred around a helical-domain spine, with C2 and catalytic domains positioned to interact with phospholipid membranes, and a Ras-binding domain placed against the catalytic domain where it could drive allosteric activation of the enzyme.
The activation of a guanine nucleotide binding (G) protein is an essential step in coupling certain receptors to the inhibition of voltage-activated calcium channels. We have previously observed that analogues of GTP potentiate the effect of receptor agonists and inhibit calcium currents in cultured dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurones. A residual sustained 'L-type' component of the calcium channel current is resistant to inhibition by internal guanosine 5'-O-3-thiotriphosphate (GTP-gamma-S). Because calcium channel antagonists such as D600, nifedipine and diltiazem inhibit L currents, we examined their effect on GTP-gamma-S-modified currents. These compounds all produced a rapid and very marked potentiation of calcium channel currents in the presence of internal GTP-gamma-S and this effect was prevented by pertussis toxin which ADP ribosylates the G proteins Gi/Go (for review see ref. 10). We suggest that this potentiation indicates that activated G protein can interact with the calcium channel, and that this enhances the action of calcium channel ligands at their agonist sites on the channel in its resting state. These results represent the first electrophysiological evidence that guanine nucleotides are able to influence cellular responses to calcium channel ligands.
In viruses, as in eukaryotes, elaborate mechanisms have evolved to protect the genome and to ensure its timely replication and reliable transmission to progeny. Influenza A viruses are enveloped, spherical or filamentous structures, ranging from 80 to 120 nm in diameter. Inside each envelope is a viral genome consisting of eight single-stranded negative-sense RNA segments of 890 to 2,341 nucleotides each. These segments are associated with nucleoprotein and three polymerase subunits, designated PA, PB1 and PB2; the resultant ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) resemble a twisted rod (10-15 nm in width and 30-120 nm in length) that is folded back and coiled on itself. Late in viral infection, newly synthesized RNPs are transported from the nucleus to the plasma membrane, where they are incorporated into progeny virions capable of infecting other cells. Here we show, by transmission electron microscopy of serially sectioned virions, that the RNPs of influenza A virus are organized in a distinct pattern (seven segments of different lengths surrounding a central segment). The individual RNPs are suspended from the interior of the viral envelope at the distal end of the budding virion and are oriented perpendicular to the budding tip. This finding argues against random incorporation of RNPs into virions, supporting instead a model in which each segment contains specific incorporation signals that enable the RNPs to be recruited and packaged as a complete set. A selective mechanism of RNP incorporation into virions and the unique organization of the eight RNP segments may be crucial to maintaining the integrity of the viral genome during repeated cycles of replication.
The ADP/ATP translocator (or adenine nucleotide translocase; ANT) is thought to play a dual role: in the transport of ADP and ATP across the mitochondrial inner membrane and in the formation of the mitochondrial permeability-transition pore (mtPTP), a nonspecific pore that is an important mediator of apoptosis (programmed cell death). However, Kokoszka et al. have shown that mitochondria from livers of 'ANT-knockout' mice, in which the ANT has been genetically inactivated, still possess mtPTP activity. From this, the authors conclude that the ANT is a non-essential component of the mtPTP that may be dispensable for mtPTP-associated cell death. These results, which contradict previous evidence and cast doubt on a widely accepted model for the mtPTP (ref. 1), warrant scrutiny and call for a fundamental reappraisal of the role of the ANT in liver metabolism.
Starch-gel electrophoresis patterns of malate dehydrogenase from human tissue indicate a new genetic polymorphism for the mitochondrial form of the enzyme. Studies of families showed simple Mendelian segregation rather than maternal inheritance, suggesting that not all mitochondrial proteins are coded by mitochondrial DNA.
The 3'-terminal CCA nucleotide sequence (positions 74-76) of transfer RNA is essential for amino acid attachment and interaction with the ribosome during protein synthesis. The CCA sequence is synthesized de novo and/or repaired by a template-independent RNA polymerase, 'CCA-adding enzyme', using CTP and ATP as substrates. Despite structural and biochemical studies, the mechanism by which the CCA-adding enzyme synthesizes the defined sequence without a nucleic acid template remains elusive. Here we present the crystal structure of Aquifex aeolicus CCA-adding enzyme, bound to a primer tRNA lacking the terminal adenosine and an incoming ATP analogue, at 2.8 A resolution. The enzyme enfolds the acceptor T helix of the tRNA molecule. In the catalytic pocket, C75 is adjacent to ATP, and their base moieties are stacked. The complementary pocket for recognizing C74-C75 of tRNA forms a 'protein template' for the penultimate two nucleotides, mimicking the nucleotide template used by template-dependent polymerases. These results are supported by systematic analyses of mutants. Our structure represents the 'pre-insertion' stage of selecting the incoming nucleotide and provides the structural basis for the mechanism underlying template-independent RNA polymerization.
Affinity-purified, polyclonal antibodies to the gamma subunit of the dihydropyridine (DHP)-sensitive, voltage-dependent calcium channel have been used to isolate complementary DNAs to the rabbit skeletal muscle protein from an expression library. The deduced primary structure indicates that the gamma subunit is a 25,058-dalton protein that contains four transmembrane domains and two N-linked glycosylation sites, consistent with biochemical analyses showing that the gamma subunit is a glycosylated hydrophobic protein. Nucleic acid hybridization studies indicate that there is a 1200-nucleotide transcript in skeletal muscle but not in brain or heart. The gamma subunit may play a role in assembly, modulation, or the structure of the skeletal muscle calcium channel.
Organisms encounter a wide range of foreign compounds--or 'xenobiotics'--with potentially harmful consequences. The cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes metabolize xenobiotics and thus are a primary defence against these compounds. Increased expression of specific CYP genes in response to particular xenobiotics is a central component of this defence, although such induction can also increase production of toxic metabolites. Here we show that the nuclear receptor CAR mediates the response evoked by a class of xenobiotics known as the 'phenobarbital-like inducers'. The strong activation of Cyp2b10 gene expression by phenobarbital, or by the more potent TCPOBOP, is absent in mice lacking the CAR gene. These animals also show decreased metabolism of the classic CYP substrate zoxazolamine and a complete loss of the liver hypertrophic and hyperplastic responses to these inducers. Cocaine causes acute hepatotoxicity in wild-type mice previously exposed to phenobarbital-like inducers and this toxicity is also absent in the CAR-deficient animals. Thus, loss of CAR function alters sensitivity to toxins, increasing or decreasing it depending on the compound. Modulation of CAR activity in humans may significantly affect metabolism of drugs and other xenobiotics.
Ty elements of Saccharomyces cerevisiae are long terminal repeat (LTR) retroelements related to retroviruses. Normal levels of Ty1 transposition require Dbr1p, a cellular enzyme that cleaves 2'-5' RNA bonds. We show that Ty1 RNAs lacking identifiable 5' ends accumulate in virus-like particles (VLPs) in dbr1 mutants. Debranching this RNA in vitro with Dbr1p creates an uncapped version of the normal Ty1 RNA 5' end. We show that the 5' nucleotide (nt) of Ty1 RNA forms a 2'-5' bond with a nt near the 3' end of the same RNA, creating a lariat. The properties of the lariat suggest it forms by a novel mechanism and that branching and debranching may play roles in Ty1 reverse transcription at the minus-strand transfer step.
We have shown previously that Drosophila cells contain virus-like particles (VLPs) containing 5-kilobase (kb) RNA that hybridizes to a transposable element, termed copia. We have suggested that VLPs and copia are derivatives of viral particles and proviral forms, respectively, of 'copia' retrovirus, a putative Drosophila retrovirus. To further clarify the relationship between copia and copia-related RNA in VLPs (VLP H-RNA), we determined and compared their nucleotide sequences. VLP H-RNA was found to be an unspliced, genome-sized transcript of copia, and, like retroviral genome RNA, VLP H-RNA is terminally redundant with termini localized in the long terminal repeats (LTRs) of copia. VLP H-RNA contains two long open reading frames (ORFs), one of which includes the coding sequence for a predominant VLP protein of relative molecular mass (Mr) 31,000 (31K). Here we show that, in contrast to 17.6 ORF2, ORFs of copia have no extensive amino-acid sequence homology to the RT region of the reverse transcriptase of retrovirus in vertebrates. Because of a one-base insertion/deletion, the two ORFs in VLP H-RNA are fused and become a single, longer ORF in a genomic copia.
Treatment of rats with L-thyroxine increases the incorporation in vivo of radioactive amino acids into protein of liver, kidney, and heart, but not of spleen, testis, or brain. The distribution of the effect among the organs is the same as that observed in thyroxine stimulation of oxidative metabolism. Thus, stimulation of protein synthesis seems to be a physiological action of the thyroid hormone.
The bacteriophage lambda transcriptional activator protein, cII, coordinately regulates transcription from two phage promoters that control lysogenic development. We demonstrate that cII is a DNA binding protein that selectively interacts with a repeat sequence in the -35 region of the promoter. Furthermore, cII is shown to bind mainly one face of the DNA helix and to make its contacts primarily in the major groove of the DNA. RNA polymerase sees this same region from the opposite side and sandwiches the DNA helix between itself and cII.
The regulation of gene expression depends critically upon chromatin structure. Transcription of protein-coding genes can be reconstituted on naked DNA with only the general transcription factors and RNA polymerase II. This minimal system cannot transcribe DNA packaged into chromatin, indicating that accessory factors may facilitate access to DNA. Two classes of accessory factor, ATP-dependent chromatin-remodelling enzymes and histone acetyltransferases, facilitate transcription initiation from chromatin templates. FACT (for facilitates chromatin transcription) is a chromatin-specific elongation factor required for transcription of chromatin templates in vitro. Here we show that FACT comprises a new human homologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Spt16/Cdc68 protein and the high-mobility group-1-like protein structure-specific recognition protein-1. Yeast SPT16/CDC68 is an essential gene that has been implicated in transcription and cell-cycle regulation. Consistent with our biochemical analysis of FACT, we provide evidence that Spt16/Cdc68 is involved in transcript elongation in vivo. Moreover, FACT specifically interacts with nucleosomes and histone H2A/H2B dimers, indicating that it may work by promoting nucleosome disassembly upon transcription. In support of this model, we show that FACT activity is abrogated by covalently crosslinking nucleosomal histones.
In Drosophila, germ cells migrate in embryonic development from the lumen of the developing gut towards the overlying mesoderm, where they enter the gonads. The gene wunen is responsible for guiding the germ cells early in this process. Here we report that the protein Wunen has two properties that allow it to use repulsion to guide the germ cells. Wunen can transform a permissive cellular environment into a repulsive one, and is expressed in the gut in a pattern that guides germ cells towards the mesoderm. Wunen shows strong similarity to the enzyme type 2 phosphatidic acid phophatase (PAP2)4, suggesting that it is involved in lipid metabolism.
ATP synthase is the universal enzyme that manufactures ATP from ADP and phosphate by using the energy derived from a transmembrane protonmotive gradient. It can also reverse itself and hydrolyse ATP to pump protons against an electrochemical gradient. ATP synthase carries out both its synthetic and hydrolytic cycles by a rotary mechanism. This has been confirmed in the direction of hydrolysis after isolation of the soluble F1 portion of the protein and visualization of the actual rotation of the central 'shaft' of the enzyme with respect to the rest of the molecule, making ATP synthase the world's smallest rotary engine. Here we present a model for this engine that accounts for its mechanochemical behaviour in both the hydrolysing and synthesizing directions. We conclude that the F1 motor achieves its high mechanical torque and almost 100% efficiency because it converts the free energy of ATP binding into elastic strain, which is then released by a coordinated kinetic and tightly coupled conformational mechanism to create a rotary torque.
X-ray analysis of the free-acid crystal form of the coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) revealed a conformational difference between the free NAD+ molecule and one bound in enzymes or complexed to Li+ ions. The pyrophosphate group showed asymmetry in the phosphate-oxygen bonds of the phosphate-oxygen-phosphate link; this bond at the nicotinamide side of the link is longer than that at the adenosine side by 0.04 angstrom. The crystal structure showed a novel intermolecular stacking of adenine and water molecules on opposite sides of nicotinamide that gives rise to a nicotinamide sandwich.
Murine macrophages are endowed with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide splitting activity that is markedly higher than that of other cells, tissues, or organs of the mouse. This enzyme therefore can be used as a biochemical marker for distinguishing macrophages from other cells of the lymphoreticular system and from polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
Glycine receptors are anchored at inhibitory chemical synapses by a cytoplasmic protein, gephyrin. Molecular cloning revealed the similarity of gephyrin to prokaryotic and invertebrate proteins essential for synthesizing a cofactor required for activity of molybdoenzymes. Gene targeting in mice showed that gephyrin is required both for synaptic clustering of glycine receptors in spinal cord and for molybdoenzyme activity in nonneural tissues. The mutant phenotype resembled that of humans with hereditary molybdenum cofactor deficiency and hyperekplexia (a failure of inhibitory neurotransmission), suggesting that gephyrin function may be impaired in both diseases.
Notch proteins are ligand-activated transmembrane receptors involved in cell-fate selection throughout development. No known enzymatic activity is contained within Notch and the molecular mechanism by which it transduces signals across the cell membrane is poorly understood. In many instances, Notch activation results in transcriptional changes in the nucleus through an association with members of the CSL family of DNA-binding proteins (where CSL stands for CBF1, Su(H), Lag-1). As Notch is located in the plasma membrane and CSL is a nuclear protein, two models have been proposed to explain how they interact. The first suggests that the two interact transiently at the membrane. The second postulates that Notch is cleaved by a protease, enabling the cleaved fragment to enter the nucleus. Here we show that signalling by a constitutively active membrane-bound Notch-1 protein requires the proteolytic release of the Notch intracellular domain (NICD), which interacts preferentially with CSL. Very small amounts of NICD are active, explaining why it is hard to detect in the nucleus in vivo. We also show that it is ligand binding that induces release of NICD.
In most eukaryotic cells, subsets of microtubules are adapted for specific functions by post-translational modifications (PTMs) of tubulin subunits. Acetylation of the epsilon-amino group of K40 on alpha-tubulin is a conserved PTM on the luminal side of microtubules that was discovered in the flagella of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Studies on the significance of microtubule acetylation have been limited by the undefined status of the alpha-tubulin acetyltransferase. Here we show that MEC-17, a protein related to the Gcn5 histone acetyltransferases and required for the function of touch receptor neurons in Caenorhabditis elegans, acts as a K40-specific acetyltransferase for alpha-tubulin. In vitro, MEC-17 exclusively acetylates K40 of alpha-tubulin. Disruption of the Tetrahymena MEC-17 gene phenocopies the K40R alpha-tubulin mutation and makes microtubules more labile. Depletion of MEC-17 in zebrafish produces phenotypes consistent with neuromuscular defects. In C. elegans, MEC-17 and its paralogue W06B11.1 are redundantly required for acetylation of MEC-12 alpha-tubulin, and contribute to the function of touch receptor neurons partly via MEC-12 acetylation and partly via another function, possibly by acetylating another protein. In summary, we identify MEC-17 as an enzyme that acetylates the K40 residue of alpha-tubulin, the only PTM known to occur on the luminal surface of microtubules.
An RNA enzyme derived from the self-splicing intervening sequence of Tetrahymena thermophila catalyses sequence-specific cleavage of an oligodeoxyribonucleotide substrate. Compared with RNA, the DNA substrate is bound very weakly and is cleaved very slowly, revealing the importance of the RNA 2'-hydroxyl group in both the binding and chemical steps. The finding that catalysis by RNA can extend to DNA substrates indicates new possibilities for the transposition of intervening sequences and for the design of DNA cleavage agents with novel sequence specificities.
The morphology of axon terminals changes with differentiation into mature synapses. A molecule that might regulate this process was identified by a screen of Drosophila mutants for abnormal motor activities. The still life (sif) gene encodes a protein homologous to guanine nucleotide exchange factors, which convert Rho-like guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) from a guanosine diphosphate-bound inactive state to a guanosine triphosphate-bound active state. The SIF proteins are found adjacent to the plasma membrane of synaptic terminals. Expression of a truncated SIF protein resulted in defects in neuronal morphology and induced membrane ruffling with altered actin localization in human KB cells. Thus, SIF proteins may regulate synaptic differentiation through the organization of the actin cytoskeleton by activating Rho-like GTPases.
Guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic GMP) and cholinergic agents stimulate incorporation of phosphate into specific nuclear acidic proteins of horse peripheral blood lymphocytes. Agents that raise intracellular adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP) inhibit nuclear acidic protein phosphorylation. The opposing effects of cyclic GMP and cyclic AMP upon nuclear protein phosphorylation parallel the effects of the cyclic nucleotides upon induction of lymphocyte proliferation.
The mating response pathway of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae includes a heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein) that activates a mitogen-activated protein MAP kinase cascade by an unknown mechanism. An amino-terminal fragment of the MAP kinase scaffold protein Ste5p that interfered with pheromone-induced cell cycle arrest was identified. A haploid-specific interaction between the amino terminus of Ste5p and the G protein beta subunit Ste4p was also detected in a two-hybrid assay, and the product of a signaling-defective allele of STE4 was defective in this interaction. In cells with a constitutively activated pheromone response pathway, epitope-tagged Ste4p was coimmunoprecipitated with Ste5p. Thus, association of the G protein and the MAP kinase cassette via the scaffolding protein Ste5p may transmit the G protein signal.
The vasopressor angiotensin II regulates vascular contractility and blood pressure through binding to type 1 angiotensin II receptors (AT1; refs 1, 2). Bradykinin, a vasodepressor, is a functional antagonist of angiotensin II (ref. 3). The two hormone systems are interconnected by the angiotensin-converting enzyme, which releases angiotensin II from its precursor and inactivates the vasodepressor bradykinin. Here we show that the AT1 receptor and the bradykinin (B2) receptor also communicate directly with each other. They form stable heterodimers, causing increased activation of G alpha(q) and G alpha(i) proteins, the two major signalling proteins triggered by AT1. Furthermore, the endocytotic pathway of both receptors changed with heterodimerization. This is the first example of signal enhancement triggered by heterodimerization of two different vasoactive hormone receptors.
Boron, as borate, appears to have a role in partitioning metabolism between the glycolytic and pentose-shunt pathways. This effect results from the association of borate with 6-phosphogluconic acid, forming a virtual substrate that inhibits the action of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. In the absence of borate, the inhibition of the enzyme is released, and excess phenolic acids are formed. These acids also associate strongly with borate and thus develop an autocatalytic system for production of excess phenolic acids which cause necrosis of tissue and eventual death of the plant.
Pre-steady state kinetics of misincorporation were used to investigate the addition of single nucleotides to nascent RNA by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase during transcription elongation. The results were fit with a branched kinetic mechanism that permits conformational switching, at each template position, between an activated and an unactivated enzyme complex, both of which can bind nucleotide triphosphates (NTPs) from solution. The complex exists most often in the long-lived activated state, and only becomes unactivated when transcription is slowed. This model permits multiple levels of nucleotide discrimination in transcription, since the complex can be "kinetically trapped" in the unactivated state in the absence of the correct NTP or if the 3' terminal residue is incorrectly matched. The transcription cleavage factor GreA (or an activity enhanced by GreA) increased the fidelity of transcription by preferential cleavage of transcripts containing misincorporated residues in the unactivated state of the elongation complex. This cleavage mechanism by GreA may prevent the formation of "dead-end" transcription complexes in vivo.
Listeria monocytogenes is a gram-positive, intracellular, food-borne pathogen that can cause severe illness in humans and animals. On infection, it is actively phagocytosed by macrophages; it then escapes from the phagosome, replicates in the cytosol, and subsequently spreads from cell to cell by a non-lytic mechanism driven by actin polymerization. Penetration of the phagosomal membrane is initiated by the secreted haemolysin listeriolysin O (LLO), which is essential for vacuolar escape in vitro and for virulence in animal models of infection. Reduction is required to activate the lytic activity of LLO in vitro, and we show here that reduction by the enzyme gamma-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiol reductase (GILT, also called Ifi30) is responsible for the activation of LLO in vivo. GILT is a soluble thiol reductase expressed constitutively within the lysosomes of antigen-presenting cells, and it accumulates in macrophage phagosomes as they mature into phagolysosomes. The enzyme is delivered by a mannose-6-phosphate receptor-dependent mechanism to the endocytic pathway, where amino- and carboxy-terminal pro-peptides are cleaved to generate a 30-kDa mature enzyme. The active site of GILT contains two cysteine residues in a CXXC motif that catalyses the reduction of disulphide bonds. Mice lacking GILT are deficient in generating major histocompatibility complex class-II-restricted CD4(+) T-cell responses to protein antigens that contain disulphide bonds. Here we show that these mice are resistant to L. monocytogenes infection. Replication of the organism in GILT-negative macrophages, or macrophages expressing an enzymatically inactive GILT mutant, is impaired because of delayed escape from the phagosome. GILT activates LLO within the phagosome by the thiol reductase mechanism shared by members of the thioredoxin family. In addition, purified GILT activates recombinant LLO, facilitating membrane permeabilization and red blood cell lysis. The data show that GILT is a critical host factor that facilitates L. monocytogenes infection.
The distribution in chicken retina of the alpha subunit of transducin, the guanine nucleotide--binding protein that couples light-dependent activation of rhodopsin with activation of guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate phosphodiesterase, was determined with the aid of a specific antiserum. alpha-Transducin was found in rod photoreceptor cells but was not detected in cones. These results show that rods and cones differ with respect to alpha-transducin content and suggest that the processes of phototransduction may differ correspondingly in rods and cones.
Rap1 is a Ras-like guanine-nucleotide-binding protein (GNBP) that is involved in a variety of signal-transduction processes. It regulates integrin-mediated cell adhesion and might activate extracellular signal-regulated kinase. Like other Ras-like GNBPs, Rap1 is regulated by guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). These GAPs increase the slow intrinsic GTPase reaction of Ras-like GNBPs by many orders of magnitude and allow tight regulation of signalling. The activation mechanism involves stabilization of the catalytic glutamine of the GNBP and, in most cases, the insertion of a catalytic arginine of GAP into the active site. Rap1 is a close homologue of Ras but does not possess the catalytic glutamine essential for GTP hydrolysis in all other Ras-like and Galpha proteins. Furthermore, RapGAPs are not related to other GAPs and apparently do not use a catalytic arginine residue. Here we present the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of the Rap1-specific Rap1GAP at 2.9 A. By mutational analysis, fluorescence titration and stopped-flow kinetic assay, we demonstrate that Rap1GAP provides a catalytic asparagine to stimulate GTP hydrolysis. Implications for the disease tuberous sclerosis are discussed.
Activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB after engagement of the T cell receptor (TCR) is important for T cell proliferation and activation during the adaptive immune response. Recent reports have elucidated a signaling pathway that involves the protein kinase C (PKC), the scaffold protein CARD11 (also called CARMA-1), the caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-containing protein Bcl10, and the paracaspase (protease related to caspases) MALT1 as critical intermediates linking the TCR to the IkappaB kinase (IKK) complex. However, the events proximal to the TCR that initiate the activation of this signaling pathway remain poorly defined. We demonstrate that 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) has an essential role in this pathway by regulating the activation of PKC and through signal-dependent recruiting of both PKC and CARD11 to lipid rafts. PDK1-associated PKC recruits the IKK complex, whereas PDK1-associated CARD11 recruits the Bcl10-MALT1 complex, thereby allowing activation of the IKK complex through Bcl10-MALT1-dependent ubiquitination of the IKK complex subunit known as NEMO (NF-kappaB essential modifier). Hence, PDK1 plays a critical role by nucleating the TCR-induced NF-kappaB activation pathway in T cells.
Spontaneous thymic leukaemia in experimental mice is the result of a complex series of genetically controlled events. An important step in this process involves the production by thymocytes of recombinant polytropic retroviruses (MCF viruses). These leukaemogenic agents arise by recombination of genes from the env regions of endogenous precursor viruses. Sequences in these regions encode the envelope glycoprotein gp70 (ref. 6). Thus far, each cloned isolate of recombinant virus from AKR and HRS/J mice has been found to possess unique oligonucleotide sequences in its env region, as well as clone-specific peptides in its gp70 (refs 7,8). Therefore, the polytropic viruses of these leukaemia-susceptible mice are extremely diverse. These findings suggest that random recombination of env genes gives rise to leukaemogenic polytropic viruses. McGrath and Weissman have proposed that thymocytes with cell surface receptors for the gp70 of a particular leukaemogenic virus are the target cells for malignant transformation by that specific virus. In view of the diversity of polytropic viral gp70, their hypothesis would predict extensive phenotypic diversity among spontaneous thymic leukaemias. In contrast, leukaemias induced by a particular leukaemogenic recombinant virus would always have the same phenotype. Here we verify these predictions experimentally.
To identify proteins that may participate in the activation of the protein kinase Raf, proteins that interact with Raf were selected in a two-hybrid screen. Two members of the 14-3-3 protein family were isolated that interacted with both the amino terminal regulatory regions of Raf and the kinase domain of Raf, but did not compete with the guanine nucleotide-binding protein Ras for binding to Raf. 14-3-3 proteins associated with Raf in mammalian cells and accompanied Raf to the membrane in the presence of activated Ras. In yeast cells expressing Raf and MEK, mammalian 14-3-3 beta or 14-3-3 zeta activated Raf to a similar extent as did expression of Ras. Therefore, 14-3-3 proteins may participate in or be required for the regulation of Raf function. These findings suggest a role for 14-3-3 proteins in Raf-mediated signal transduction.
Some 30,000 genes are expressed exclusively in the rat brain, many of which contain a genetic element called an identifier sequence located in at least one of their introns. The identifier sequences are transcribed by RNA polymerase III exclusively in neurons to produce two RNA species, BC1 and BC2, of 160 and 100 to 110 nucleotides. This transcriptional event may define regions of chromatin that contain neuronal-specific genes and may poise these genes for transcription by polymerase II by rendering the gene promoters accessible to soluble trans-acting molecules.
Human neutrophils can initiate the rapid degradation of extracellular matrix macromolecules by localizing the destructive process to sites of cell-substrate contact. Although plasma and its filtrates contain multiple proteinase inhibitors, these inhibitors did not prevent neutrophils from attacking either underlying fibronectin or elastin. However, subjacent substrates could be protected from neutrophils by recombinant secretory leukoprotease inhibitor, a structurally unique serine proteinase inhibitor whose natural counterpart is normally confined to human mucous secretions. The identification of this extravascular proteinase inhibitor as a potent regulator of subjacent proteolysis could lead to the development of a new class of anti-inflammatory therapeutics.
A complementary DNA clone encoding the alpha subunit of the adenylate cyclase stimulatory G protein (Gs) was isolated and identified. A bovine brain complementary DNA library was screened with an oligonucleotide probe derived from amino acid sequence common to known G proteins. The only clone that was obtained with this probe has a complementary DNA insert of approximately 1670 base pairs. An antibody to a peptide synthesized according to deduced amino acid sequence reacts specifically with the alpha subunit of Gs. In addition, RNA that hybridizes with probes made from the clone is detected in wild-type S49 cells; however, cyc- S49 cells, which are deficient in Gs alpha activity, are devoid of this messenger RNA.
Growth factors stimulate cells to take up excess nutrients and to use them for anabolic processes. The biochemical mechanism by which this is accomplished is not fully understood but it is initiated by phosphorylation of signalling proteins on tyrosine residues. Using a novel proteomic screen for phosphotyrosine-binding proteins, we have made the observation that an enzyme involved in glycolysis, the human M2 (fetal) isoform of pyruvate kinase (PKM2), binds directly and selectively to tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides. We show that binding of phosphotyrosine peptides to PKM2 results in release of the allosteric activator fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, leading to inhibition of PKM2 enzymatic activity. We also provide evidence that this regulation of PKM2 by phosphotyrosine signalling diverts glucose metabolites from energy production to anabolic processes when cells are stimulated by certain growth factors. Collectively, our results indicate that expression of this phosphotyrosine-binding form of pyruvate kinase is critical for rapid growth in cancer cells.
Many studies have established that a select subset of normal cellular genes are altered in cancer by point mutations, translocations or gene amplification. However, the vast majority of genetic changes that occur in neoplastic cells have not yet been identified. In an attempt to identify some of these other genetic changes, we have recently isolated a gene, GLI, by virtue of its amplification in a human glioblastoma. Subsequently, GLI was found to be amplified in other human glioblastomas (ref. 3 and unpublished data). To understand better the role of GLI in human neoplasia, we have now cloned the GLI complementary DNA (cDNA) and determined its nucleotide sequence. Analysis of the predicted translation product reveals that it contains five repeats of a DNA binding consensus sequence (zinc finger) originally described in Xenopus Transcription Factor III A (TFIIIA). Furthermore, these zinc fingers contain sequence elements that suggest the GLI gene product is a member of the recently described Kruppel family of zinc finger proteins. Additional experiments demonstrate that GLI is an evolutionarily conserved gene that is expressed in embryonal carcinoma cells but not in most adult tissues. The link between the developmentally important Kruppel family of genes and GLI is interesting considering the similarities between developing embryonic and neoplastic tissue.
Replication of the Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pT181, which occurs by the rolling circle mechanism, is accompanied by the covalent attachment of a approximately 12-residue oligodeoxy-nucleotide to one subunit of the dimeric plasmid-coded initiator protein, RepC. This oligonucleotide represents the plasmid sequence immediately 3' to the initiating nick site. The resulting heterodimeric protein lacks the topoisomerase and replication activities of unmodified RepC, suggesting that the regulation of plasmid DNA replication requires post-replicational inactivation of the initiator protein as well as control of its synthesis.
Cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the beta- and gamma-secretases generates the amino and carboxy termini, respectively, of the A beta amyloidogenic peptides A beta40 and A beta42--the major constituents of the amyloid plaques in the brain parenchyma of Alzheimer's disease patients. There is evidence that the polytopic membrane-spanning proteins, presenilin 1 and 2 (PS1 and PS2), are important determinants of gamma-secretase activity: mutations in PS1 and PS2 that are associated with early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease increase the production of A beta42 (refs 4-6), the more amyloidogenic peptide; gamma-secretase activity is reduced in neuronal cultures derived from PS1-deficient mouse embryos; and directed mutagenesis of two conserved aspartates in transmembrane segments of PS1 inactivates the ability of gamma-secretase to catalyse processing of APP within its transmembrane domain. It is unknown, however, whether PS1 (which has little or no homology to any known aspartyl protease) is itself a transmembrane aspartyl protease or a gamma-secretase cofactor, or helps to colocalize gamma-secretase and APP. Here we report photoaffinity labelling of PS1 (and PS2) by potent gamma-secretase inhibitors that were designed to function as transition state analogue inhibitors directed to the active site of an aspartyl protease. This observation indicates that PS1 (and PS2) may contain the active site of gamma-secretase. Interestingly, the intact, single-chain form of wild-type PS1 is not labelled by an active-site-directed photoaffinity probe, suggesting that intact wild-type PS1 may be an aspartyl protease zymogen.
RNA degradation is a determining factor in the control of gene expression. The maturation, turnover and quality control of RNA is performed by many different classes of ribonucleases. Ribonuclease II (RNase II) is a major exoribonuclease that intervenes in all of these fundamental processes; it can act independently or as a component of the exosome, an essential RNA-degrading multiprotein complex. RNase II-like enzymes are found in all three kingdoms of life, but there are no structural data for any of the proteins of this family. Here we report the X-ray crystallographic structures of both the ligand-free (at 2.44 A resolution) and RNA-bound (at 2.74 A resolution) forms of Escherichia coli RNase II. In contrast to sequence predictions, the structures show that RNase II is organized into four domains: two cold-shock domains, one RNB catalytic domain, which has an unprecedented alphabeta-fold, and one S1 domain. The enzyme establishes contacts with RNA in two distinct regions, the 'anchor' and the 'catalytic' regions, which act synergistically to provide catalysis. The active site is buried within the RNB catalytic domain, in a pocket formed by four conserved sequence motifs. The structure shows that the catalytic pocket is only accessible to single-stranded RNA, and explains the specificity for RNA versus DNA cleavage. It also explains the dynamic mechanism of RNA degradation by providing the structural basis for RNA translocation and enzyme processivity. We propose a reaction mechanism for exonucleolytic RNA degradation involving key conserved residues. Our three-dimensional model corroborates all existing biochemical data for RNase II, and elucidates the general basis for RNA degradation. Moreover, it reveals important structural features that can be extrapolated to other members of this family.
The crystal structure of the guanine-nucleotide-binding domain of p21 (amino acids 1-166) complexed to the guanosine triphosphate analogue guanosine-5'-(beta, gamma-imido)triphosphate (GppNp) has been determined at a resolution of 2.6 A. The topological order of secondary structure elements is the same as that of the guanine-nucleotide-binding domain of bacterial elongation factor EF-Tu. Many interactions between nucleotide and protein have been identified. The effects of point mutations and the conservation of amino-acid sequence in the guanine-nucleotide-binding proteins are discussed.
We report the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of human ADAR2, an RNA editing enzyme, at 1.7 angstrom resolution. The structure reveals a zinc ion in the active site and suggests how the substrate adenosine is recognized. Unexpectedly, inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6) is buried within the enzyme core, contributing to the protein fold. Although there are no reports that adenosine deaminases that act on RNA (ADARs) require a cofactor, we show that IP6 is required for activity. Amino acids that coordinate IP6 in the crystal structure are conserved in some adenosine deaminases that act on transfer RNA (tRNA) (ADATs), related enzymes that edit tRNA. Indeed, IP6 is also essential for in vivo and in vitro deamination of adenosine 37 of tRNAala by ADAT1.
The incidence of human malaria has increased during the past 20 years; 270 million people are now estimated to be infected with the parasite. An important contribution to this increase has been the appearance of malaria organisms resistant to quinoline-containing antimalarials such as chloroquine and quinine. These drugs accumulate in the acid food vacuoles of the intraerythrocytic-stage malaria parasite, although the mechanism of their specific toxicity in this organelle is uncertain. The primary function of the food vacuole is the proteolysis of ingested red cell haemoglobin to provide the growing parasite with essential amino acids. Haemoglobin breakdown in the food vacuole releases haem, which if soluble can damage biological membranes and inhibit a variety of enzymes. Rather than degrading or excreting the haem, the parasite has evolved a novel pathway for its detoxification by incorporating it into an insoluble crystalline material called haemozoin or malaria pigment. These crystals form in the food vacuole of the parasite concomitant with haemoglobin degradation, where they remain until the infected red cell bursts. The structure of haemozoin comprises a polymer of haems linked between the central ferric ion of one haem and a carboxylate side-group oxygen of another. This structure does not form spontaneously from either free haem or haemoglobin under physiological conditions, and the biochemistry of its formation is unclear. Here we report the identification and characterization of a haem polymerase enzyme activity from extracts of Plasmodium falciparum trophozoites, and show that this enzyme is inhibited by quinoline-containing drugs such as chloroquine and quinine. This provides a possible explanation for the highly stage-specific antimalarial properties of these drugs.
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) regulate pigmentation and adrenal cortical function, respectively. These peptides also have a variety of biological activities in other areas, including the brain, the pituitary, and the immune system. A complete understanding of the biological activities of these hormones requires the isolation and characterization of their corresponding receptors. The murine and human MSH receptors (MSH-Rs) and a human ACTH receptor (ACTH-R) were cloned. These receptors define a subfamily of receptors coupled to guanine nucleotide-binding proteins that may include the cannabinoid receptor.
High-affinity nucleic acid ligands for a protein were isolated by a procedure that depends on alternate cycles of ligand selection from pools of variant sequences and amplification of the bound species. Multiple rounds exponentially enrich the population for the highest affinity species that can be clonally isolated and characterized. In particular one eight-base region of an RNA that interacts with the T4 DNA polymerase was chosen and randomized. Two different sequences were selected by this procedure from the calculated pool of 65,536 species. One is the wild-type sequence found in the bacteriophage mRNA; one is varied from wild type at four positions. The binding constants of these two RNA's to T4 DNA polymerase are equivalent. These protocols with minimal modification can yield high-affinity ligands for any protein that binds nucleic acids as part of its function; high-affinity ligands could conceivably be developed for any target molecule.
Long-term memory is thought to be mediated by protein synthesis-dependent, late-phase long-term potentiation (L-LTP). Two secretory proteins, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), have been implicated in this process, but their relationship is unclear. Here we report that tPA, by activating the extracellular protease plasmin, converts the precursor proBDNF to the mature BDNF (mBDNF), and that such conversion is critical for L-LTP expression in mouse hippocampus. Moreover, application of mBDNF is sufficient to rescue L-LTP when protein synthesis is inhibited, which suggests that mBDNF is a key protein synthesis product for L-LTP expression.
A special proteolipid (a hydrophobic protein) has been extracted and purified from nerve-ending membranes and total particulate matter of gray areas of the central nervous system. Such a proteolipid shows a high affinity for binding d-tubocurarine, serotonin, and atropine and has been called receptor proteolipid. The interaction of this proteolipid with atropine sulfate was studied with light scattering and polarization of fluorescence. The changes observed, which follow a cooperative type of curve, were attributed to the aggregation of the proteolipid macromolecules. Such a phenomenon was then observed under the electron microscope. A receptor proteolipid having a high affinity for binding acetylcholine, hexamethonium, and other cholinergic drugs was isolated and purified from electric tissue of fishes and from electroplax membranes. Such a proteolipid was also extracted from membranes from which acetylcholinesterase had been removed, and it was concluded that this enzyme and the receptor proteolipid are two different macromolecules. A high affinity binding site with a dissociation constant of K1 equal to 10(-7) and about ten sites with K2 equal to 10(-5) were recognized in the receptor proteolipid. Under the electron microscope the receptor proteolipid of brain appears as a rod-shaped macromolecule which may assume paracrystalline arrays with 10(-8) molar atropine sulfate. Similarly the receptor proteolipid from electric tissue and from skeletal muscle may form paracrystalline arrays under the action of acetylcholine and hexamethonium. A model of the cholinergic receptor based on the properties of the proteolipid is presented. Preliminary work indicates the possibility of obtaining a biophysical response to acetylcholine when the receptor proteolipid is embedded in artificial bilayered lipid membrance.
Anopheles gambiae is the principal vector of malaria, a disease that afflicts more than 500 million people and causes more than 1 million deaths each year. Tenfold shotgun sequence coverage was obtained from the PEST strain of A. gambiae and assembled into scaffolds that span 278 million base pairs. A total of 91% of the genome was organized in 303 scaffolds; the largest scaffold was 23.1 million base pairs. There was substantial genetic variation within this strain, and the apparent existence of two haplotypes of approximately equal frequency ("dual haplotypes") in a substantial fraction of the genome likely reflects the outbred nature of the PEST strain. The sequence produced a conservative inference of more than 400,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms that showed a markedly bimodal density distribution. Analysis of the genome sequence revealed strong evidence for about 14,000 protein-encoding transcripts. Prominent expansions in specific families of proteins likely involved in cell adhesion and immunity were noted. An expressed sequence tag analysis of genes regulated by blood feeding provided insights into the physiological adaptations of a hematophagous insect.
Several lines of evidence suggest that both sweet and bitter tastes are transduced via receptors coupled to heterotrimeric guanine-nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins). Gustducin is a taste receptor cell (TRC)-specific G protein that is closely related to the transducins. Gustducin and rod transducin, which is also expressed in TRCs, have been proposed to couple bitter-responsive receptors to TRC-specific phosphodiesterases to regulate intracellular cyclic nucleotides. Here we investigate gustducin's role in taste transduction by generating and characterizing mice deficient in the gustducin alpha-subunit (alpha-gustducin). As predicted, the mutant mice showed reduced behavioural and electrophysiological responses to bitter compounds, whereas they were indistinguishable from wild-type controls in their responses to salty and sour stimuli. Unexpectedly, mutant mice also exhibited reduced behavioural and electrophysiological responses to sweet compounds. Our results suggest that gustducin is a principal mediator of both bitter and sweet signal transduction.
The mechanism by which the estrogen receptor and other steroid hormone receptors regulate gene expression in eukaryotic cells is not well understood. In this study, a complementary DNA clone containing the entire translated portion of the messenger RNA for the estrogen receptor from MCF-7 human breast cancer cells was sequenced and then expressed in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO-K1) cells to give a functional protein. An open reading frame of 1785 nucleotides in the complementary DNA corresponded to a polypeptide of 595 amino acids and a molecular weight of 66,200, which is in good agreement with published molecular weight values of 65,000 to 70,000 for the estrogen receptor. Homogenates of transformed Chinese hamster ovary cells containing a protein that bound [3H]estradiol and sedimented as a 4S complex in salt-containing sucrose gradients and as an 8 to 9S complex in the absence of salt. Interaction of this receptor-[3H]estradiol complex with a monoclonal antibody that is specific for primate ER confirms the identity of the expressed complementary DNA as human estrogen receptor. Amino acid sequence comparisons revealed significant regional homology among the human estrogen receptor, the human glucocorticoid receptor, and the putative v-erbA oncogene product. This suggests that steroid receptor genes and the avian erythroblastosis viral oncogene are derived from a common primordial gene. The homologous region, which is rich in cysteine, lysine, and arginine, may represent the DNA-binding domain of these proteins.
The genes required for autonomous replication and incompatibility in the antibiotic resistance plasmids R100 and R1 have been located within a 2.5-kilobase region of the 90-kilobase genome, within which the incompatibility gene occupies a 1.3-kilobase region excluding the replication origin. We now report that three RNA species are synthesized in vitro from the 2.5-kilobase region, which R100 and R1 have in common. One, a long RNA molecule which is transcribed in the direction of DNA replication, probably acts as a messenger or a protein required for plasmid replication. The second RNA species, only 91 nucleotides long, is transcribed in the opposite direction, from a region of the DNA entirely contained within the first and known to specify incompatibility and copy control functions. The third RNA species, 150 bases long, is transcribed from a region including the replication origin; it may be a primer of DNA synthesis or, in conjunction with the second of the three RNA species, an influence in the control of replication.
Mutations that cause pituitary dwarfism in the mouse reside in the gene encoding the transcription factor growth hormone factor 1 (GHF1 or pit1). These dwarf mice (dw and dwJ) are deficient in growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) synthesis and exhibit pituitary hypoplasia, suggesting a stem cell defect. With antisense oligonucleotide technology, a cell culture model of this genetic defect was developed. Specific inhibition of GHF1 synthesis by complementary oligonucleotides led to a marked decrease in GH and PRL expression and to a marked decrease in proliferation of somatotrophic cell lines. These results provide direct evidence that the homeodomain protein GHF1 is required not only for the establishment and maintenance of the differentiated phenotype but for cell proliferation as well.
The red clover necrotic mosaic virus genome is composed of two single-stranded RNA components, RNA-1 and RNA-2. The viral capsid protein is translated from a subgenomic RNA (sgRNA) that is transcribed from genomic RNA-1. Here, a 34-nucleotide sequence in RNA-2 is shown to be required for transcription of sgRNA. Mutations that prevent base-pairing between the RNA-1 subgenomic promoter and the 34-nucleotide trans-activator prevent expression of a reporter gene. A model is proposed in which direct binding of RNA-2 to RNA-1 trans-activates sgRNA synthesis. This RNA-mediated regulation of transcription is unusual among RNA viruses, which typically rely on protein regulators.
Although the biochemical mechanism of action of phorbol ester tumour promoters is not fully understood, it is known that phorbol ester binding to the cell surface causes rapid changes in calcium flux and phospholipid metabolism. A protein kinase activity has recently been described which is dependent on calcium and acidic phospholipids and is further enhanced by diacylglycerol. Previously, we have observed that phorbol ester treatment of EL4 mouse thymoma cells causes a rapid decrease in cytosolic calcium, phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (Ca, PL-PK) activity, which is mediated through the specific phorbol ester cell-surface receptors identified on EL4 cells. We now show that treatment of parietal yolk sacs (PYS-2) cells with biologically active 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) provokes a rapid decrease in cytosolic Ca, PL-PK activity that is accompanied by a significant increase in the amount of Ca, PL-PK activity associated with the plasma membrane fraction. These results suggest that the rapid and tight association of Ca, PL-PK activity with the plasma membrane may be an early event in mediating some of the effects of phorbol esters.
Glycolysis and apoptosis are considered major but independent pathways that are critical for cell survival. The activity of BAD, a pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family member, is regulated by phosphorylation in response to growth/survival factors. Here we undertook a proteomic analysis to assess whether BAD might also participate in mitochondrial physiology. In liver mitochondria, BAD resides in a functional holoenzyme complex together with protein kinase A and protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) catalytic units, Wiskott-Aldrich family member WAVE-1 as an A kinase anchoring protein, and glucokinase (hexokinase IV). BAD is required to assemble the complex in that Bad-deficient hepatocytes lack this complex, resulting in diminished mitochondria-based glucokinase activity and blunted mitochondrial respiration in response to glucose. Glucose deprivation results in dephosphorylation of BAD, and BAD-dependent cell death. Moreover, the phosphorylation status of BAD helps regulate glucokinase activity. Mice deficient for BAD or bearing a non-phosphorylatable BAD(3SA) mutant display abnormal glucose homeostasis including profound defects in glucose tolerance. This combination of proteomics, genetics and physiology indicates an unanticipated role for BAD in integrating pathways of glucose metabolism and apoptosis.
Electron transfer in nitrogenase involves a gating process initiated by MgATP (magnesium adenosine triphosphate) binding to Fe-protein. The redox site, an 4Fe:4S cluster, is structurally separated from the MgATP binding site. For MgATP hydrolysis to be coupled to electron transfer, a signal transduction mechanism is proposed that is similar to that in guanosine triphosphatase proteins. Based on the three-dimensional structure of Fe-protein, Asp125 is likely to be part of a putative transduction path. Altered Fe-protein with Glu replacing Asp has been prepared and retains the ability for the initial nucleotide-dependent conformational change. However, either MgADP or MgATP can induce the shift and Mg binding to the nucleotide is no longer essential.
Drosophila exhibits a circadian rest-activity cycle, but it is not known whether fly rest constitutes sleep or is mere inactivity. It is shown here that, like mammalian sleep, rest in Drosophila is characterized by an increased arousal threshold and is homeostatically regulated independently of the circadian clock. As in mammals, rest is abundant in young flies, is reduced in older flies, and is modulated by stimulants and hypnotics. Several molecular markers modulated by sleep and waking in mammals are modulated by rest and activity in Drosophila, including cytochrome oxidase C, the endoplasmic reticulum chaperone protein BiP, and enzymes implicated in the catabolism of monoamines. Flies lacking one such enzyme, arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase, show increased rest after rest deprivation. These results implicate the catabolism of monoamines in the regulation of sleep and waking in the fly and suggest that Drosophila may serve as a model system for the genetic dissection of sleep.
Since the initial observations in the 1950s a large number of neurotransmitters and hormones have been shown to influence phosphatidylinositol (PI) metabolism in brain and peripheral ganglia (see ref. 3 for review). This has led to the suggestion that PI is part of an intracellular second messenger system for some types of diffusible chemical factors. Consistent with this are recent reports that one of the products of PI turnover (diacylglycerol) stimulates the Ca-dependent phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (kinase C) while a second (inositol trisphosphate) causes the release of calcium from intracellular stores. Thus it is possible that at least some brain neurotransmitters utilize the PI system to produce functional effects that are in addition to and which outlast the very brief physiological responses they elicit. Although it had been anticipated that another class of receptors might inhibit receptor-mediated stimulation of PI breakdown, no clear examples of such effects have been described. We now report that acidic amino acids, which are that acidic amino acids, which are thought to be excitatory neurotransmitters at the majority of brain synapses, strongly inhibit the stimulation of PI metabolism elicited by carbachol, histamine, or by potassium-induced depolarization, without changing the response to noradrenaline. As well as indicating a novel function for the excitatory amino acids, these results suggest that the central nervous system possesses cell-cell interactions of a previously unsuspected type.
DNA polymerase III is an enzyme activity in eukaryotic cells which under certain conditions shows strong preference for polyadenylic acid as template when primed by oligodeoxythymidylate. Its first complete separation from other DNA polymerases in human lymphoblasts is reported. This enzyme is biochemically and immunologically distinct from DNA polymerase I and from viral reverse transcriptase from a primtate type C virus.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is a polypeptide growth factor which stimulates the proliferation and differentiation of T lymphocytes. The receptor for IL-2 is expressed on activated T lymphocytes, cloned IL-2 dependent cells and several other cell types. Analysis of the primary structure and of immune-precipitated receptor suggests that this molecule has no intrinsic signal transduction function, unlike other growth factors. IL-2 interaction with a high affinity receptor has been shown, however, to activate the calcium/phospholipid-dependent protein kinase C (PK-C) presumably via phosphoinositide hydrolysis. Members of a family of closely related guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) regulate a diverse group of metabolic events. Two of them, Gs and Gi, stimulate and inhibit adenylate cyclase activity respectively, and other G proteins are involved in diverse signal transduction system. Another member, Go, has no known function and activation of phospholipase C has been attributed to the action of an unidentified G protein, Gp. Since it has been observed that IL-2 inhibits the catalytic activity of adenylate cyclase and that agents such as PGE2 which stimulate adenylate cyclase activity inhibit the lymphoproliferative response to IL-2, association of GTP binding proteins with IL-2 signal transduction was investigated. In this report we describe for the first time the participation of a GTP binding protein in the action of a polypeptide growth factor, interleukin-2.
The selective degradation of messenger RNAs enables cells to regulate the levels of particular mRNAs in response to changes in the environment. Ribonuclease (RNase) E, a single-strand-specific endonuclease that is found in a multi-enzyme complex known as the 'degradosome', initiates the degradation of many mRNAs in Escherichia coli. Its relative lack of sequence specificity and the presence of many potential cleavage sites in mRNA substrates cannot explain why mRNA decay frequently proceeds in a net 5'-to-3' direction. I have prepared covalently closed circular derivatives of natural substrates, the rpsT mRNA encoding ribosomal protein S20 and the 9S precursor to 5S ribosomal RNA, and find that these derivatives are considerably more resistant to cleavage in vitro by RNase E than are linear molecules. Moreover, antisense oligo-deoxynucleotides complementary to the 5' end of linear substrates significantly reduce the latter's susceptibility to attack by RNase E. Finally, natural substrates with terminal 5'-triphosphate groups are poorly cleaved by RNase E in vitro, whereas 5' monophosphorylated substrates are strongly preferred. These results show that RNase E has inherent vectorial properties, with its activity depending on the 5' end of its substrates; this can account for the direction of mRNA decay in E. coli, the phenomenon of 'all or none' mRNA decay, and the stabilization provided by 5' stem-loop structures.
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy can now be used to investigate the biochemical energetics of human tissues and organs noninvasively. The method already has increased our understanding of some muscle diseases, has provided information from muscle metabolism about whole-body functions, control, and hormonal status, has helped in the elucidation of hitherto unrecognized causes of disease, and yielded new ideas about the control of bioenergetics in vivo. Studies on the biochemistry of human brain, liver, heart, and kidney are just beginning. Further investigations of well-selected patients are likely to bring biochemistry and clinical practice closer together.
Marked alterations in cellular energy metabolism are a universal hallmark of the ageing process. The biogenesis and function of mitochondria, the energy-generating organelles in eukaryotic cells, are primary longevity determinants. Genetic or pharmacological manipulations of mitochondrial activity profoundly affect the lifespan of diverse organisms. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating mitochondrial biogenesis and energy metabolism during ageing are poorly understood. Prohibitins are ubiquitous, evolutionarily conserved proteins, which form a ring-like, high-molecular-mass complex at the inner membrane of mitochondria. Here, we show that the mitochondrial prohibitin complex promotes longevity by modulating mitochondrial function and fat metabolism in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. We found that prohibitin deficiency shortens the lifespan of otherwise wild-type animals. Notably, knockdown of prohibitin promotes longevity in diapause mutants or under conditions of dietary restriction. In addition, prohibitin deficiency extends the lifespan of animals with compromised mitochondrial function or fat metabolism. Depletion of prohibitin influences ATP levels, animal fat content and mitochondrial proliferation in a genetic-background- and age-specific manner. Together, these findings reveal a novel mechanism regulating mitochondrial biogenesis and function, with opposing effects on energy metabolism, fat utilization and ageing in C. elegans. Prohibitin may have a similar key role in modulating energy metabolism during ageing in mammals.
As a result of an early deficiency in cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase activity, guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate accumulates in retinal photoreceptor cells before they begin to degenerate. It is suggested that degeneration of the photoreceptor cells is related to an imbalance in their metabolism or function which is caused by the elevated levels of cyclic guanosine monophosphate.
Heterotrimeric G proteins couple various receptors to intracellular effector molecules. Although the role of the G alpha subunit in effector activation, guanine nucleotide exchange and GTP hydrolysis has been well studied, the cellular functions of the G beta subunits are less well understood. G beta gamma dimers bind G alpha subunits and anchor them to the membrane for presentation to the receptor. In specific systems, the G beta subunits have also been implicated in direct coupling to ion channels and to effector molecules. We have isolated Drosophila melanogaster mutants defective in an eye-specific G-protein beta-subunit (G beta e), and show here that the beta-subunit is essential for G-protein-receptor coupling in vivo. Remarkably, G beta mutants are also severely defective in the deactivation of the light response, demonstrating an essential role for the G beta subunit in terminating the active state of this signalling cascade.
Genetic studies indicated that the Drosophila melanogaster protein REAPER (RPR) controls apoptosis during embryo development. Induction of RPR expression in Drosophila Schneider cells rapidly stimulated apoptosis. RPR-mediated apoptosis was blocked by N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone (Z-VAD-fmk), which suggests that an interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme (ICE)-like protease is required for RPR function. RPR-induced apoptosis was associated with increased ceramide production that was also blocked by Z-VAD-fmk, which suggests that ceramide generation requires an ICE-like protease as well. Thus, the intracellular RPR protein uses cell death signaling pathways similar to those used by the vertebrate transmembrane receptors Fas (CD95) and tumor necrosis factor receptor type 1.
Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme essential for the replication of chromosome termini in most eukaryotes. Telomerase RNA components have been identified from many organisms, but no protein component has been demonstrated to catalyze telomeric DNA extension. Telomerase was purified from Euplotes aediculatus, a ciliated protozoan, and one of its proteins was partially sequenced by nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Cloning and sequence analysis of the corresponding gene revealed that this 123-kilodalton protein (p123) contains reverse transcriptase motifs. A yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) homolog was found and subsequently identified as EST2 (ever shorter telomeres), deletion of which had independently been shown to produce telomere defects. Introduction of single amino acid substitutions within the reverse transcriptase motifs of Est2 protein led to telomere shortening and senescence in yeast, indicating that these motifs are important for catalysis of telomere elongation in vivo. In vitro telomeric DNA extension occurred with extracts from wild-type yeast but not from est2 mutants or mutants deficient in telomerase RNA. Thus, the reverse transcriptase protein fold, previously known to be involved in retroviral replication and retrotransposition, is essential for normal chromosome telomere replication in diverse eukaryotes.
Many organisms can enter a dormant state or diapause to survive harsh environmental conditions for extended durations. When Caenorhabditis elegans larvae enter dauer they arrest feeding but remain active and motile, yet become stress-resistant, extremely long-lived and non-ageing. Entry into dauer is associated with a reduction in insulin-like signalling, the accumulation of nutritive resources and a concomitant global change in metabolism, yet the precise molecular and physiological processes that enable long-term survival in the absence of caloric intake remain largely unknown. We show here that C. elegans larvae that lack LKB1/AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) signalling enter dauer normally, but then rapidly consume their stored energy and prematurely expire following vital organ failure. We found that this signalling pathway acts in adipose-like tissues to downregulate triglyceride hydrolysis so that these lipid reserves are rationed to last the entire duration of the arrest. Indeed, the downregulation of adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL-1) activity suppresses both the rapid depletion of stored lipids and reduced life span of AMPK mutant dauers, while AMPK directly phosphorylates ATGL-1. Finally, we show that the slow release of energy during dauer is critical for appropriate long-term osmoregulation, which fails as triglyceride resources become depleted. These mechanisms may be essential for survival through diapause, hibernation, or long-term fasting in diverse organisms and may also underlie AMPK-dependent life span extension.
The product of the gene RCC1 (regulator of chromosome condensation) in a BHK cell line is involved in the control of mitotic events. Homologous genes have been found in Xenopus, Drosophila and yeast. A human genomic DNA fragment and complementary DNA that complement a temperature-sensitive mutation of RCC1 in BHK21 cells encode a protein of relative molecular mass 45,000 (Mr 45K) which is located in the nucleus and binds to chromatin. We have recently isolated a protein from HeLa cells that strongly binds an anti-RCC1 antibody and has the same molecular mass, DNA-binding properties, and amino-acid sequence as the 205 residues already identified. HeLa cell RCC1 is complexed to a protein of Mr 25K. We have shown that this 25K protein has a sequence homologous to the translated reading frame of TC4, a cDNA found by screening a human teratocarcinoma cDNA library with oligonucleotides coding for a ras consensus sequence, and that the protein binds GDP and GTP. We have referred to this protein as the Ran protein (ras-related nuclear protein). In addition to the fraction of Ran protein complexed to RCC1, a 25-fold molar excess of the protein over RCC1 was found in the nucleoplasm of HeLa cells. Here we show that RCC1 specifically catalyses the exchange of guanine nucleotides on the Ran protein but not on the protein c-Ha-ras p21 (p21ras).
The comparison of the genomes of two very closely related human mucosal pathogens, Mycoplasma genitalium and Mycoplasma pneumoniae, has helped define the essential functions of a self-replicating minimal cell, as well as what constitutes a mycoplasma. Here we report the complete sequence of a more distant phylogenetic relative of those bacteria, Ureaplasma urealyticum (parvum biovar), which is also a mucosal pathogen of humans. It is the third mycoplasma to be sequenced, and has the smallest sequenced prokaryotic genome except for M. genitalium. Although the U. urealyticum genome is similar to the two sequenced mycoplasma genomes, features make this organism unique among mycoplasmas and all bacteria. Almost all ATP synthesis is the result of urea hydrolysis, which generates an energy-producing electrochemical gradient. Some highly conserved eubacterial enzymes appear not to be encoded by U. urealyticum, including the cell-division protein FtsZ, chaperonins GroES and GroEL, and ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase. U. urealyticum has six closely related iron transporters, which apparently arose through gene duplication, suggesting that it has a kind of respiration system not present in other small genome bacteria The genome is only 25.5% G+C in nucleotide content, and the G+C content of individual genes may predict how essential those genes are to ureaplasma survival.
Blood pressure is critically controlled by angiotensins, which are vasopressor peptides specifically released by the enzyme renin from the tail of angiotensinogen-a non-inhibitory member of the serpin family of protease inhibitors. Although angiotensinogen has long been regarded as a passive substrate, the crystal structures solved here to 2.1 A resolution show that the angiotensin cleavage site is inaccessibly buried in its amino-terminal tail. The conformational rearrangement that makes this site accessible for proteolysis is revealed in our 4.4 A structure of the complex of human angiotensinogen with renin. The co-ordinated changes involved are seen to be critically linked by a conserved but labile disulphide bridge. Here we show that the reduced unbridged form of angiotensinogen is present in the circulation in a near 40:60 ratio with the oxidized sulphydryl-bridged form, which preferentially interacts with receptor-bound renin. We propose that this redox-responsive transition of angiotensinogen to a form that will more effectively release angiotensin at a cellular level contributes to the modulation of blood pressure. Specifically, we demonstrate the oxidative switch of angiotensinogen to its more active sulphydryl-bridged form in the maternal circulation in pre-eclampsia-the hypertensive crisis of pregnancy that threatens the health and survival of both mother and child.
Backbone-engineered HIV-1 protease was prepared by a total chemical synthesis approach that combines the act of joining two peptides with the generation of an analog structure. Unprotected synthetic peptide segments corresponding to the two halves of the HIV-1 protease monomer polypeptide chain were joined cleanly and in high yield through unique mutually reactive functional groups, one on each segment. Ligation was performed in 6 molar guanidine hydrochloride, thus circumventing limited solubility of protected peptide segments, the principal problem of the classical approach to the chemical synthesis of proteins. The resulting fully active HIV-1 protease analog contained a thioester replacement for the natural peptide bond between Gly51-Gly52 in each of the two active site flaps, a region known to be highly sensitive to mutational changes of amino acid side chains.
An RNA enzyme that catalyzes the RNA-templated joining of RNA was converted to a format whereby two enzymes catalyze each other's synthesis from a total of four oligonucleotide substrates. These cross-replicating RNA enzymes undergo self-sustained exponential amplification in the absence of proteins or other biological materials. Amplification occurs with a doubling time of about 1 hour and can be continued indefinitely. Populations of various cross-replicating enzymes were constructed and allowed to compete for a common pool of substrates, during which recombinant replicators arose and grew to dominate the population. These replicating RNA enzymes can serve as an experimental model of a genetic system. Many such model systems could be constructed, allowing different selective outcomes to be related to the underlying properties of the genetic system.
A cycloheximide-sensitive protein responsive to adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate has been postulated to participate in the regulation of cholesterol side-chain cleavage activity in steroidogenic tissues. Such a steroidogenesis activator polypeptide (SAP) had been isolated from rat adrenocortical tissue and partially characterized. Now a polypeptide with comparable chromatographic behavior and biological activity has been purified from the rat H-540 Leydig cell tumor in quantities sufficient for amino acid sequencing. The activator contains 30 amino acid residues and has a molecular weight of 3215. The synthetic construct based on this sequence is virtually equipotent with native H-540 tumor SAP in an adrenal mitochondrial cholesterol side-chain cleavage assay. Hormonal regulation of the intracellular concentration of this activator may control the rate of cholesterol metabolism in steroidogenic organs.
An "escape hatch" from the cocoon of Antheraea pernyi is established by the hydrolytic action of a virtually pure proteinase which the moth first secretes and then dissolves by means of a solvent which maintains the enzyme at optimum pH. The proteinase is both synthesized and secreted by the maxillary galeae. The solvent derives from a pair of labial glands which have the form of long convoluted tubules lying alongside the foregut and opening to the exterior through a single aperture in the head.
Sodium-potassium ATPase is an ATP-powered ion pump that establishes concentration gradients for Na(+) and K(+) ions across the plasma membrane in all animal cells by pumping Na(+) from the cytoplasm and K(+) from the extracellular medium. Such gradients are used in many essential processes, notably for generating action potentials. Na(+), K(+)-ATPase is a member of the P-type ATPases, which include sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase and gastric H(+), K(+)-ATPase, among others, and is the target of cardiac glycosides. Here we describe a crystal structure of this important ion pump, from shark rectal glands, consisting of alpha- and beta-subunits and a regulatory FXYD protein, all of which are highly homologous to human ones. The ATPase was fixed in a state analogous to E2.2K(+).P(i), in which the ATPase has a high affinity for K(+) and still binds P(i), as in the first crystal structure of pig kidney enzyme at 3.5 A resolution. Clearly visualized now at 2.4 A resolution are coordination of K(+) and associated water molecules in the transmembrane binding sites and a phosphate analogue (MgF(4)(2-)) in the phosphorylation site. The crystal structure shows that the beta-subunit has a critical role in K(+) binding (although its involvement has previously been suggested) and explains, at least partially, why the homologous Ca(2+)-ATPase counter-transports H(+) rather than K(+), despite the coordinating residues being almost identical.
Targeting of protein modification enzymes is a key biochemical step to achieve specific and effective posttranslational modifications. Two alternatively spliced ZIP1 and ZIP2 proteins are described, which bind to both Kvbeta2 subunits of potassium channel and protein kinase C (PKC) zeta, thereby acting as a physical link in the assembly of PKCzeta-ZIP-potassium channel complexes. ZIP1 and ZIP2 differentially stimulate phosphorylation of Kvbeta2 by PKCzeta. They also interact to form heteromultimers, which allows for a hybrid stimulatory activity to PKCzeta. Finally, ZIP1 and ZIP2 coexist in the same cell type and are elevated differentially by neurotrophic factors. These results provide a mechanism for specificity and regulation of PKCzeta-targeted phosphorylation.
One of the most dominant influences in the patterning of multicellular embryos is exerted by the Hedgehog (Hh) family of secreted signaling proteins. Here, we identify a segment polarity gene in Drosophila melanogaster, skinny hedgehog (ski), and show that its product is required in Hh-expressing cells for production of appropriate signaling activity in embryos and in the imaginal precursors of adult tissues. The ski gene encodes an apparent acyltransferase, and we provide genetic and biochemical evidence that Hh proteins from ski mutant cells retain carboxyl-terminal cholesterol modification but lack amino-terminal palmitate modification. Our results suggest that ski encodes an enzyme that acts within the secretory pathway to catalyze amino-terminal palmitoylation of Hh, and further demonstrate that this lipid modification is required for the embryonic and larval patterning activities of the Hh signal.
The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the RNA polymerase II (RNApII) largest subunit consists of multiple heptapeptide repeats with the consensus sequence YSPTSPS. Different CTD phosphorylation patterns act as recognition sites for the binding of various messenger RNA processing factors, thereby coupling transcription and mRNA processing. Polyadenylation factors are co-transcriptionally recruited by phosphorylation of CTD serine 2 (ref. 2) and these factors are also required for transcription termination. RNApII transcribes past the poly(A) site, the RNA is cleaved by the polyadenylation machinery, and the RNA downstream of the cleavage site is degraded. Here we show that Rtt103 and the Rat1/Rai1 5' --> 3' exonuclease are localized at 3' ends of protein coding genes. In rat1-1 or rai1Delta cells, RNA 3' to polyadenylation sites is greatly stabilized and termination defects are seen at many genes. These findings support a model in which poly(A) site cleavage and subsequent degradation of the 3'-downstream RNA by Rat1 trigger transcription termination.
Gene delivery by transplantation of normal myoblasts has been proposed as a treatment of the primary defect, lack of the muscle protein dystrophin, that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), a lethal human muscle degenerative disorder. To test this possibility, we transplanted normal myoblasts from a father or an unaffected sibling into the muscle of eight boys with DMD, and assessed their production of dystrophin. Three patients with deletions in the dystrophin gene expressed normal dystrophin transcripts in muscle biopsy specimens taken from the transplant site one month after myoblast injection. Using the polymerase chain reaction we established that the dystrophin in these biopsies derived from donor myoblast DNA. These results show that transplanted myoblasts persist and produce dystrophin in muscle fibres of DMD patients.
The nucleotide coenzyme cytidine-5'-diphospho-choline is highly folded. The CMP-5' parts of the molecules in the crystal structure are strongly linked by metal ligation and hydrogen bonds leaving the phosphoryl-choline residues relatively free. Cytidine-5'-diphosphoric acid exists as a zwitterion with N31 protonated. The P-O bond lengths from the anhydride bridging oxygen in the pyrophosphate are significantly different.
Cells with loss of BRCA2 function are defective in homologous recombination (HR) and are highly sensitive to inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), which provides the basis for a new therapeutic approach. Here we show that resistance to PARP inhibition can be acquired by deletion of a mutation in BRCA2. We derived PARP-inhibitor-resistant (PIR) clones from the human CAPAN1 pancreatic cancer cell line, which carries the protein-truncating c.6174delT frameshift mutation. PIR clones could form DNA-damage-induced RAD51 nuclear foci and were able to limit genotoxin-induced genomic instability, both hallmarks of a competent HR pathway. New BRCA2 isoforms were expressed in the resistant lines as a result of intragenic deletion of the c.6174delT mutation and restoration of the open reading frame (ORF). Reconstitution of BRCA2-deficient cells with these revertant BRCA2 alleles rescued PARP inhibitor sensitivity and HR deficiency. Most of the deletions in BRCA2 were associated with small tracts of homology, and possibly arose from error-prone repair caused by BRCA2 deficiency. Similar ORF-restoring mutations were present in carboplatin-resistant ovarian tumours from c.6174delT mutation carriers. These observations have implications for understanding drug resistance in BRCA mutation carriers as well as in defining functionally important domains within BRCA2.
Recombinant DNA techniques were used to analyze the structure of the messenger RNA encoding a precursor of calcitonin, a small calcium-regulating hormone of 32 amino acids. Analyses of the nucleotide sequences of cloned complementary DNA's comprising the entire coding sequence of the messenger RNA revealed that calcitonin is flanked at both its amino and carboxyl termini by peptide extensions linked to the hormone by short sequences of basic amino acids. The location of glycine next to the carboxyl terminal prolinamide of calcitonin is consistent with indications that glycine is required for the enzymatic amidation of proline to the prolinamide. During cellular biosynthesis, calcitonin arises from a large precursor protein by cleavages at both amino and carboxyl terminal residues of the hormone. These findings raise questions concerning the regulation of these cleavages and the potential biological functions of the precursor extensions derived from these cleavages.
The gene, encoding the A4 peptide found in the amyloid core of senile plaques isolated from the cerebral cortex of patients with Alzheimer's disease, produces at least three precursors that resemble cell surface receptors. A clone isolated from a human brain complementary DNA library contained the structural sequence for an A4 amyloid peptide precursor with a serine protease inhibitor domain in which 208 amino acids at the carboxyl terminal are replaced by 20 amino acids derived from nucleotide sequences with homology to the Alu repeat family. This protein devoid of the transmembrane domain most likely represents a secreted form of the A4 amyloid peptide precursor.
Initiation of transcription of a gene from a core promoter region by RNA polymerase II requires the assembly of several initiation factors to form a preinitiation complex. Assembly of this complex is thought to be nucleated exclusively by the sequence-specific binding of the TFIID transcription factor complex, which is composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAF(II)s), to the different promoters. Here we isolate and characterize a new multiprotein complex that does not contain either TBP or a TBP-like factor but is composed of several TAF(II)s and other proteins. This complex can replace TFIID on both TATA-containing and TATA-lacking promoters in in vitro transcription assays. Moreover, an anti-TBP antibody that inhibits TBP- and TFIID-dependent transcription does not inhibit activity of this new complex. These results indicate that TBP-free RNA polymerase II mediated transcription may be able to occur in mammalian cells and that multiple preinitiation complexes may play an important role in regulating gene expression.
Most, though not all, of the messenger RNAs of higher cells are composed of transcripts from two or more non-contiguous DNA segments that are 'spliced' together by mechanisms which are poorly understood. There has been recent speculation that small RNA molecules may play a part in the splicing reaction, acting as templates or adaptors to stabilize the appropriate conformation of a precursor RNA. Adenovirus-2 codes for two low molecular weight RNAs, the virus-associate (VA) RNAs I and II, major and minor species, respectively. These RNAs are about 160 nucleotides long and have both been sequenced. They originate from closely spaced genes which are transcribed by RNA polymerase III, but have not been definitively associated with any function. We have shown previously that a fraction of the VA RNA of infected cells is complexed with high molecular weight RNA in a denaturation-sensitive fashion. Results presented here show that the VA RNAs bind to unfractionated late virus mRNA and to a cloned copy of a single mRNA species, but not to corresponding cloned segments of viral genomic DNA. It is suggested that VA RNA may act as a template in the splicing reaction.
DNA shuffling is a method for in vitro homologous recombination of pools of selected mutant genes by random fragmentation and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) reassembly. Computer simulations called genetic algorithms have demonstrated the importance of iterative homologous recombination for sequence evolution. Oligonucleotide cassette mutagenesis and error-prone PCR are not combinatorial and thus are limited in searching sequence space. We have tested mutagenic DNA shuffling for molecular evolution in a beta-lactamase model system. Three cycles of shuffling and two cycles of backcrossing with wild-type DNA, to eliminate non-essential mutations, were each followed by selection on increasing concentrations of the antibiotic cefotaxime. We report here that selected mutants had a minimum inhibitory concentration of 640 micrograms ml-1, a 32,000-fold increase and 64-fold greater than any published TEM-1 derived enzyme. Cassette mutagenesis and error-prone PCR resulted in only a 16-fold increase.
Recent growth studies in children suggest that there is no threshold for adverse effects from the universal exposure to inorganic lead. The biochemical mechanisms mediating low-level toxicity are unclear, but in several biological systems, lead alters calcium-mediated cellular processes and may mimic calcium in binding to regulatory proteins. Here we present evidence that lead stimulates diacylglycerol-activated calcium and phospholipid-dependent protein kinase, protein kinase C, partially purified from rat brain. Picomolar concentrations of lead are equivalent to micromolar calcium in kinase activation, so this regulatory enzyme is sensitive to the lead levels expected from current environmental exposure.
The transfer of DNA across membranes and between cells is a central biological process; however, its molecular mechanism remains unknown. In prokaryotes, trans-membrane passage by bacterial conjugation, is the main route for horizontal gene transfer. It is the means for rapid acquisition of new genetic information, including antibiotic resistance by pathogens. Trans-kingdom gene transfer from bacteria to plants or fungi and even bacterial sporulation are special cases of conjugation. An integral membrane DNA-binding protein, called TrwB in the Escherichia coli R388 conjugative system, is essential for the conjugation process. This large multimeric protein is responsible for recruiting the relaxosome DNA-protein complex, and participates in the transfer of a single DNA strand during cell mating. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of a soluble variant of TrwB. The molecule consists of two domains: a nucleotide-binding domain of alpha/beta topology, reminiscent of RecA and DNA ring helicases, and an all-alpha domain. Six equivalent protein monomers associate to form an almost spherical quaternary structure that is strikingly similar to F1-ATPase. A central channel, 20 A in width, traverses the hexamer.
A new serine protease was encoded by a clone isolated from a murine cytotoxic T-lymphocyte complementary DNA library by an RNA-hybridization competition protocol. Complementary transcripts were detected in cytotoxic T lymphocytes, spleen cells from nude mice, a rat natural killer cell leukemia, and in two of eight T-helper clones (both cytotoxic), but not in normal mouse kidney, liver, spleen, or thymus, nor in several tested T- and B-cell tumors. T-cell activation with concanavalin A plus interleukin-2 induced spleen cells to express this gene with kinetics correlating with the acquisition of cytolytic capacity. The nucleotide sequence of this gene encoded an amino acid sequence of approximately 25,700 daltons, with 25 to 35 percent identity to members of the serine protease family. The active site "charge-relay" residues (His57, Asp102, and Ser195 of the chymotrypsin numbering system) are conserved, as well as the trypsin-specific Asp (position 189 in trypsin). A Southern blot analysis indicated that this gene is conserved in humans, mouse, and chicken. This serine protease may have a role in lymphocyte lysis and a "lytic cascade."
Diatoms dominate the biomass of phytoplankton in nutrient-rich conditions and form the basis of some of the world's most productive marine food webs. The diatom nuclear genome contains genes with bacterial and plastid origins as well as genes of the secondary endosymbiotic host (the exosymbiont), yet little is known about the relative contribution of each gene group to diatom metabolism. Here we show that the exosymbiont-derived ornithine-urea cycle, which is similar to that of metazoans but is absent in green algae and plants, facilitates rapid recovery from prolonged nitrogen limitation. RNA-interference-mediated knockdown of a mitochondrial carbamoyl phosphate synthase impairs the response of nitrogen-limited diatoms to nitrogen addition. Metabolomic analyses indicate that intermediates in the ornithine-urea cycle are particularly depleted and that both the tricarboxylic acid cycle and the glutamine synthetase/glutamate synthase cycles are linked directly with the ornithine-urea cycle. Several other depleted metabolites are generated from ornithine-urea cycle intermediates by the products of genes laterally acquired from bacteria. This metabolic coupling of bacterial- and exosymbiont-derived proteins seems to be fundamental to diatom physiology because the compounds affected include the major diatom osmolyte proline and the precursors for long-chain polyamines required for silica precipitation during cell wall formation. So far, the ornithine-urea cycle is only known for its essential role in the removal of fixed nitrogen in metazoans. In diatoms, this cycle serves as a distribution and repackaging hub for inorganic carbon and nitrogen and contributes significantly to the metabolic response of diatoms to episodic nitrogen availability. The diatom ornithine-urea cycle therefore represents a key pathway for anaplerotic carbon fixation into nitrogenous compounds that are essential for diatom growth and for the contribution of diatoms to marine productivity.
The detection of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in pathogenic microorganisms has normally been carried out by trial and error. Here we show that DNA hybridization with high-density oligonucleotide arrays provides rapid and convenient detection of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in Plasmodium falciparum, despite its exceptionally high adenine-thymine (AT) content (82%). A disproportionate number of polymorphisms are found in genes encoding proteins associated with the cell membrane. These genes are targets for only 22% of the oligonucleotide probes but account for 69% of the polymorphisms. Genetic variation is also enriched in subtelomeric regions, which account for 22% of the chromosome but 76% of the polymorphisms.
The sphingolipid metabolite sphingosine-1-phosphate (SPP) has been implicated as a second messenger in cell proliferation and survival. However, many of its biological effects are due to binding to unidentified receptors on the cell surface. SPP activated the heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding protein (G protein)-coupled orphan receptor EDG-1, originally cloned as Endothelial Differentiation Gene-1. EDG-1 bound SPP with high affinity (dissociation constant = 8.1 nM) and high specificity. Overexpression of EDG-1 induced exaggerated cell-cell aggregation, enhanced expression of cadherins, and formation of well-developed adherens junctions in a manner dependent on SPP and the small guanine nucleotide binding protein Rho.
The protease inhibitor leupeptin decreases protein degradation in rat skeletal and cardiac muscle incubated in vitro, while protein synthesis remains unaltered. Leupeptin also lowers protein breakdown in denervated rat muscles and affected muscles from mice with hereditary muscular dystrophy. Leupeptin may thus be useful in retarding tissue atrophy. Since homogenates of leupeptin-treated muscles had decreased cathepsin B activity, this lysosomal protease may play a role in protein turnover in normal and diseased muscles.
Seven transmembrane receptors and their associated heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) have been proposed to play a key role in modulating the activities of neurons and muscles. The physiological function of the Caenorhabditis elegans G protein Go has been genetically characterized. Mutations in the goa-1 gene, which encodes an alpha subunit of Go (G alpha o), cause behavioral defects similar to those observed in mutants that lack the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT), and goa-1 mutants are partially resistant to exogenous 5-HT. Mutant animals that lack G alpha o and transgenic animals that overexpress G alpha o [goa-1(xs) animals] have reciprocal defects in locomotion, feeding, and egg laying behaviors. In normal animals, all of these behaviors are regulated by 5-HT. These results demonstrate that the level of Go activity is a critical determinant of several C. elegans behaviors and suggest that Go mediates many of the behavioral effects of 5-HT.
Seven races of Striga gesnerioides parasitic on cowpea, a major food and forage legume in sub-Saharan Africa, have been identified. Race-specific resistance of cowpea to Striga involves a coiled-coil nucleotide binding site leucine-rich repeat domain resistance protein encoded by the RSG3-301 gene. Knockdown of RSG3-301 expression by virus-induced gene silencing in the multirace-resistant cowpea cultivar B301 results in the failure of RSG3-301-silenced plants to mount a hypersensitive response and promotes parasite necrosis when challenged with Striga race SG3, whereas the resistance response to races SG2 and SG5 is unaltered. Our findings indicate that a gene-for-gene resistance mechanism is operating in these unique plant-plant associations.
Analysis of crosslinked complexes of M1 RNA, the catalytic RNA subunit of ribonuclease P from Escherichia coli, and transfer RNA precursor substrates has led to the identification of regions in the enzyme and in the substrate that are in close physical proximity to each other. The nucleotide in M1 RNA, residue C92, which participates in a crosslink with the substrate was deleted and the resulting mutant M1 RNA was shown to cleave substrates lacking the 3' terminal CCAUCA sequence at sites several nucleotides away from the normal site of cleavage. The presence or absence of the 3' terminal CCAUCA sequence in transfer RNA precursor substrates markedly affects the way in which these substrates interact with the catalytic RNA in the enzyme-substrate complex. The contacts between wild-type M1 RNA and its substrate are in a region that resembles part of the transfer RNA "E" (exit) site in 23S ribosomal RNA. These data demonstrate that in RNA's with very different cellular functions, there are domains with similar structural and functional properties and that there is a nucleotide in M1 RNA that affects the site of cleavage by the enzyme.
Nitrogen regulatory protein C (NtrC) contacts a bacterial RNA polymerase from distant enhancers by means of DNA loops and activates transcription by allowing polymerase to gain access to the template DNA strand. It was shown that NtrC from Salmonella typhimurium must build large oligomers to activate transcription. In contrast to eukaryotic enhancer-binding proteins, most of which must bind directly to DNA, some NtrC dimers were bound solely by protein-protein interactions. NtrC oligomers were visualized with scanning force microscopy. Evidence of their functional importance was provided by showing that some inactive non-DNA-binding and DNA-binding mutant forms of NtrC can cooperate to activate transcription.
Gut microbes supply the human body with energy from dietary polysaccharides through carbohydrate active enzymes, or CAZymes, which are absent in the human genome. These enzymes target polysaccharides from terrestrial plants that dominated diet throughout human evolution. The array of CAZymes in gut microbes is highly diverse, exemplified by the human gut symbiont Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, which contains 261 glycoside hydrolases and polysaccharide lyases, as well as 208 homologues of susC and susD-genes coding for two outer membrane proteins involved in starch utilization. A fundamental question that, to our knowledge, has yet to be addressed is how this diversity evolved by acquiring new genes from microbes living outside the gut. Here we characterize the first porphyranases from a member of the marine Bacteroidetes, Zobellia galactanivorans, active on the sulphated polysaccharide porphyran from marine red algae of the genus Porphyra. Furthermore, we show that genes coding for these porphyranases, agarases and associated proteins have been transferred to the gut bacterium Bacteroides plebeius isolated from Japanese individuals. Our comparative gut metagenome analyses show that porphyranases and agarases are frequent in the Japanese population and that they are absent in metagenome data from North American individuals. Seaweeds make an important contribution to the daily diet in Japan (14.2 g per person per day), and Porphyra spp. (nori) is the most important nutritional seaweed, traditionally used to prepare sushi. This indicates that seaweeds with associated marine bacteria may have been the route by which these novel CAZymes were acquired in human gut bacteria, and that contact with non-sterile food may be a general factor in CAZyme diversity in human gut microbes.
Rhodes and Klug have recently proposed that the internal control region of the Xenopus 5S RNA gene adopts an A-type DNA structure in solution. This suggestion was based on a Fourier analysis of both the spacing of DNase I cutting sites and on the distribution of G residues in the DNA sequence. Both revealed a approximately 5.6-5.7-base periodicity which the authors interpreted as a structural repeat every half helical turn of A-type DNA. This contention was strengthened by the finding that a 9-base-pair (bp) double-stranded deoxyoligonucleotide corresponding to residues +81 to +89 of the 5S gene exhibits an A' RNA-like crystal structure. This region of DNA is of special interest as it forms the binding site for the 5S gene-specific transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA). TFIIIA is a Zn2+-binding protein which interacts with both the internal control region of the gene and the 5S transcript. As base-paired regions of RNA are of the A type, it was reasonable to postulate that 5S DNA might also adopt this conformation. We report here that the circular dichroism (CD) spectrum of a synthetic 54-bp deoxyoligonucleotide corresponding to the TFIIIA binding site is similar to the CD spectrum of B-form DNA in solution. Further, DNA-TFIIIA complexes show an unaltered DNA CD component indicating no gross alteration in DNA structure on protein binding.
The disulfide reducing enzymes glutathione reductase and thioredoxin reductase are highly conserved among bacteria, fungi, worms, and mammals. These proteins maintain intracellular redox homeostasis to protect the organism from oxidative damage. Here we demonstrate the absence of glutathione reductase in Drosophila melanogaster, identify a new type of thioredoxin reductase, and provide evidence that a thioredoxin system supports GSSG reduction. Our data suggest that antioxidant defense in Drosophila, and probably in related insects, differs fundamentally from that in other organisms.
One of the principal photochemical reactions of DNA on exposure to UV is the formation of intrastrand cyclobutane-type pyrimidine dimers. The efficiency of this reaction depends on both the wavelength of the UV2 and the specific nucleotide sequence in the DNA. The formation of the pyrimidine dimer and its repair in living cells have been studied extensively. We have examined the possibility that pyrimidines at the ends of DNA strands may be adequately juxtaposed for dimer formation by the presence of a complementary strand, even when no phosphodiester linkage joins their sugars. In these conditions the formation of a dimer will 'ligate' two DNA strands end-to-end. We report here that thymidine oligonucleotides annealed to polydeoxyadenylate can be ligated end-to-end by UV irradiation, via thymine dimerization of the terminal nucleotides in adjacent oligonucleotides. The linkages are susceptible to direct photoreversal by 254 nm UV, as expected for cyclobutane-type thymine dimers, but they are not cleaved by the bacteriophage T4 endonuclease V, a dimer-specific DNA repair enzyme. We demonstrate that the ligating dimers are also resistant to photolyase from Escherichia coli. Although the phosphodiester backbone is not required for dimer formation, it is required for recognition of dimers by these DNA repair enzymes. We discuss the possibility that high molecular weight polynucleotides in primordial seas might have been generated from oligonucleotides by pyrimidine dimerization under the intense solar UV flux unattenuated by an ozone layer.
Previous studies have demonstrated that in addition to its effects on metabolic rate, thyroxine stimulates protein biosynthesis. The administration of puromycin, a drug which blocks protein synthesis and, therefore, the thyroxine effect on protein synthesis, acutely reverses the hypermetabolism induced in rats by prior administration of thyroxine and restores the oxygen consumption of the thyrotoxic rats to the euthyroid level. The results suggest that a larger fraction of the total body basal oxygen consumption in hyperthyroidism is related to the process of protein synthesis than in the euthyroid state and that the calorigenic effect of thyroxine is secondary to its effect on protein synthesis.
The distance dependence of photoinduced electron transfer in duplex DNA was determined for a family of synthetic DNA hairpins in which a stilbene dicarboxamide forms a bridge connecting two oligonucleotide arms. Investigation of the fluorescence and transient absorption spectra of these hairpins established that no photoinduced electron transfer occurs for a hairpin that has six deoxyadenosine-deoxythymidine base pairs. However, the introduction of a single deoxyguanosine-deoxycytidine base pair resulted in distance-dependent fluorescence quenching and the formation of the stilbene anion radical. Kinetic analysis suggests that duplex DNA is somewhat more effective than proteins as a medium for electron transfer but that it does not function as a molecular wire.
The phenomenon of long-term potentiation (LTP), a long lasting increase in the strength of synaptic transmission which is due to brief, repetitive activation of excitatory afferent fibres, is one of the most striking examples of synaptic plasticity in the mammalian brain. In the CA1 region of the hippocampus, the induction of LTP requires activation of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors by synaptically released glutamate with concomitant postsynaptic membrane depolarization. This relieves the voltage-dependent magnesium block of the NMDA-receptor ion channel, allowing calcium to flow into the dendritic spine. Although calcium has been shown to be a necessary trigger for LTP (refs 11, 12), little is known about the immediate biochemical processes that are activated by calcium and are responsible for LTP. The most attractive candidates have been calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaM-KII) (refs 13-16), protein kinase C (refs 17-19), and the calcium-dependent protease, calpain. Extracellular application of protein kinase inhibitors to the hippocampal slice preparation blocks the induction of LTP (refs 21-23) but it is unclear whether this is due to a pre- and/or postsynaptic action. We have found that intracellular injection into CA1 pyramidal cells of the protein kinase inhibitor H-7, or of the calmodulin antagonist calmidazolium, blocks LTP. Furthermore, LTP is blocked by the injection of synthetic peptides that are potent calmodulin antagonists and inhibit CaM-KII auto- and substrate phosphorylation. These findings demonstrate that in the postsynaptic cell both activation of calmodulin and kinase activity are required for the generation of LTP, and focus further attention on the potential role of CaM-KII in LTP.
A 514-base pair fragment of double-stranded DNA coding for human interferon-alpha 1 (166 amino acid residues), and containing initiation and termination signals plus appropriate restriction enzyme sites for plasmid insertion, has been totally synthesized. The synthesis involved preparation of 66 oligodeoxyribonucleotides, ranging in size from 14 to 21 residues, plus 1 deoxydecanucleotide, by rapid, solid phase procedures, and enzymatic ligation of the oligonucleotides. After ligation of the synthetic gene to a plasmid vector and transformation of Escherichia coli, clones containing the anticipated gene sequence were obtained.
We purified, cloned, and expressed aggrecanase, a protease that is thought to be responsible for the degradation of cartilage aggrecan in arthritic diseases. Aggrecanase-1 [a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs-4 (ADAMTS-4)] is a member of the ADAMTS protein family that cleaves aggrecan at the glutamic acid-373-alanine-374 bond. The identification of this protease provides a specific target for the development of therapeutics to prevent cartilage degradation in arthritis.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase from rats and from humans was partially purified and was inactivated (dissociated) by removing triphosphopyridine nucleotide by repeated washing and dialysis, and then it was reactivated by addition of triphosphopyridine nucleotide and incubation at 25 degrees C. When enzyme from each species was mixed with enzyme from the other during or after inactivation, a new electrophoretic band located between the fast-moving rat dehydrogenase and the slow-moving type B human enzyme appeared. This band is interpreted as representing a hybrid composed of polypeptide chains from each enzyme.
During gene transcription, RNA polymerase (Pol) II moves forwards along DNA and synthesizes messenger RNA. However, at certain DNA sequences, Pol II moves backwards, and such backtracking can arrest transcription. Arrested Pol II is reactivated by transcription factor IIS (TFIIS), which induces RNA cleavage that is required for cell viability. Pol II arrest and reactivation are involved in transcription through nucleosomes and in promoter-proximal gene regulation. Here we present X-ray structures at 3.3 A resolution of an arrested Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pol II complex with DNA and RNA, and of a reactivation intermediate that additionally contains TFIIS. In the arrested complex, eight nucleotides of backtracked RNA bind a conserved 'backtrack site' in the Pol II pore and funnel, trapping the active centre trigger loop and inhibiting mRNA elongation. In the reactivation intermediate, TFIIS locks the trigger loop away from backtracked RNA, displaces RNA from the backtrack site, and complements the polymerase active site with a basic and two acidic residues that may catalyse proton transfers during RNA cleavage. The active site is demarcated from the backtrack site by a 'gating tyrosine' residue that probably delimits backtracking. These results establish the structural basis of Pol II backtracking, arrest and reactivation, and provide a framework for analysing gene regulation during transcription elongation.
A DNA nanostructure consisting of four four-arm junctions oriented with a square aspect ratio was designed and constructed. Programmable self-assembly of 4 x 4 tiles resulted in two distinct lattice morphologies: uniform-width nanoribbons and two-dimensional nanogrids, which both display periodic square cavities. Periodic protein arrays were achieved by templated self-assembly of streptavidin onto the DNA nanogrids containing biotinylated oligonucleotides. On the basis of a two-step metallization procedure, the 4 x 4 nanoribbons acted as an excellent scaffold for the production of highly conductive, uniform-width, silver nanowires.
The messenger RNAs of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) have an RNA hairpin structure, TAR, at their 5' ends that contains a six-nucleotide loop and a three-nucleotide bulge. The conformations of TAR RNA and of TAR with an arginine analog specifically bound at the binding site for the viral protein, Tat, were characterized by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Upon arginine binding, the bulge changes conformation, and essential nucleotides for binding, U23 and A27.U38, form a base-triple interaction that stabilizes arginine hydrogen bonding to G26 and phosphates. Specificity in the arginine-TAR interaction appears to be derived largely from the structure of the RNA.
Tumours with mutant BRAF are dependent on the RAF-MEK-ERK signalling pathway for their growth. We found that ATP-competitive RAF inhibitors inhibit ERK signalling in cells with mutant BRAF, but unexpectedly enhance signalling in cells with wild-type BRAF. Here we demonstrate the mechanistic basis for these findings. We used chemical genetic methods to show that drug-mediated transactivation of RAF dimers is responsible for paradoxical activation of the enzyme by inhibitors. Induction of ERK signalling requires direct binding of the drug to the ATP-binding site of one kinase of the dimer and is dependent on RAS activity. Drug binding to one member of RAF homodimers (CRAF-CRAF) or heterodimers (CRAF-BRAF) inhibits one protomer, but results in transactivation of the drug-free protomer. In BRAF(V600E) tumours, RAS is not activated, thus transactivation is minimal and ERK signalling is inhibited in cells exposed to RAF inhibitors. These results indicate that RAF inhibitors will be effective in tumours in which BRAF is mutated. Furthermore, because RAF inhibitors do not inhibit ERK signalling in other cells, the model predicts that they would have a higher therapeutic index and greater antitumour activity than mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK) inhibitors, but could also cause toxicity due to MEK/ERK activation. These predictions have been borne out in a recent clinical trial of the RAF inhibitor PLX4032 (refs 4, 5). The model indicates that promotion of RAF dimerization by elevation of wild-type RAF expression or RAS activity could lead to drug resistance in mutant BRAF tumours. In agreement with this prediction, RAF inhibitors do not inhibit ERK signalling in cells that coexpress BRAF(V600E) and mutant RAS.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) supports disulfide bond formation by a poorly understood mechanism requiring protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) and ERO1. In yeast, Ero1p-mediated oxidative folding was shown to depend on cellular flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) levels but not on ubiquinone or heme, and Ero1p was shown to be a FAD-binding protein. We reconstituted efficient oxidative folding in vitro using FAD, PDI, and Ero1p. Disulfide formation proceeded by direct delivery of oxidizing equivalents from Ero1p to folding substrates via PDI. This kinetic shuttling of oxidizing equivalents could allow the ER to support rapid disulfide formation while maintaining the ability to reduce and rearrange incorrect disulfide bonds.
Mutations in the enzyme cytosolic isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) are a common feature of a major subset of primary human brain cancers. These mutations occur at a single amino acid residue of the IDH1 active site, resulting in loss of the enzyme's ability to catalyse conversion of isocitrate to alpha-ketoglutarate. However, only a single copy of the gene is mutated in tumours, raising the possibility that the mutations do not result in a simple loss of function. Here we show that cancer-associated IDH1 mutations result in a new ability of the enzyme to catalyse the NADPH-dependent reduction of alpha-ketoglutarate to R(-)-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG). Structural studies demonstrate that when arginine 132 is mutated to histidine, residues in the active site are shifted to produce structural changes consistent with reduced oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate and acquisition of the ability to convert alpha-ketoglutarate to 2HG. Excess accumulation of 2HG has been shown to lead to an elevated risk of malignant brain tumours in patients with inborn errors of 2HG metabolism. Similarly, in human malignant gliomas harbouring IDH1 mutations, we find markedly elevated levels of 2HG. These data demonstrate that the IDH1 mutations result in production of the onco-metabolite 2HG, and indicate that the excess 2HG which accumulates in vivo contributes to the formation and malignant progression of gliomas.
Peptide antigens are presented to T cells by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, with endogenous peptides presented by MHC class I and exogenous peptides presented by MHC class II. In contrast to the MHC system, CD1 molecules bind lipid antigens that are presented at the antigen-presenting cell (APC) surface to lipid antigen-reactive T cells. Because CD1 molecules survey endocytic compartments, it is self-evident that they encounter antigens from extracellular sources. However, the mechanisms of exogenous lipid antigen delivery to CD1-antigen-loading compartments are not known. Serum apolipoproteins are mediators of extracellular lipid transport for metabolic needs. Here we define the pathways mediating markedly efficient exogenous lipid antigen delivery by apolipoproteins to achieve T-cell activation. Apolipoprotein E binds lipid antigens and delivers them by receptor-mediated uptake into endosomal compartments containing CD1 in APCs. Apolipoprotein E mediates the presentation of serum-borne lipid antigens and can be secreted by APCs as a mechanism to survey the local environment to capture antigens or to transfer microbial lipids from infected cells to bystander APCs. Thus, the immune system has co-opted a component of lipid metabolism to develop immunological responses to lipid antigens.
CD8 T cells, which have a crucial role in immunity to infection and cancer, are maintained in constant numbers, but on antigen stimulation undergo a developmental program characterized by distinct phases encompassing the expansion and then contraction of antigen-specific effector (T(E)) populations, followed by the persistence of long-lived memory (T(M)) cells. Although this predictable pattern of CD8 T-cell responses is well established, the underlying cellular mechanisms regulating the transition to T(M) cells remain undefined. Here we show that tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), an adaptor protein in the TNF-receptor and interleukin-1R/Toll-like receptor superfamily, regulates CD8 T(M)-cell development after infection by modulating fatty acid metabolism. We show that mice with a T-cell-specific deletion of TRAF6 mount robust CD8 T(E)-cell responses, but have a profound defect in their ability to generate T(M) cells that is characterized by the disappearance of antigen-specific cells in the weeks after primary immunization. Microarray analyses revealed that TRAF6-deficient CD8 T cells exhibit altered expression of genes that regulate fatty acid metabolism. Consistent with this, activated CD8 T cells lacking TRAF6 display defective AMP-activated kinase activation and mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation (FAO) in response to growth factor withdrawal. Administration of the anti-diabetic drug metformin restored FAO and CD8 T(M)-cell generation in the absence of TRAF6. This treatment also increased CD8 T(M) cells in wild-type mice, and consequently was able to considerably improve the efficacy of an experimental anti-cancer vaccine.
The peptide GsMTx4, isolated from the venom of the tarantula Grammostola spatulata, is a selective inhibitor of stretch-activated cation channels (SACs). The mechanism of inhibition remains unknown; but both GsMTx4 and its enantiomer, enGsMTx4, modify the gating of SACs, thus violating a trademark of the traditional lock-and-key model of ligand-protein interactions. Suspecting a bilayer-dependent mechanism, we examined the effect of GsMTx4 and enGsMTx4 on gramicidin A (gA) channel gating. Both peptides are active, and the effect increases with the degree of hydrophobic mismatch between bilayer thickness and channel length, meaning that GsMTx4 decreases the energy required to deform the boundary lipids adjacent to the channel. GsMTx4 decreases inward SAC single-channel currents but has no effect on outward currents, suggesting it is located within a Debye length of the outer vestibule of the SACs, but significantly farther from the inner vestibule. Likewise, GsMTx4 decreases gA single-channel currents. Our results suggest that modulation of membrane proteins by amphipathic peptides--mechanopharmacology--involves not only the protein itself but also the surrounding lipids. The surprising efficacy of the d form of GsMTx4 peptide has important therapeutic implications, because d peptides are not hydrolysed by endogenous proteases and may be administered orally.
Sera from patients with autoimmune diseases often contain antibodies that bind ribonucleoproteins (RNPs). Sera from 30 such patients were found to immunoprecipitate ribonuclease P (RNase P), an RNP enzyme required to process the 5' termini of transfer RNA transcripts in nuclei and mitochondria of eukaryotic cells. All 30 sera also immunoprecipitated the nucleolar Th RNP, indicating that the two RNPs are structurally related. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the Th RNP revealed it was identical to the RNA component of the mitochondrial RNA processing enzyme known as RNase MRP. Antibodies that immunoprecipitated the Th RNP selectively depleted murine and human cell extracts of RNase MRP activity, indicating that the Th and RNase MRP RNPs are identical. Since RNase P and RNase MRP are not associated with each other during biochemical purification, we suggest that these two RNA processing enzymes share a common autoantigenic polypeptide.
The tripartite toxin secreted by Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax, helps the bacterium evade the immune system and can kill the host during a systemic infection. Two components of the toxin enzymatically modify substrates within the cytosol of mammalian cells: oedema factor (OF) is an adenylate cyclase that impairs host defences through a variety of mechanisms including inhibiting phagocytosis; lethal factor (LF) is a zinc-dependent protease that cleaves mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase and causes lysis of macrophages. Protective antigen (PA), the third component, binds to a cellular receptor and mediates delivery of the enzymatic components to the cytosol. Here we describe the cloning of the human PA receptor using a genetic complementation approach. The receptor, termed ATR (anthrax toxin receptor), is a type I membrane protein with an extracellular von Willebrand factor A domain that binds directly to PA. In addition, a soluble version of this domain can protect cells from the action of the toxin.
Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases p42mapk and p44mapk are activated in cells stimulated with epidermal growth factor (EGF) and other agents. A principal pathway for MAP kinase (MAPK) activation by EGF consists of sequential activations of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos, the guanosine triphosphate binding protein Ras, and the protein kinases Raf-1, MAPK kinase (MKK), and MAPK. Because adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) does not activate MAPK and has some opposing physiologic effects, the effect of increasing intracellular concentrations of cAMP with forskolin and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine on the EGF-stimulated MAPK pathway was studied. Increased concentrations of cAMP blocked activation of Raf-1, MKK, and MAPK in Rat1hER fibroblasts, accompanied by a threefold increase in Raf-1 phosphorylation on serine 43 in the regulatory domain. Phosphorylation of Raf-1 in vitro and in vivo reduces the apparent affinity with which it binds to Ras and may contribute to the blockade by cAMP.
The nucleotide sequences of the six regions within the normal human cellular locus (c-sis) that correspond to the entire transforming region of the simian sarcoma virus (SSV) genome (v-sis) were determined. The regions are bounded by acceptor and donor splice sites and, except for region 6, resemble exons. Region 6 lacks a 3' donor splice site and terminates -5 base pairs from the 3' v-sis-helper-viral junction. This is consistent with a model proposing that SSV was generated by recombination between proviral DNA of a simian sarcoma associated virus and proto-sis and that introns were spliced out subsequently from a fused viral-sis messenger RNA. This also suggests that the 3' recombination occurred within an exon of the woolly monkey (Lagothrix) genome. The open reading frames predicting the v-sis and c-sis gene products coincide with the stop codon of c-sis located 123 nucleotides into the fifth region of homology. The overall nucleotide homology was 91 percent with substitutions mainly in the third codon positions within the open reading frame and with greatest divergence within the untranslated 3' portion of the sequences. The predicted protein products for v-sis and c-sis are 93 percent homologous. The predicted c-sis gene product is identical in 31 of 31 amino acids to one of the published sequences of platelet-derived growth factor. Thus, c-sis encodes one chain of human platelet-derived growth factor.
More than a million cattle infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) may have entered the human food chain. Fears that BSE might transmit to man were raised when atypical cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), a human transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE), emerged in the UK. In BSE and other TSE diseases, the conversion of the protease-sensitive host prion protein (PrP-sen) to a protease-resistant isoform (PrP-res) is an important event in pathogenesis. Biological aspects of TSE diseases are reflected in the specificities of in vitro PrP conversion reactions. Here we show that there is a correlation between in vitro conversion efficiencies and known transmissibilities of BSE, sheep scrapie and CJD. On this basis, we used an in vitro system to gauge the potential transmissibility of scrapie and BSE to humans. We found limited conversion of human PrP-sen to PrP-res driven by PrP-res associated with both scrapie (PrP[Sc]) and BSE (PrP[BSE]). The efficiencies of these heterologous conversion reactions were similar but much lower than those of relevant homologous conversions. Thus the inherent ability of these infectious agents of BSE and scrapie to affect humans following equivalent exposure may be finite but similarly low.
Commonly, linear replicons that have protein covalently attached to 5' DNA termini replicate by protein-primed, strand-displacing, continuous synthesis of full-length strands. The synthesis of DNA in pSLA2, a 17-kilobase linear plasmid of Streptomyces rochei containing 5' terminal protein, occurs bidirectionally from an internally located replication origin. The replication intermediates are linear duplex molecules that have recessed (approximately 280 nucleotides) 5' ends rather than full-length single strands. The 3' over-hangs may serve as templates for the non-displacing synthesis of the lagging strand terminus primed by the covalently attached 5' DNA binding protein.
Oligonucleotides complementary to regions of U1 and U2 small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), when injected into Xenopus laevis oocytes, rapidly induced the specific degradation of U1 and U2 snRNAs, respectively, and then themselves were degraded. After such treatment, splicing of simian virus 40 (SV40) late pre-mRNA transcribed from microinjected viral DNA was blocked in oocytes. If before introduction of SV40 DNA into oocytes HeLa cell U1 or U2 snRNAs were injected and allowed to assemble into small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle (snRNP)-like complexes, SV40 late RNA was as efficiently spliced as in oocytes that did not receive U1 or U2 oligonucleotides. This demonstrates that oocytes can form fully functional hybrid U1 and U2 snRNPs consisting of human snRNA and amphibian proteins.
The repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs), DNA lesions induced by ultraviolet light, was studied at nucleotide resolution. Human fibroblasts were irradiated with ultraviolet light and allowed to repair. The DNA was enzymatically cleaved at the CPDs, and the induced breaks along the promoter and exon 1 of the PGK1 gene were mapped by ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction. Repair rates within the nontranscribed strand varied as much as 15-fold, depending on nucleotide position. Preferential repair of the transcribed strand began just downstream of the transcription start site but was most pronounced beginning at nucleotide +140 in exon 1. The promoter contained two slowly repaired regions that coincided with two transcription factor binding sites.
Alteration of gene expression is a crucial component of adaptive responses to hypoxia. These responses are mediated by hypoxia-inducible transcription factors (HIFs). Here we describe an inhibitory PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) domain protein, IPAS, which is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS protein structurally related to HIFs. IPAS contains no endogenous transactivation function but demonstrates dominant negative regulation of HIF-mediated control of gene expression. Ectopic expression of IPAS in hepatoma cells selectively impairs induction of genes involved in adaptation to a hypoxic environment, notably the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene, and results in retarded tumour growth and tumour vascular density in vivo. In mice, IPAS was predominantly expressed in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum and in corneal epithelium of the eye. Expression of IPAS in the cornea correlates with low levels of expression of the VEGF gene under hypoxic conditions. Application of an IPAS antisense oligonucleotide to the mouse cornea induced angiogenesis under normal oxygen conditions, and demonstrated hypoxia-dependent induction of VEGF gene expression in hypoxic corneal cells. These results indicate a previously unknown mechanism for negative regulation of angiogenesis and maintenance of an avascular phenotype.
The identification of genes predisposing to familial cancer is an essential step towards understanding the molecular events underlying tumorigenesis and is critical for the clinical management of affected families. Despite a declining incidence, gastric cancer remains a major cause of cancer death worldwide, and about 10% of cases show familial clustering. The relative contributions of inherited susceptibility and environmental effects to familial gastric cancer are poorly understood because little is known of the genetic events that predispose to gastric cancer. Here we describe the identification of the gene responsible for early-onset, histologically poorly differentiated, high grade, diffuse gastric cancer in a large kindred from New Zealand (Aotearoa). Genetic linkage analysis demonstrated significant linkage to markers flanking the gene for the calcium-dependent cell-adhesion protein E-cadherin. Sequencing of the E-cadherin gene revealed a G --> T nucleotide substitution in the donor splice consensus sequence of exon 7, leading to a truncated gene product. Diminished E-cadherin expression is associated with aggressive, poorly differentiated carcinomas. Underexpression of E-cadherin is a prognostic marker of poor clinical outcome in many tumour types, and restored expression of E-cadherin in tumour models can suppress the invasiveness of epithelial tumour cells. The role of E-cadherin in gastric cancer susceptibility was confirmed by identifying inactivating mutations in other gastric cancer families. In one family, a frameshift mutation was identified in exon 15, and in a second family a premature stop codon interrupted exon 13. These results describe, to our knowledge for the first time, a molecular basis for familial gastric cancer, and confirm the important role of E-cadherin mutations in cancer.
The electrical signalling properties of neurons originate largely from the gating properties of their ion channels. N-type inactivation of voltage-gated potassium (Kv) channels is the best-understood gating transition in ion channels, and occurs by a 'ball-and-chain' type mechanism. In this mechanism an N-terminal domain (inactivation gate), which is tethered to the cytoplasmic side of the channel protein by a protease-cleavable chain, binds to its receptor at the inner vestibule of the channel, thereby physically blocking the pore. Even when synthesized as a peptide, ball domains restore inactivation in Kv channels whose inactivation domains have been deleted. Using high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, we analysed the three-dimensional structure of the ball peptides from two rapidly inactivating mammalian K. channels (Raw3 (Kv3.4) and RCK4 (Kv1.4)). The inactivation peptide of Raw3 (Raw3-IP) has a compact structure that exposes two phosphorylation sites and allows the formation of an intramolecular disulphide bridge between two spatially close cysteine residues. Raw3-IP exhibits a characteristic surface charge pattern with a positively charged, a hydrophobic, and a negatively charged region. The RCK4 inactivation peptide (RCK4-IP) shows a similar spatial distribution of charged and uncharged regions, but is more flexible and less ordered in its amino-terminal part.
Exposure of cultures of cortical cells from mouse to either of the endogenous excitatory neurotoxins quinolinate or glutamate resulted in widespread neuronal destruction; but only in the cultures exposed to quinolinate, an N-methyl-D-aspartate agonist, was there a striking preservation of the subpopulation of neurons containing the enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase (NADPH-d). Further investigation revealed that neurons containing NADPH-d were also resistant to the toxicity of N-methyl-D-aspartate itself but were selectively vulnerable to the toxicity of either kainate or quisqualate. Thus, neurons containing NADPH-d may have an unusual distribution of receptors for excitatory amino acids, with a relative lack of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors and a relative preponderance of kainate or quisqualate receptors. Since selective sparing of neurons containing NADPH-d is a hallmark of Huntington's disease, the results support the hypothesis that the disease may be caused by excess exposure to quinolinate or some other endogenous N-methyl-D-aspartate agonist.
The sequence of a Pst I restriction fragment was determined that demonstrate instability in fragile X syndrome pedigrees. The region of instability was localized to a trinucleotide repeat p(CCG)n. The sequence flanking this repeat were identical in normal and affected individuals. The breakpoints in two somatic cell hybrids constructed to break at the fragile site also mapped to this repeat sequence. The repeat exhibits instability both when cloned in a nonhomologous host and after amplification by the polymerase chain reaction. These results suggest variation in the trinucleotide repeat copy number as the molecular basis for the instability and possibly the fragile site. This would account for the observed properties of this region in vivo and in vitro.
We have shown that a polypeptide of M(r) 60,000 (60K) that shares N-terminal homology with a calcium-binding protein, calreticulin, can bind to an amino-acid sequence motif, KXGFFKR, found in the cytoplasmic domains of all integrin alpha-subunits. The homologous amino-acid sequence, KXFFKR (where X is either G, A or V), is also present in the DNA-binding domain of all known members of the steroid hormone receptor family; amino acids in this sequence make direct contact with nucleotides in their DNA-responsive elements and are crucial for DNA binding. Here we show that both the 60K protein (p60), purified on a KLGFFKR-Sepharose affinity matrix, and recombinant calreticulin can inhibit the binding of androgen receptor to its hormone-responsive DNA element in a KXFFKR-sequence-specific manner. Calreticulin can also inhibit androgen receptor and retinoic acid receptor transcriptional activities in vivo, as well as retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation. Our results indicate that calreticulin can act as an important modulator of the regulation of gene transcription by nuclear hormone receptors.
Despite the recent advances in single-molecule manipulation techniques, purely mechanical approaches cannot detect subtle conformational changes in the biologically important regime of weak forces. We developed a hybrid scheme combining force and fluorescence that allowed us to examine the effect of subpiconewton forces on the nanometer scale motion of the Holliday junction (HJ) at 100-hertz bandwidth. The HJ is an exquisitely sensitive force sensor whose force response is amplified with an increase in its arm lengths, demonstrating a lever-arm effect at the nanometer-length scale. Mechanical interrogation of the HJ in three different directions helped elucidate the structures of the transient species populated during its conformational changes. This method of mapping two-dimensional reaction landscapes at low forces is readily applicable to other nucleic acid systems and their interactions with proteins and enzymes.
Transcription of a typical eukaryotic gene by RNA polymerase II is activated by proteins bound to sites found near the beginning of the gene as well as to sites, called enhancers, located a great distance from the gene. According to one view, the primary difference between an activator that can work at a large distance and one that cannot is that the former bears a particularly strong activating region; the stronger the activating region, the more readily the activator interacts with its target bound near the transcriptional start site, with the intervening DNA looping out to accommodate the reaction. One alternative view is that the effect of proteins bound to enhancers might require some special aspect of cellular or chromosome structure. Consistent with the first view, an activator bearing an unusually potent activating region can stimulate transcription of a mammalian gene in a HeLa nuclear extract when bound as far as 1.3 kilobase pairs upstream or 320 base pairs downstream of the transcriptional start site.
Administration of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate with theophylline produced testosterone-like induction of hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, pyruvate kinase, and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in the seminal vesicles of both orchidectomized and immature rats. The N(6)-O(2)'-dibutyryl analog of this cyclic nucleotide produced greater increases in vesicular enzyme activities than those induced by the parent compound. The observed enhancement of the key glycolytic enzymes and of hexose monophosphate shunt dehydrogenase was significantly inhibited by actinomycin D and cycloheximide. The evidence indicates that cyclic adenosine monophosphate may be involved as an intermediary in the action of androgenic hormones on male accessory sex organs.
The genomes of aerobic organisms suffer chronic oxidation of guanine to the genotoxic product 8-oxoguanine (oxoG). Replicative DNA polymerases misread oxoG residues and insert adenine instead of cytosine opposite the oxidized base. Both bases in the resulting A*oxoG mispair are mutagenic lesions, and both must undergo base-specific replacement to restore the original C*G pair. Doing so represents a formidable challenge to the DNA repair machinery, because adenine makes up roughly 25% of the bases in most genomes. The evolutionarily conserved enzyme adenine DNA glycosylase (called MutY in bacteria and hMYH in humans) initiates repair of A*oxoG to C*G by removing the inappropriately paired adenine base from the DNA backbone. A central issue concerning MutY function is the mechanism by which A*oxoG mispairs are targeted among the vast excess of A*T pairs. Here we report the use of disulphide crosslinking to obtain high-resolution crystal structures of MutY-DNA lesion-recognition complexes. These structures reveal the basis for recognizing both lesions in the A*oxoG pair and for catalysing removal of the adenine base.
The oncogenic protein Vav harbours a complex array of structural motifs, including leucine-rich, Dbl-homology, pleckstrin-homology, zinc-finger, SH2 and SH3 domains. Upon stimulation by antigens or mitogens, Vav becomes phosphorylated on key tyrosine residues and associates with other signalling proteins, including the mitogen receptors Zap-70 (ref. 6), Vap-1 (ref. 5) and Slp-76 (ref. 7). Disruption of the vav locus by homologous recombination causes severe defects in signalling by primary antigen receptors, leading to abnormal lymphocyte proliferation and lymphopenia. Despite the importance of Vav cell signalling, the function of this protein remains unknown. Here we show that tyrosine-phosphorylated Vav, but not the non-phosphorylated protein, catalyses GDP/GTP exchange on Rac-1, a protein implicated in cell proliferation and cytoskeletal organization, causing this GTPase to switch from its inactive to its active state. Transfection experiments also show that phosphorylation of Vav on tyrosine residues leads to nucleotide exchange on Rac-1 in vivo and stimulates c-Jun kinase, a downstream element in the signalling pathway involving this GTPase. Our results have identified a function for Vav and define a mechanism in which engaged membrane receptors activate its signalling pathway.
In an analysis of the genomic variation of AIDS retroviral isolates from patients living in New York, Alabama, and Zaire, restriction maps were constructed by using seven enzymes, each known to cleave the proviral DNA more than once, in conjunction with Southern blot analysis. The maps of LAV, HTLV-III, and ARV-2 as deduced from their published nucleotide sequences were included in this analysis. The results demonstrated that (i) several "signature" restriction sites were common to all isolates; (ii) with the exception of LAV and HTLV-III, the North American and European isolates were all different from one another and showed no geographical specificity; (iii) the African isolates as a group were more diverse than those from North America and Europe; and (iv) the genomic variability was concentrated within the env gene.
The complement system is an important mediator of the acute inflammatory response, and an effective inhibitor would suppress tissue damage in many autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Such an inhibitor might be found among the endogenous regulatory proteins of complement that block the enzymes that activate C3 and C5. Of these proteins, complement receptor type 1 (CR1; CD35) has the most inhibitory potential, but its restriction to a few cell types limits its function in vivo. This limitation was overcome by the recombinant, soluble human CR1, sCR1, which lacks the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. The sCR1 bivalently bound dimeric forms of its ligands, C3b and methylamine-treated C4 (C4-ma), and promoted their inactivation by factor I. In nanomolar concentrations, sCR1 blocked complement activation in human serum by the two pathways. The sCR1 had complement inhibitory and anti-inflammatory activities in a rat model of reperfusion injury of ischemic myocardium, reducing myocardial infarction size by 44 percent. These findings identify sCR1 as a potential agent for the suppression of complement-dependent tissue injury in autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
The 4.5S RNA of Escherichia coli is a small, stable RNA that is essential for cell growth but its function is not yet known. Its biosynthesis is stringently controlled, and it is processed by RNase P, a transfer RNA processing enzyme. To identify the biological role of the 4.5S species, we have characterized the physiological changes that occur when the bacterial cell is depleted of this RNA. We used a strain of E. coli in which synthesis of the 4.5S RNA can be turned off by removing an inducer of the Iac operon, resulting in cell death. We report here that an early consequence of depriving the cell of 4.5S RNA is the accumulation of translationally-defective ribosomes, which maintain their ability to elongate polypeptide chains, but can no longer participate in the initiation of protein synthesis.
Rab guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) regulate vesicle trafficking in eukaryotic cells by reversibly associating with lipid membranes. Inactive Rab GTPases are maintained in the cytosol by binding to GDP-dissociation inhibitor (GDI). It is believed that specialized proteins are required to displace GDI from Rab GTPases before Rab activation by guanosine diphosphate-guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GDP-GTP) exchange factors (GEFs). Here, we found that SidM from Legionella pneumophila could act as both GEF and GDI-displacement factor (GDF) for Rab1. Rab1 released from GDI was inserted into liposomal membranes and was used as a substrate for SidM-mediated nucleotide exchange. During host cell infection, recruitment of Rab1 to Legionella-containing vacuoles depended on the GDF activity of SidM. Thus, GDF and GEF activity can be promoted by a single protein, and GDF activity can coordinate Rab1 recruitment from the GDI-bound pool.
Programmed cell death (PCD) in animals depends on caspase protease activity. Plants also exhibit PCD, for example as a response to pathogens, although a plant caspase remains elusive. Here we show that vacuolar processing enzyme (VPE) is a protease essential for a virus-induced hypersensitive response that involves PCD. VPE deficiency prevented virus-induced hypersensitive cell death in tobacco plants. VPE is structurally unrelated to caspases, although VPE has a caspase-1 activity. Thus, plants have evolved a regulated cellular suicide strategy that, unlike PCD of animals, is mediated by VPE and the cellular vacuole.
Familial cylindromatosis is an autosomal dominant predisposition to tumours of skin appendages called cylindromas. Familial cylindromatosis is caused by mutations in a gene encoding the CYLD protein of previously unknown function. Here we show that CYLD is a deubiquitinating enzyme that negatively regulates activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB by specific tumour-necrosis factor receptors (TNFRs). Loss of the deubiquitinating activity of CYLD correlates with tumorigenesis. CYLD inhibits activation of NF-kappaB by the TNFR family members CD40, XEDAR and EDAR in a manner that depends on the deubiquitinating activity of CYLD. Downregulation of CYLD by RNA-mediated interference augments both basal and CD40-mediated activation of NF-kappaB. The inhibition of NF-kappaB activation by CYLD is mediated, at least in part, by the deubiquitination and inactivation of TNFR-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) and, to a lesser extent, TRAF6. These results indicate that CYLD is a negative regulator of the cytokine-mediated activation of NF-kappaB that is required for appropriate cellular homeostasis of skin appendages.
Both cyclic AMP and a specific inducer acting in concert are required for the synthesis of many inducible enzymes in E. coli. Little enzyme is made in the absence of either. In contrast to the specific inducers which stimulate the synthesis only of the proteins required for their metabolism, cyclic AMP controls the synthesis of many proteins. Glucose and certain other carbohydrates decrease the differential rate of synthesis of inducible enzymes by lowering cyclic AMP concentrations. In the lac operon, cyclic AMP acts at the promoter site to facilitate initiation of transcription. This action requires another protein, the cyclic AMP receptor protein. The nucleotide stimulates tryptophanase synthesis at a translational level. The action of cyclic AMP in E. coli may serve as a model to understand its action on transcriptional and translational processes in eukaryotes.
Integrase is an essential retroviral enzyme that binds both termini of linear viral DNA and inserts them into a host cell chromosome. The structure of full-length retroviral integrase, either separately or in complex with DNA, has been lacking. Furthermore, although clinically useful inhibitors of HIV integrase have been developed, their mechanism of action remains speculative. Here we present a crystal structure of full-length integrase from the prototype foamy virus in complex with its cognate DNA. The structure shows the organization of the retroviral intasome comprising an integrase tetramer tightly associated with a pair of viral DNA ends. All three canonical integrase structural domains are involved in extensive protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. The binding of strand-transfer inhibitors displaces the reactive viral DNA end from the active site, disarming the viral nucleoprotein complex. Our findings define the structural basis of retroviral DNA integration, and will allow modelling of the HIV-1 intasome to aid in the development of antiretroviral drugs.
Transcription of the yeast CYC1 promoter fused to a sequence lacking guanosine residues provided a rapid, sensitive assay of initiation by RNA polymerase II in yeast extracts. Initiation was enhanced by yeast and mammalian activator proteins. The adenoviral major late promoter fused to the G-minus sequence was transcribed in yeast extracts with an efficiency comparable to that observed in HeLa extracts, showing that promoters as well as transcription factors are functionally interchangeable across species. Initiation occurred at different sites, approximately 30 and 63 to 69 base pairs downstream of the TATA element of the adenoviral promoter in HeLa and yeast extracts, respectively, distances characteristic of initiation in the two systems in vivo. A component of the transcription system and not the promoter sequence determines the distance to the initiation site.
The crystal structures and enzymic properties of two mutant dihydrofolate reductases (Escherichia coli) were studied in order to clarify the functional role of an invariant carboxylic acid (aspartic acid at position 27) at the substrate binding site. One mutation, constructed by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis, replaces Asp27 with asparagine; the other is a primary-site revertant to Ser27. The only structural perturbations involve two internally bound water molecules. Both mutants have low but readily measurable activity, which increases rapidly with decreasing pH. The mutant enzymes were also characterized with respect to relative folate: dihydrofolate activities and kinetic deuterium isotope effects. It is concluded that Asp27 participates in protonation of the substrate but not in electrostatic stabilization of a positively charged, protonated transition state.
Ternary complexes between metal ions, nucleotides and aromatic heterocyclic amines are being investigated by X-ray diffraction as possible models for enzyme-metal-substrate interactions. Kennard and coworkers have reported the crystal structure of the ATP disodium salt. Although more recently several crystal structures of binary and ternary complexes between metal ions and nucleoside monophosphates have been reported, no structure combining metal complexes with nucleoside di- or triphosphates has been reported. Most divalent metal ions catalyse the nonenzymatic transfer of phosphate from nucleoside polyphosphates to various acceptors. Therefore, these compounds in water solution undergo extensive hydrolysis in the presence of metal ions, leading to the formation of the monophosphates; for instance, at pH 6.5, Cu2+ accelerates the hydrolysis of ATP by a factor of about 300 (ref. 5). We report here the crystal and molecular structure of the complex [Zn(II)-H2ATP-2,2'-bipyridyl]2.4H2O, determined by single crystal X-ray analysis. The complex molecule provides a possible model for ATP transport and phosphate group transfer mechanism.
The unicellular eukaryote Trypanosoma brucei evades the immune defence of its mammalian host by antigenic variation. The genes for variant-specific surface glycoproteins (VSGs) are expressed within large multicistronic transcription units. Mature messenger RNAs are produced by trans-splicing and polyadenylation. A remarkable feature of the transcription of VSG genes is its insensitivity to the RNA polymerase II inhibitor alpha-amanitin. This has led to the speculation that RNA polymerase I, normally only involved in the transcription of ribosomal RNA genes, also mediates expression of these surface antigen genes. In higher eukaryotes, however, transcripts produced by RNA polymerase I were found to be poor substrates for processing into mature mRNAs. In contrast, we show here that the RNA polymerase I of T. brucei can mediate the efficient production of functional mRNA for neomycin phosphotransferase. This exceptional ability may be related to the unusual way in which pre-mRNAs are capped in trypanosomes. In most eukaryotes, mRNAs are modified at their 5' end by a capping activity associated with RNA polymerase II; in trypanosomes, mRNAs acquire their 5'-cap from capped mini-exon donor RNA by trans-splicing, a process that could be independent of the RNA polymerase producing the pre-mRNA.
Synthetic oligonucleotides containing GC-rich triplet sequences were used in a scanning strategy to identify unstable genetic sequences at the myotonic dystrophy (DM) locus. A highly polymorphic GCT repeat was identified and found to be unstable, with an increased number of repeats occurring in DM patients. In the case of severe congenital DM, the paternal triplet allele was inherited unaltered while the maternal, DM-associated allele was unstable. These studies suggest that the mutational mechanism leading to DM is triplet amplification, similar to that occurring in the fragile X syndrome. The triplet repeat sequence is within a gene (to be referred to as myotonin-protein kinase), which has a sequence similar to protein kinases.
The convergent evolution of a fermentative foregut in two groups of mammals offers an opportunity to study adaptive evolution at the protein level. The appearance of this mode of digestion has been accompanied by the recruitment of lysozyme as a bacteriolytic enzyme in the stomach both in the ruminants (for example the cow) and later in the colobine monkeys (for example the langur). The stomach lysozymes of these two groups share some physicochemical and catalytic properties that appear to adapt them for functioning in the stomach fluid. To examine the basis for these shared properties, we sequenced langur stomach lysozyme and compared it to other lysozymes of known sequence. Tree analysis suggest that, after foregut fermentation arose in monkeys, the langur lysozyme gained sequence similarity to cow stomach lysozyme and evolved two times faster than the other primate lysozymes. This rapid evolution, coupled with functional and sequence convergence upon cow stomach lysozyme, could imply that positive darwinian selection has driven about 50% of the evolution of langur stomach lysozyme.
G-protein-coupled receptors of the rhodopsin family transduce many important neural and endocrine signals. These receptors activate heterotrimeric G proteins and in many cases also cause activation of phospholipase D, an enzyme that can be controlled by the small G proteins ARF and RhoA. Here we show that the activation of phospholipase D that is induced by many, but not all, Ca2+-mobilizing G-protein-coupled receptors is sensitive to inhibitors of ARF and of RhoA. Receptors of this type were co-immunoprecipitated with ARF or RhoA on exposure to agonists, and the effects of GTP analogues on ligand binding to the receptor changed to a profile that is characteristic of small G proteins. These receptors contain the amino-acid sequence AsnProXXTyr in their seventh transmembrane domain, whereas receptors capable of activating phospholipase D without involving ARF contain the sequence AspProXXTyr. Mutation of this latter sequence to AsnProXXTyr in the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor conferred sensitivity to an inhibitor of ARF, and the reciprocal mutation in the 5-HT2A receptor for 5-hydroxy-tryptamine reduced its sensitivity to the inhibitor. Receptors carrying the AsnProXXTyr motif thus seem to form functional complexes with ARF and RhoA.
We recently reported the discovery and preliminary characterization of Mimivirus, the largest known virus, with a 400-nanometer particle size comparable to mycoplasma. Mimivirus is a double-stranded DNA virus growing in amoebae. We now present its 1,181,404-base pair genome sequence, consisting of 1262 putative open reading frames, 10% of which exhibit a similarity to proteins of known functions. In addition to exceptional genome size, Mimivirus exhibits many features that distinguish it from other nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses. The most unexpected is the presence of numerous genes encoding central protein-translation components, including four amino-acyl transfer RNA synthetases, peptide release factor 1, translation elongation factor EF-TU, and translation initiation factor 1. The genome also exhibits six tRNAs. Other notable features include the presence of both type I and type II topoisomerases, components of all DNA repair pathways, many polysaccharide synthesis enzymes, and one intein-containing gene. The size and complexity of the Mimivirus genome challenge the established frontier between viruses and parasitic cellular organisms. This new sequence data might help shed a new light on the origin of DNA viruses and their role in the early evolution of eukaryotes.
In humans, the strong statistical association between fitness and survival suggests a link between impaired oxygen metabolism and disease. We hypothesized that artificial selection of rats based on low and high intrinsic exercise capacity would yield models that also contrast for disease risk. After 11 generations, rats with low aerobic capacity scored high on cardiovascular risk factors that constitute the metabolic syndrome. The decrease in aerobic capacity was associated with decreases in the amounts of transcription factors required for mitochondrial biogenesis and in the amounts of oxidative enzymes in skeletal muscle. Impairment of mitochondrial function may link reduced fitness to cardiovascular and metabolic disease.
The amyloid beta protein peptide is a major constituent of amyloid plaque cores in Alzheimer's disease and is apparently derived from a higher molecular weight precursor. It is now shown that the core protein of a heparan sulfate proteoglycan secreted from a nerve cell line (PC12) has an amino acid sequence and a size very similar to those of the amyloid beta protein precursor and that these molecules are antigenically related. This amyloid beta protein precursor-related protein is not found in the conditioned medium of a variant cell line (F3 PC12) that does not secrete heparan sulfate proteoglycan. The synaptic localization and metabolism of this class of proteoglycans are consistent with its potential involvement in central nervous system dysfunction.
Direct observation of transcription factor action in the living cell nucleus can provide important insights into gene regulatory mechanisms. Live-cell imaging techniques have enabled the visualization of a variety of intranuclear activities, from chromosome dynamics to gene expression. However, progress in studying transcription regulation of specific native genes has been limited, primarily as a result of difficulties in resolving individual gene loci and in detecting the small number of protein molecules functioning within active transcription units. Here we report that multiphoton microscopy imaging of polytene nuclei in living Drosophila salivary glands allows real-time analysis of transcription factor recruitment and exchange on specific native genes. After heat shock, we have visualized the recruitment of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to native hsp70 gene loci 87A and 87C in real time. We show that heat shock factor (HSF), the transcription activator of hsp70, is localized to the nucleus before heat shock and translocates from nucleoplasm to chromosomal loci after heat shock. Assays based on fluorescence recovery after photobleaching show a rapid exchange of HSF at chromosomal loci under non-heat-shock conditions but a very slow exchange after heat shock. However, this is not a consequence of a change of HSF diffusibility, as shown here directly by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. Our results provide strong evidence that activated HSF is stably bound to DNA in vivo and that turnover or disassembly of transcription activator is not required for rounds of hsp70 transcription. This and previous studies indicate that transcription activators display diverse dynamic behaviours in their associations with targeted loci in living cells. Our method can be applied to study the dynamics of many factors involved in transcription and RNA processing, and in their regulation at native heat shock genes in vivo.
The activation of ubiquitin and related protein modifiers is catalysed by members of the E1 enzyme family that use ATP for the covalent self-attachment of the modifiers to a conserved cysteine. The Escherichia coli proteins MoeB and MoaD are involved in molybdenum cofactor (Moco) biosynthesis, an evolutionarily conserved pathway. The MoeB- and E1-catalysed reactions are mechanistically similar, and despite a lack of sequence similarity, MoaD and ubiquitin display the same fold including a conserved carboxy-terminal Gly-Gly motif. Similar to the E1 enzymes, MoeB activates the C terminus of MoaD to form an acyl-adenylate. Subsequently, a sulphurtransferase converts the MoaD acyl-adenylate to a thiocarboxylate that acts as the sulphur donor during Moco biosynthesis. These findings suggest that ubiquitin and E1 are derived from two ancestral genes closely related to moaD and moeB. Here we present the crystal structures of the MoeB-MoaD complex in its apo, ATP-bound, and MoaD-adenylate forms, and highlight the functional similarities between the MoeB- and E1-substrate complexes. These structures provide a molecular framework for understanding the activation of ubiquitin, Rub, SUMO and the sulphur incorporation step during Moco and thiamine biosynthesis.
A catalytic RNA (ribozyme) derived from an intervening sequence (IVS) RNA of Tetrahymena thermophila will catalyze an RNA polymerization reaction in which pentacytidylic acid (C5) is extended by the successive addition of mononucleotides derived from a guanylyl-(3',5')-nucleotide (GpN). Cytidines or uridines are added to C5 to generate chain lengths of 10 to 11 nucleotides, with longer products being generated at greatly reduced efficiency. The reaction is analogous to that catalyzed by a replicase with C5 acting as the primer, GpNs as the nucleoside triphosphates, and a sequence in the ribozyme providing a template. The demonstration that an RNA enzyme can catalyze net elongation of an RNA primer supports theories of prebiotic RNA self-replication.
Guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) that transduce signals from cell surface receptors to effector molecules are made up of three subunits, alpha, beta, and gamma. A complementary DNA clone that encodes a 71-amino acid protein was isolated from bovine brain; this protein contains peptide sequences that were derived from the purified gamma subunit of Gi and Go. The primary sequence of this G protein gamma subunit (G gamma) has 55 percent homology to the gamma subunit of transducin (T gamma) and also has homology to functional domains of mammalian ras proteins. The probe for isolating the clone was generated with the use of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The extent of divergence between T gamma and G gamma, the isolation of homologous PCR-generated fragments, and the differences between the predicted amino acid sequence of G gamma and that derived from the gamma subunit of Gi and Go indicate that gamma subunits are encoded by a family of genes.
Some globular proteins contain repeated structural patterns within the same polypeptide chain. Several enzymes have a pseudo-symmetric two-lobed architecture: a pair of connected but well separated domains with very similar structures are grouped round an approximate 2-fold symmetry axis close to the active centre. On a smaller scale the same motif may appear inside a single protein domain: the polypeptide chain folds into two successive topologically similar subdomains which interlock symmetrically and form a compact globule. In such a domain the two halves come into close contact round the dyad axis; as if the structural integrity of the domain depended on the interactions between its halves, while one separated subdomain could not exist as an independent folding unit. Many of these paired structures seem to have evolved from dimeric precursors by tandem gene duplication. They contain repeated amino acid sequences or precisely repeated structural elements in which equivalent sets of alpha-carbon atoms can be superimposed with root mean square deviations of the order of 1-2 A. Here it is shown that copper-zinc superoxide dismutase contains two paired subdomains, and the significance of the repeated folding pattern is discussed.
Meiotic maturation, the final step of oogenesis, is a crucial stage of development in which an immature oocyte becomes a fertilizable egg. In Xenopus, the ability to replicate DNA is acquired during maturation at breakdown of the nuclear envelope by translation of a DNA synthesis inducer that is not present in the oocyte. Here we identify Cdc6, which is essential for recruiting the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) helicase to the pre-replication complex, as this inducer of DNA synthesis. We show that maternal cdc6 mRNA but not protein is stored in the oocyte. Cdc6 protein is synthesized during maturation, but this process can be blocked by degrading the maternal cdc6 mRNA by oligonucleotide antisense injections or by translation inhibition. Rescue experiments using recombinant Cdc6 protein show that Cdc6 is the only missing replication factor whose translation is necessary and sufficient to confer DNA replication competence to the egg before fertilization. The licence to replicate is given by Cdc6 at the end of meiosis I, but the cytostatic factor (CSF) pathway, which maintains large amounts of active Cdc2/Cyclin B2, prevents the entry into S phase until fertilization.
The transcriptomes of eukaryotic cells are incredibly complex. Individual non-coding RNAs dwarf the number of protein-coding genes, and include classes that are well understood as well as classes for which the nature, extent and functional roles are obscure. Deep sequencing of small RNAs (<200 nucleotides) from human HeLa and HepG2 cells revealed a remarkable breadth of species. These arose both from within annotated genes and from unannotated intergenic regions. Overall, small RNAs tended to align with CAGE (cap-analysis of gene expression) tags, which mark the 5' ends of capped, long RNA transcripts. Many small RNAs, including the previously described promoter-associated small RNAs, appeared to possess cap structures. Members of an extensive class of both small RNAs and CAGE tags were distributed across internal exons of annotated protein coding and non-coding genes, sometimes crossing exon-exon junctions. Here we show that processing of mature mRNAs through an as yet unknown mechanism may generate complex populations of both long and short RNAs whose apparently capped 5' ends coincide. Supplying synthetic promoter-associated small RNAs corresponding to the c-MYC transcriptional start site reduced MYC messenger RNA abundance. The studies presented here expand the catalogue of cellular small RNAs and demonstrate a biological impact for at least one class of non-canonical small RNAs.
Novel, low-abundance microbial species can be easily overlooked in standard polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based surveys. We used community genomic data obtained without PCR or cultivation to reconstruct DNA fragments bearing unusual 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and protein-coding genes from organisms belonging to novel archaeal lineages. The organisms are minor components of all biofilms growing in pH 0.5 to 1.5 solutions within the Richmond Mine, California. Probes specific for 16S rRNA showed that the fraction less than 0.45 micrometers in diameter is dominated by these organisms. Transmission electron microscope images revealed that the cells are pleomorphic with unusual folded membrane protrusions and have apparent volumes of <0.006 cubic micrometer.
The infectious agent (or 'prion') of the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) such as scrapie resembles a virus in that it replicates in vivo and has distinct strains, but it was postulated long ago to contain only protein. More recently, PrPSc, a pathogenic, scrapie-associated form of the host-encoded prion protein (PrP), was identified as a possible primary TSE agent protein. PrPSc is defined biochemically by its insolubility and resistance to proteases and is derived post-translationally from normal, protease-sensitive PrP (PrPc). The conversion seems to involve conformational change rather than covalent modification. However, the conversion mechanism and the relationship of PrPSc formation to TSE agent replication remain unclear. Here we report the conversion of PrPc to protease-resistant forms similar to PrPSc in a cell-free system composed of substantially purified constituents. This conversion was selective and required the presence of preexisting PrPSc, providing direct evidence that PrPSc derives from specific PrPc-PrPSc interactions.
Fragile X syndrome is the result of the unstable expansion of a trinucleotide repeat in the 5'-untranslated region of the FMR1 gene. Fibroblast subclones from a mildly affected patient, each containing stable FMR1 alleles with 57 to 285 CGG repeats, were shown to exhibit normal steady-state levels of FMR1 messenger RNA. However, FMR protein was markedly diminished from transcript with more than 200 repeats. Such transcripts were associated with stalled 40S ribosomal subunits. These results suggest that a structural RNA transition beyond 200 repeats impedes the linear 40S migration along the 5'-untranslated region. This results in translational inhibition by trinucleotide repeat expansion.
The enzyme dUTPase catalyses the hydrolysis of dUTP and maintains a low intracellular concentration of dUTP so that uracil cannot be incorporated into DNA. dUTPase from Escherichia coli is strictly specific for its dUTP substrate, the active site discriminating between nucleotides with respect to the sugar moiety as well as the pyrimidine base. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of E. coli dUTPase determined by X-ray crystallography at a resolution of 1.9 A. The enzyme is a symmetrical trimer, and of the 152 amino acid residues in the subunit, the first 136 are visible in the crystal structure. The tertiary structure resembles a jelly-roll fold and does not show the 'classical' nucleotide-binding domain. In the quaternary structure there is a complex interaction between the subunits that may be important in catalysis. This possibility is supported by the location of conserved elements in the sequence.
Lowe's oculocerebrorenal syndrome (OCRL) is a human X-linked developmental disorder of unknown pathogenesis and has a pleiotropic phenotype affecting the lens, brain and kidneys. The OCRL locus has been mapped to Xq25-q26 by linkage and by finding de novo X; autosome translocations at Xq25-q26 in two unrelated females with OCRL. Here we use yeast artificial chromosomes with inserts that span the X chromosomal breakpoint from a female OCRL patient in order to isolate complementary DNAs for a gene that is interrupted by the translocation. We show that the transcript is absent in both female OCRL patients with X; autosome translocations and that it is absent or abnormally sized in 9 of 13 unrelated male OCRL patients with no detectable genomic rearrangement. The open reading frame encodes a new protein with 71% similarity to human inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase. Our results suggest that OCRL may be an inborn error of inositol phosphate metabolism.
Recently, we have shown that deoxyribonucleoside residues in the cellular DNA precursor pool are generally more susceptible to methylation than are residues within the DNA duplex. The N-1 position of adenosine, for example, was found to be at least 13,000 times more susceptible to methylation by N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) than the same site in the DNA. These results suggest that potential sites for alkylation in the double-strand duplex are relatively inaccessible to direct alkylation in vivo. Many of these sites are probably protected from alkylation not only by their position in the interstices of the DNA helix, but also by further in vivo 'packaging' of the DNA in chromatin. We have now used DNA sequencing to demonstrate the incorporation properties of products of the reaction of MNU with dATP and of deoxy-N4-hydroxycytidine triphosphate during DNA replication in vitro by phage T4 DNA polymerase and the 'Klenow' fragment of Escherichia coli pol I. The results suggest that DNA precursor nucleotides due to their greater availability for alkylation, may offer routes for the introduction of alkylated residues into double-stranded DNA.
The molecular events leading to the synthesis of mature tRNA are only now becoming amenable to experimental study. In bacterial and mammalian cells tRNA genes are transcribed into precursor tRNA. These molecules, when isolated, contain additional nucleotides at both ends (20) of the mature tRNA and lack most modified nucleosides. Presumably, specific nucleases ("trimming" enzymes) cut the precursor to proper tRNA size. The C-C-A nucleotide sequence of the amino acid acceptor end common to all tRNA's does not seem to be coded by tRNA genes (30), and may be added to the trimmed molecules by the tRNA-CMP-AMP-pyrophosphorylase (71). Modifications at the polynucleotide level of the heterocyclic bases or the sugar residues give rise to the modified nucleosides in tRNA. Although newly available substrates have allowed the detection of more of the enzymes involved in these reactions, there is still no knowledge about the sequence of modification or trimming events leading to the synthesis of active tRNA. Progress in these studies may not be easy because enzyme preparations free of nucleases or other tRNA modifying enzymes are required. The role of the modified nucleosides in the biological functions of tRNA is still unknown. Possibly pseudouridine is required for ribosome mediated protein synthesis; some other modified nucleosides in tRNA are not required for this reaction, but may enhance its rate. What might be the role of the large variety of modified nucleosides in tRNA? One is tempted to speculate that such nucleosides are important in other cellular processes in which tRNA is thought to participate such as virus infection, cell differentiation, and hormone action (2, 3). Mutants in a number of tRNA-modifying enzymes are needed in order to extend our knowledge of their purpose and of tRNA involvement in other biological processes. But unless tRNA-modifying enzymes specific for a particular tRNA species exist, no simple selection procedure can be devised. Possibly some of the regulatory mutants of amino acid biosynthesis may prove to affect tRNA-modifying enzymes (72). Transfer RNA's are macromolecules well suited for the study of nucleic acid-protein interactions. The tRNA molecules are structurally very similar, and they interact with a large number of enzymes or protein factors (2, 3). Each aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, for instance, very precisely recognizes a set of cognate isoacceptor tRNA's (2, 73). The availability of the tRNA- modifying enzymes adds another dimension to the problem of the nature of specific recognition of tRNA by proteins. There are some tRNA-modifying enzymes, such as the uracil-tRNA methylase, which may recognize all tRNA species, while others, such as the isopentenyl-tRNA transferase, probably recognize only a selected set of tRNA molecules, even with different amino acid accepting capacities. With well-characterized RNA precursor and tRNA molecules we can hope to delineate those features of primary, secondary, and tertiary structure involved in the specific interactions of tRNA with these enzymes.
Haem is degraded to bile pigments in the catabolism of haemoproteins in mammals and in the formation of photosynthetic pigments in algae. The first stage of this reaction involves oxygen attack at one of the four methene-bridge carbon atoms, which is ultimately eliminated as CO(ref. 1). The four bridges are not sterically equivalent (Fig. 1) and the bilirubin in mammalian bile and algal bile pigments consists almost exclusively of the alpha-isomers. Little is known about the structures of the ring-cleaving enzymes responsible, although microsomal haem oxygenase, which catalyses the breakdown of haem to biliverdin in mammals, has very similar spectroscopic properties to myoglobin. The degradation process has been simulated in vitro by a 'coupled oxidation' method in which the proportions of the four possible isomeric products depend on the nature of the globin moiety to which the haem is bound. We report here the use of an interactive computer display system to explore the relative accessibilities of the four methene bridges to a haem-bound oxygen molecule in myoglobin and in the alpha and beta chains of haemoglobin. Our calculated interaction energies agree well with the proportions of the four isomers that are observed experimentally.
Study of proteins that recognize specific DNA sequences has yielded much information, but the field is still in its infancy. Already two major structural motifs have been discovered, the helix-turn-helix and zinc finger, and numerous examples of DNA-binding proteins containing either of them are known. The restriction enzyme Eco RI uses yet a different motif. Additional motifs are likely to be found as well. There is a growing understanding of some of the physical chemistry involved in protein-DNA binding, but much remains to be learned before it becomes possible to engineer a protein that binds to a specific DNA sequence.
Reciprocal control mechanisms between hemoprotein and 8-aminolevulinic acid synthetase take part in coordinate synthesis of the heme and apoenzyme moieties of tryptophan pyrrolase. Stimulation of heme biosynthesis increases tryptophan pyrrolase, whereas enhancement of heme binding by apotryptophan pyrrolase secondarily increases the formation of delta-aminolevulinic acid synthetase, the rate-limiting enzyme in heme formation. Tryptophan-mediated induction of delta-aminolevulinic acid synthetase suggests that heme participates in repression of that enzyme
Photosynthesis is the hallmark of plant life and is the only plastid metabolic process known to be controlled by plastid genes. The complete loss of photosynthetic ability, however, has occurred on several independent occasions in parasitic flowering plants. Some of these plants are known to lack chlorophyll and certain photosynthetic enzymes, but it is not known to what extent changes have occurred in the genes encoding the photosynthetic apparatus or whether the plants even maintain a plastid genome. Here we report that the nonphotosynthetic root parasite Epifagus virginiana has a plastid chromosome only 71 kilobases in size, far smaller than any previously characterized land plant plastid genome. The Epifagus plastid genome has lost most, if not all, of the 30 or more chloroplast genes for photosynthesis and most of a large family of plastid genes, the ndh genes, whose products may be involved in a plastid respiratory chain. The extensive changes in Epifagus plastid gene content must have occurred in a relatively short time (5-50 x 10(6) yr), because Striga asiatica, a related photosynthetic parasite, has a typical complement of chloroplast genes for photosynthesis and chlororespiration. The plastid genome of Epifagus has retained transcribed ribosomal RNA and ribosomal protein genes, suggesting that it expresses one or more gene products for plastid functions not related to photosynthesis.
U6 is one of the five small nuclear RNA's (snRNA's) that are required for splicing of nuclear precursor messenger RNA (pre-mRNA). The size and sequence of U6 RNA are conserved among organisms as diverse as yeast and man, and so it has been proposed that U6 RNA functions as a catalytic element in splicing. A procedure for in vitro reconstitution of functional yeast U6 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP's) with synthetic U6 RNA was applied in an attempt to elucidate the function of yeast U6 RNA. Two domains in U6 RNA were identified, each of which is required for in vitro splicing. Single nucleotide substitutions in these two domains block splicing either at the first or the second step. Invariably, U6 RNA mutants that block the first step of splicing do not enter the spliceosome. On the other hand, those that block the second step of splicing form a spliceosome but block cleavage at the 3' splice site of the intron. In both domains, the positions of base changes that block the second step of splicing correspond exactly to the site of insertion of pre-mRNA-type introns into the U6 gene of two yeast species, providing a possible explanation for the mechanism of how these introns originated and adding further evidence for the proposed catalytic role of U6 RNA.
Inborn errors of metabolism often cause epilepsy, as with certain strains of mice. Aggravating the metabolic defect with a protein synthesis inhibitor increases the symptoms. Mature animals that have "outgrown" their genetic susceptibility to audiogenic seizures are made susceptible again by acetoxycycloheximide. After a single small dose the incidence and severity of audiogenic seizures increases at 16 hours, reaches a maximum of 40 hours, and then declines gradually.
Unlike most serine proteases of the chymotrypsin family, tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) is secreted from cells as an active, single-chain enzyme with a catalytic efficiency only slightly lower than that of the proteolytically cleaved form. A zymogenic mutant of tPA has been engineered that displays a reduction in catalytic efficiency by a factor of 141 in the single-chain form while retaining full activity in the cleaved form. The residues introduced in the mutant, serine 292 and histidine 305, are proposed to form a hydrogen-bonded network with aspartate 477, similar to the aspartate 194-histidine 40-serine 32 network found to stabilize the zymogen chymotrypsinogen.
Cells migrating directionally toward a chemoattractant source display a highly polarized cytoskeletal organization, with F-actin localized predominantly at the anterior and myosin II at the lateral and posterior regions. Dictyostelium discoideum has proven a useful system for elucidating signaling pathways that regulate this chemotactic response. During development, extracellular adenosine 3', 5' monophosphate (cAMP) functions as a primary signal to activate cell surface cAMP receptors (cARs). These receptors transduce different signals depending on whether or not they are coupled to heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) (see the STKE Connections Maps). Multiple G protein-stimulated pathways interact to establish polarity in chemotaxing D. discoideum cells by localizing F-actin at their leading edge and by regulating the phosphorylation state and assembly of myosin II. Many of the molecular interactions described are fundamental to the regulation of chemotaxis in other eukaryotic cells.
The peptide nociceptin (also named orphanin FQ) acts in the brain to produce various pharmacological effects, including hyperalgesia and hypolocomotion. The nociceptin receptor uses guanine-nucleotide-binding proteins to mediate the inhibition of adenylyl cyclase, the activation of potassium channels and inhibition of calcium channels. It has been shown using knock-out mice that the nociceptin receptor is not required for regulation of nociceptive responses or locomotion activity, but modulates the auditory function. Here we show that mice lacking the nociceptin receptor possess greater learning ability and have better memory than control mice. Histological analysis revealed the expression of both the nociceptin precursor and the nociceptin receptor in the hippocampus, thought to take part in aspects of learning and memory. Moreover, the receptor-deficient mice showed larger long-term potentiation in the hippocampal CA1 region than control mice, without apparent changes in presynaptic or postsynaptic electrophysiological properties. These results show that the loss of the nociceptin receptor results in a gain-of-function mutation in both the memory process and the long-term potentiation mechanism in CA1, perhaps as a result of altered intracellular signal transduction systems in neurons.
The chemical identity of the amino acid free-radical site that represents one of the two oxidizing equivalents stored in the H2O2-oxidized intermediate (compound ES) of the mitochondrial heme enzyme, cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP) has been sought for almost a quarter of a century. Site-directed mutagenesis alone cannot yield this answer. Low-temperature 35-gigahertz (Q-band) electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) spectroscopy was used to examine compound ES prepared from proteins containing specifically deuterated methionine or tryptophan, as well as the amino acid replacement Trp51----Phe. The results definitely identify the site of the radical in compound ES as tryptophan, most likely Trp191.
Transcribing RNA polymerases oscillate between three stable states, two of which, pre- and posttranslocated, were previously subjected to x-ray crystal structure determination. We report here the crystal structure of RNA polymerase II in the third state, the reverse translocated, or "backtracked" state. The defining feature of the backtracked structure is a binding site for the first backtracked nucleotide. This binding site is occupied in case of nucleotide misincorporation in the RNA or damage to the DNA, and is termed the "P" site because it supports proofreading. The predominant mechanism of proofreading is the excision of a dinucleotide in the presence of the elongation factor SII (TFIIS). Structure determination of a cocrystal with TFIIS reveals a rearrangement whereby cleavage of the RNA may take place.
The interaction between receptors and guanine nucleotide binding (G) proteins leads to G protein activation and subsequent regulation of effector enzymes. The molecular basis of receptor-G protein interaction has been examined by using the ability of the G protein from rods (transducin) to cause a conformational change in rhodopsin as an assay. Synthetic peptides corresponding to two regions near the carboxyl terminus of the G protein alpha subunit, Glu311-Val328 and Ile340-Phe350, compete with G protein for interaction with rhodopsin. Amino acid substitution studies show that Cys321 is required for this effect. Ile340-Phe350 and a modified peptide, acetyl-Glu311-Lys329-amide, mimic G protein effects on rhodopsin conformation, showing that these peptides bind to and stabilize the activated conformation of rhodopsin.
Alteration of gene transcription by inhibition of specific transcriptional regulatory proteins is necessary for determining how these factors participate in cellular differentiation. The functions of these proteins can be antagonized by several methods, each with specific limitations. Inhibition of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins was achieved with double-stranded (ds) phosphorothioate oligonucleotides that contained octamer or kappa B consensus sequences. The phosphorothioate oligonucleotides specifically bound either octamer transcription factor or nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B. The modified oligonucleotides accumulated in cells more effectively than standard ds oligonucleotides and modulated gene expression in a specific manner. Octamer-dependent activation of a reporter plasmid or NF-kappa B-dependent activation of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enhancer was inhibited when the appropriate phosphorothioate oligonucleotide was added to a transiently transfected B cell line. Addition of phosphorothioate oligonucleotides that contained the octamer consensus to Jurkat T leukemia cells inhibited interleukin-2 (IL-2) secretion to a degree similar to that observed with a mutated octamer site in the IL-2 enhancer. The ds phosphorothioate oligonucleotides probably compete for binding of specific transcription factors and may provide anti-viral, immunosuppressive, or other therapeutic effects.
Messenger-RNA-directed protein synthesis is accomplished by the ribosome. In eubacteria, this complex process is initiated by a specialized transfer RNA charged with formylmethionine (tRNA(fMet)). The amino-terminal formylated methionine of all bacterial nascent polypeptides blocks the reactive amino group to prevent unfavourable side-reactions and to enhance the efficiency of translation initiation. The first enzymatic factor that processes nascent chains is peptide deformylase (PDF); it removes this formyl group as polypeptides emerge from the ribosomal tunnel and before the newly synthesized proteins can adopt their native fold, which may bury the N terminus. Next, the N-terminal methionine is excised by methionine aminopeptidase. Bacterial PDFs are metalloproteases sharing a conserved N-terminal catalytic domain. All Gram-negative bacteria, including Escherichia coli, possess class-1 PDFs characterized by a carboxy-terminal alpha-helical extension. Studies focusing on PDF as a target for antibacterial drugs have not revealed the mechanism of its co-translational mode of action despite indications in early work that it co-purifies with ribosomes. Here we provide biochemical evidence that E. coli PDF interacts directly with the ribosome via its C-terminal extension. Crystallographic analysis of the complex between the ribosome-interacting helix of PDF and the ribosome at 3.7 A resolution reveals that the enzyme orients its active site towards the ribosomal tunnel exit for efficient co-translational processing of emerging nascent chains. Furthermore, we have found that the interaction of PDF with the ribosome enhances cell viability. These results provide the structural basis for understanding the coupling between protein synthesis and enzymatic processing of nascent chains, and offer insights into the interplay of PDF with the ribosome-associated chaperone trigger factor.
Helicobacter pylori, strain 26695, has a circular genome of 1,667,867 base pairs and 1,590 predicted coding sequences. Sequence analysis indicates that H. pylori has well-developed systems for motility, for scavenging iron, and for DNA restriction and modification. Many putative adhesins, lipoproteins and other outer membrane proteins were identified, underscoring the potential complexity of host-pathogen interaction. Based on the large number of sequence-related genes encoding outer membrane proteins and the presence of homopolymeric tracts and dinucleotide repeats in coding sequences, H. pylori, like several other mucosal pathogens, probably uses recombination and slipped-strand mispairing within repeats as mechanisms for antigenic variation and adaptive evolution. Consistent with its restricted niche, H. pylori has a few regulatory networks, and a limited metabolic repertoire and biosynthetic capacity. Its survival in acid conditions depends, in part, on its ability to establish a positive inside-membrane potential in low pH.
A 2.7 angstrom resolution x-ray diffraction analysis of a trypsin-modified form of the Escherichia coli elongation factor Tu reveals that the GDP-binding domain has a structure similar to that of other nucleotide-binding proteins. The GDP ligand is located at the COOH-terminal end of the beta sheet and is linked to the protein via a Mg2+ ion salt bridge. The location of the guanine ring is unusual; the purine ring is located on the outer edge of the domain, not deep within a hydrophobic pocket. The amino acids from Pro10 to Arg44 and from Gly59 to Glu190 have been assigned to the electron density with computer graphic techniques, and the resulting model is consistent with all known biochemical data. An analysis of the structure reveals that four regions of the amino acid sequence that are homologous with the family of ras oncogene proteins, termed p21, are located in the vicinity of the GDP-binding site, and most of the invariant amino acids shared by the proteins interact directly with the GDP ligand.
Pineal opsin (P-opsin), an opsin from chick that is highly expressed in pineal but is not detectable in retina, was cloned by the polymerase chain reaction. It is likely that the P-opsin lineage diverged from the retinal opsins early in opsin evolution. The amino acid sequence of P-opsin is 42 to 46 percent identical to that of the retinal opsins. P-opsin is a seven-membrane spanning, G protein-linked receptor with a Schiff-base lysine in the seventh membrane span and a Schiff-base counterion in the third membrane span. The primary sequence of P-opsin suggests that it will be maximally sensitive to approximately 500-nanometer light and produce a slow and prolonged phototransduction response consistent with the nonvisual function of pineal photoreception.
We have used adenosine diphosphate analogs containing electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spin moieties and EPR spectroscopy to show that the nucleotide-binding site of kinesin-family motors closes when the motor.diphosphate complex binds to microtubules. Structural analyses demonstrate that a domain movement in the switch 1 region at the nucleotide site, homologous to domain movements in the switch 1 region in the G proteins [heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins], explains the EPR data. The switch movement primes the motor both for the free energy-yielding nucleotide hydrolysis reaction and for subsequent conformational changes that are crucial for the generation of force and directed motion along the microtubule.
Millions of people regularly obtain insufficient sleep. Given the effect of sleep deprivation on our lives, understanding the cellular and molecular pathways affected by sleep deprivation is clearly of social and clinical importance. One of the major effects of sleep deprivation on the brain is to produce memory deficits in learning models that are dependent on the hippocampus. Here we have identified a molecular mechanism by which brief sleep deprivation alters hippocampal function. Sleep deprivation selectively impaired 3', 5'-cyclic AMP (cAMP)- and protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent forms of synaptic plasticity in the mouse hippocampus, reduced cAMP signalling, and increased activity and protein levels of phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4), an enzyme that degrades cAMP. Treatment of mice with phosphodiesterase inhibitors rescued the sleep-deprivation-induced deficits in cAMP signalling, synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent memory. These findings demonstrate that brief sleep deprivation disrupts hippocampal function by interfering with cAMP signalling through increased PDE4 activity. Thus, drugs that enhance cAMP signalling may provide a new therapeutic approach to counteract the cognitive effects of sleep deprivation.
Cumulative damage to lung tissue by leukocyte elastase is thought to be responsible for the development of pulmonary emphysema, an irreversible lung disease characterized by loss of lung elasticity. It is also thought to be involved in the rapidly developing and usually fatal adult respiratory distress syndrome. The primary defence against elastase damage is the anti-protease known as alpha 1-antitrypsin, a glycosylated serum protein of 394 amino acids. Oxidation of the methionine 358 residue located at the active centre of alpha 1-antitrypsin results in a dramatic decrease in inhibitory activity towards elastase which effectively inactivates the protective function. It has been suggested that this oxidation sensitivity has a regulatory function and allows tissue breakdown at sites of inflammation by inactivation of alpha 1-antitrypsin by oxygen radicals released by phagocytes. In the above diseases, however, the oxidative inactivation of alpha 1-antitrypsin is probably of major importance in allowing lung damage by elastase. An oxidation-resistant alpha 1-antitrypsin required for emphysemics and provide treatment for acute inflammatory respiratory conditions. To further the possibility of therapy for the above conditions, we describe here the synthesis in yeast of active, non-glycosylated, human alpha 1-antitrypsin. Site-directed mutagenesis has been used to construct an active, oxidation-resistant derivative containing a single methionine to valine substitution at the active centre. This demonstrates the potential of engineered modifications to protein molecules designed to improve their physiological function.
Complexes of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase with DNA containing the lambda PL promoter have been deposited on mica and imaged in air with a scanning force microscope. The topographic images reveal the gross spatial relations of the polymerase relative to the DNA template. The DNA appears bent in open promoter complexes containing RNA polymerase bound to the promoter and appears more severely bent in elongation complexes in which RNA polymerase has synthesized a 15-nucleotide transcript. This difference could be related to the conformational changes that accompany the maturation of open promoter complexes into elongation complexes and suggests that formation of the elongation complex involves a considerable modification of the spatial relations between the polymerase and the DNA template.
On page 2137, a research team reports the discovery of a gene that, when altered, can double the life-span of fruit flies and may one day offer the promise of perpetual youth. Preliminary data suggest that the protein encoded by this gene transports and recycles metabolic byproducts. The researchers think that defects in the gene can lead to production of a protein that renders metabolism less efficient; as a result the body functions as if the fruit fly were dieting, even though its eating habits are unchanged. The work may lead to a better understanding of how metabolism plays into aging.
Pig organs may offer a solution to the shortage of human donor organs for transplantation, but concerns remain about possible cross-species transmission of porcine endogenous retrovirus (PERV). Samples were collected from 160 patients who had been treated with various living pig tissues up to 12 years earlier. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and protein immunoblot analyses were performed on serum from all 160 patients. No viremia was detected in any patient. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 159 of the patients were analyzed by PCR using PERV-specific primers. No PERV infection was detected in any of the patients from whom sufficient DNA was extracted to allow complete PCR analysis (97 percent of the patients). Persistent microchimerism (presence of donor cells in the recipient) was observed in 23 patients for up to 8.5 years.
Plant volatiles (PVs) are lipophilic molecules with high vapor pressure that serve various ecological roles. The synthesis of PVs involves the removal of hydrophilic moieties and oxidation/hydroxylation, reduction, methylation, and acylation reactions. Some PV biosynthetic enzymes produce multiple products from a single substrate or act on multiple substrates. Genes for PV biosynthesis evolve by duplication of genes that direct other aspects of plant metabolism; these duplicated genes then diverge from each other over time. Changes in the preferred substrate or resultant product of PV enzymes may occur through minimal changes of critical residues. Convergent evolution is often responsible for the ability of distally related species to synthesize the same volatile.
Immature T cells and some T cell hybridomas undergo apoptotic cell death when activated through the T cell receptor complex, a phenomenon that is probably related to antigen induced negative selection of developing T cells. This activation-induced apoptosis depends on active protein and RNA synthesis in the dying cells, although none of the genes required for this process have previously been identified. Antisense oligonucleotides corresponding to c-myc block the constitutive expression of c-Myc protein in T cell hybridomas and interfere with all aspects of activation-induced apoptosis without affecting lymphokine production in these cells. These data indicate that c-myc expression is a necessary component of activation-induced apoptosis.
The synthesis of RNA catalysed by RNA polymerase from Escherichia coli is terminated at specific sites on DNA templates through the action of a multimeric basic protein known as rho (refs 1, 2). Three lines of evidence suggest that an interactions of rho with the nascent RNA is important for this termination. First, rho binds strongly to RNA; second, rho expresses an RNA-dependent ATPase activity which is essential for termination; third, RNA polymerase does not terminate RNA synthesis at rho-dependent sites when the nascent RNA is digested by ribonuclease during transcription. From the fact that certain RNAs, particularly single-stranded, pyrimidine-rich polymers containing at least 10% cytidylate residues, are more effective than other RNAs at promoting rho-ATPase, it has been proposed that rho recognises specific sites oion on a mRNA transcribed from bacteriophage lambda DNA.
Examples of variability and apparent innovation presented in this paper are but a portion of the many examples in the literature. Thus, the notion of the "unity of biochemistry" has been advanced in an overly simplified form and reflects a primitive stage in the development of the discipline. Cells contain many more compounds and biosynthetic mechanisms than we had suspected or list in our texts. Accordingly, either early chemical evolution was far more extensive than we have postulated or an evolution of biochemical synthesis and function took place which was more extensive than has been postulated; perhaps both have occurred. The chemical choices available from the environment have been considerable rather than limited and the cells have chosen, adapted, improved upon a limited number of these, and in turn have themselves been selected. In the case of the naturally occurring antibiotic substances, biosynthetic mechanisms for compounds which do not fit within the cells' own nucleic acids and proteins to advantage have nevertheless been preserved since they contribute to survival. On the other hand, some of these compounds such as alpha-ribazole, are fitted to other metabolic uses. The existence of the large number of uncommon relatives of the common components of the nucleic acids and proteins in turn implies an enormous untapped area of potential knowledge concerning their paths of biosyntheses and the genetic and physiological controls for these same paths. That these compounds exist perhaps also indicates an expanded material basis for a continuing biochemical evolution.
Gossypol, a phenolic compound isolated from the cotton plant, is a powerful inhibitor of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-linked enzymes (alpha-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase and malate dehydrogenase) of Trypanosoma cruzi, the parasite that causes Chagas' disease. Parasites at the epimastigote stage that were incubated for 5 minutes with 100 micromolar gossypol were completely immobilized. Concentrations of gossypol as low as 0.01 micromolar markedly reduced the growth rate of T. cruzi in culture.
Increasing quantities of man-made organic chemicals are released each year into the biosphere. Some of these compounds are both toxic and relatively resistant to physical, chemical, or biological degradation, and they thus constitute an environmental burden of considerable magnitude. Genetic manipulation of microbial catabolic pathways offers a powerful means by which to accelerate evolution of biodegradative routes through which such compounds might be eliminated from the environment. In the experiments described here, a catabolic pathway for alkylbenzoates specified by the TOL plasmid of Pseudomonas was restructured to produce a pathway capable of processing a new substrate, 4-ethylbenzoate. Analysis of critical steps in the TOL pathway that prevent metabolism of 4-ethylbenzoate revealed that this compound fails to induce synthesis of the catabolic enzymes and that one of its metabolic intermediates inactivates catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (C23O), the enzyme that cleaves the aromatic ring. Consequently, the pathway was sequentially modified by recruitment of genes from mutant bacteria selected for their production of either an altered pathway operon regulator that is activated by 4-ethylbenzoate or an altered C23O that is less sensitive to metabolite inactivation. The redesigned pathway was stably expressed and enabled host bacteria to degrade 4-ethylbenzoate in addition to the normal substrates of the TOL pathway.
The CD8 antigen is a marker for T-lymphocyte subsets that is absent from helper T cells but expressed on cytotoxic T cells which recognize foreign determinants in association with class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens. It has been suggested that CD8 plays some part in recognition by CD8+ cytotoxic T cells since anti-CD8 antibodies can block their functions and the human CD8 antigen contains a domain with clear similarities to immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor (TCR) variable-region (V) domains. Human CD8 antigen is thought to be a homodimer but in the mouse and rat the equivalent antigens (alternatively called Lyt2,3 and OX8) are heterodimeric. Rat CD8 contains two chains of relative molecular mass 32,000 (32K) and 37K: the 32K chain is the rat homologue of human CD8 and mouse Lyt2. We describe here the molecular cloning of the rat 37K chain using an oligonucleotide probe predicted from peptide sequence. The full protein sequence is derived from the complementary DNA and matches limited peptide sequence for mouse Lyt3. The new sequence is more like immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor V domains than other T-cell antigens and includes a patch that is almost identical to some joining (J) piece sequences. This suggests that the CD8 and receptor heterodimers may have evolved directly from a common ancestor.
Ca(2+) channels and calmodulin (CaM) are two prominent signalling hubs that synergistically affect functions as diverse as cardiac excitability, synaptic plasticity and gene transcription. It is therefore fitting that these hubs are in some sense coordinated, as the opening of Ca(V)1-2 Ca(2+) channels are regulated by a single CaM constitutively complexed with channels. The Ca(2+)-free form of CaM (apoCaM) is already pre-associated with the isoleucine-glutamine (IQ) domain on the channel carboxy terminus, and subsequent Ca(2+) binding to this 'resident' CaM drives conformational changes that then trigger regulation of channel opening. Another potential avenue for channel-CaM coordination could arise from the absence of Ca(2+) regulation in channels lacking a pre-associated CaM. Natural fluctuations in CaM concentrations might then influence the fraction of regulable channels and, thereby, the overall strength of Ca(2+) feedback. However, the prevailing view has been that the ultrastrong affinity of channels for apoCaM ensures their saturation with CaM, yielding a significant form of concentration independence between Ca(2+) channels and CaM. Here we show that significant exceptions to this autonomy exist, by combining electrophysiology (to characterize channel regulation) with optical fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) sensor determination of free-apoCaM concentration in live cells. This approach translates quantitative CaM biochemistry from the traditional test-tube context into the realm of functioning holochannels within intact cells. From this perspective, we find that long splice forms of Ca(V)1.3 and Ca(V)1.4 channels include a distal carboxy tail that resembles an enzyme competitive inhibitor that retunes channel affinity for apoCaM such that natural CaM variations affect the strength of Ca(2+) feedback modulation. Given the ubiquity of these channels, the connection between ambient CaM levels and Ca(2+) entry through channels is broadly significant for Ca(2+) homeostasis. Strategies such as ours promise key advances for the in situ analysis of signalling molecules resistant to in vitro reconstitution, such as Ca(2+) channels.
NLR (nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich repeat-containing) proteins have rapidly emerged as central regulators of immunity and inflammation with demonstrated relevance to human diseases. Much attention has focused on the ability of several NLRs to activate the inflammasome complex and drive proteolytic processing of inflammatory cytokines; however, NLRs also regulate important inflammasome-independent functions in the immune system. We discuss several of these functions, including the regulation of canonical and noncanonical NF-kappaB activation, mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, cytokine and chemokine production, antimicrobial reactive oxygen species production, type I interferon production, and ribonuclease L activity. We also explore the mechanistic basis of these functions and describe current challenges in the field.
In vivo protein-DNA interactions at the developmentally regulated enhancer of the mouse muscle creatine kinase (MCK) gene were examined by a newly developed polymerase chain reaction (PCR) footprinting procedure. This ligation mediated, single-sided PCR technique permits the exponential amplification of an entire sequence ladder. Several footprints were detected in terminally differentiated muscle cells where the MCK gene is actively transcribed. None were observed in myogenic cells prior to differentiation or in nonmuscle cells. Two footprints appear to correspond to sites that can bind the myogenic regulator MyoD1 in vitro, whereas two others represent muscle specific use of apparently general factors. Because MyoD1 is synthesized by undifferentiated myoblasts, these data imply that additional regulatory mechanisms must restrict the interaction between this protein and its target site prior to differentiation.
The carbon skeletons of over 55,000 naturally occurring isoprenoid compounds are constructed from four fundamental coupling reactions: chain elongation, cyclopropanation, branching, and cyclobutanation. Enzymes that catalyze chain elongation and cyclopropanation are well studied, whereas those that catalyze branching and cyclobutanation are unknown. We have catalyzed the four reactions with chimeric proteins generated by replacing segments of a chain-elongation enzyme with corresponding sequences from a cyclopropanation enzyme. Stereochemical and mechanistic considerations suggest that the four coupling enzymes could have evolved from a common ancestor through relatively small changes in the catalytic site.
Male alcoholics often suffer from features of hypogonadism related to abnormal metabolism of sex steroids. Since the activity of testosterone reductases is rate limiting for testosterone metabolism in the liver, the effect of prolonged ethanol consumption by rats and human volunteers on the activities of these microsomal and cytosolic enzymes was studied. In rats, long-term ethanol ingestion doubled microsomal 5alpha-testosterone reductase activity, a major pathway for testosterone metabolism, while in human volunteers the activity was increased two- to fivefold. These changes may play a role in the altered androgenic activity of the chronic alcoholic.
A new form of alpha-L-fucosidase deficiency has been found in a 20-year-old severely retarded male. Additional signs include angiokeratoma corporis diffusum and anhydrosis. The skin lesion is due to an accumulation of residual bodies, presumably containing oligosaccharides and glycoproteins, in endothelial cells and fibrocytes. The enzyme activity in blood relatives indicates that the disease is inherited as a simple autosomal recessive trait that segregates according to Mendelian principles. Because the enzyme activity in the heterozygotes was consistently below that of normal controls, the carriers of the trait in this family could be ascertained.
Lipoxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid have recently been shown to modulate the activity of ion channels in nerve and muscle cells. The mechanism of action of these metabolites is, however, unknown. In sensory neurons of Aplysia, the S-K- channel is under the dual modulatory control of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), which decreases the number of active S channels through cyclic AMP-dependent phosphorylation, and the neuropeptide FMRFamide, which increases the probability of S-channel opening through the 12-lipoxygenase metabolite 12-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12-HPETE). Here we report that the increase in the probability of S-channel opening with FMRFamide is mimicked by application of 12-HPETE to cell-free membrane patches that lack ATP and GTP. Thus, 12-HPETE can act directly to modulate S-channel activity, independently of protein phosphorylation or dephosphorylation, G-protein activation or cyclic nucleotides.
Phosphatidylinositol (Pl)-3 kinase is one of many enzymes stimulated by growth factors. A constitutively activated mutant, p110, that functions independently of growth factor stimulation was constructed to determine the specific responses regulated by Pl-3 kinase. The p110 protein exhibited high specific activity as a Pl-3 kinase and as a protein kinase. Expression of p110 in NIH 3T3 cells induced transcription from the fos promoter. Co-expression of dominant negative Ras blocked this response. When expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes, p110 increased the amount of guanosine 5'-triphosphate-bound Ras, caused activation of the Ras effector Raf-1, and induced Ras-dependent oocyte maturation. These findings show that Pl-3 kinase can stimulate diverse Ras-dependent cellular processes, including oocyte maturation and fos transcription.
Foot and mouth disease virus (FMDV), of the family Picornaviridae, consists of a single-stranded RNA (approximately 8,000 nucleotides), the translation of which is initiated on the 3' side of a 150-nucleotide poly(C) tract and yields a single polyprotein which is processed by host cell proteases into four primary products (Fig. 1). One or more virus-specified proteases further cleave these into the final products, the capsid proteins (VP1-4) being derived from the precursor p88 (for review see ref. 5). There are seven serotypes of the virus and as it has been shown that the immunizing activity of FMDV particles is associated primarily with VP1 (refs 6, 7), it seems likely that antigenic variation in FMDV is a result of changes in the structure of this protein. To further our understanding of this variation and as a first step in the possible development of FMDV vaccines from genetically manipulated microorganisms, we report here the construction and analysis of recombinant plasmids containing cDNA copies of the RNA. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence with the known polypeptide sequences shows that the NH2-termini of VP2 and VP3 are conserved between the A and O serotypes whereas that of VP1 (the immunizing antigen) varies by as much as 42% between serotypes.
Hypertrophy of the rat soleus muscle was induced by tenotomy of the synergistic muscles. Four days after the operation, the weight of the muscle had increased by 30 percent. The hypertrophied muscle had an increased concentration of DNA and RNA, when compared to the contralateral control soleus. Although the amount of myofibrillar protein increased during the 4-day period, the concentration of this component decreased. Microsomes prepared from hypertrophied muscle had an increased RNA concentration. The combined microsomes and pH-5 enzyme from hypertrophied muscle supported a faster rate of protein synthesis in vitro than the same system prepared from an equal weight of contralateral muscle which was used as a control.
Complete enzymatic replication of DNA from the simian virus 40 origin has been reconstituted with T antigen and highly purified cellular proteins. DNA polymerase-alpha/primase functions primarily to synthesize RNA-DNA primers for initiation of DNA replication at the origin and for priming each Okazaki fragment. A polymerase switching mechanism requiring replication factor C and the proliferating cell nuclear antigen allows two molecules of DNA polymerase-delta to replicate both strands of the double helix conjointly.
To define the functional domains of the progesterone receptor required for gene regulation, complementary DNA (cDNA) clones encoding the chicken progesterone receptor have been isolated from a chicken oviduct lambda gt11 cDNA expression library. Positive clones expressed antigenic determinants that cross-reacted with six monospecific antibodies derived from two independent sources. A 36-amino acid peptide sequence obtained by microsequencing of purified progesterone receptor was encoded by nucleotide sequences in the longest cDNA clone. Analysis of the amino acid sequence of the progesterone receptor deduced from the cDNA clones revealed a cysteine-rich region that was homologous to a region found in the estrogen and glucocorticoid receptors and to the avian erythroblastosis virus gag-erb-A fusion protein. Northern blot analysis with chicken progesterone receptor cDNA's indicated the existence of at least three messenger RNA species. These messages were found only in oviduct and could be induced by estrogens.
The structure of Escherichia coli succinate dehydrogenase (SQR), analogous to the mitochondrial respiratory complex II, has been determined, revealing the electron transport pathway from the electron donor, succinate, to the terminal electron acceptor, ubiquinone. It was found that the SQR redox centers are arranged in a manner that aids the prevention of reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation at the flavin adenine dinucleotide. This is likely to be the main reason SQR is expressed during aerobic respiration rather than the related enzyme fumarate reductase, which produces high levels of ROS. Furthermore, symptoms of genetic disorders associated with mitochondrial SQR mutations may be a result of ROS formation resulting from impaired electron transport in the enzyme.
G proteins are an important class of regulatory switches in all living systems. They are activated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which facilitate the exchange of GDP for GTP. This activity makes GEFs attractive targets for modulating disease-relevant G-protein-controlled signalling networks. GEF inhibitors are therefore of interest as tools for elucidating the function of these proteins and for therapeutic intervention; however, only one small molecule GEF inhibitor, brefeldin A (BFA), is currently available. Here we used an aptamer displacement screen to identify SecinH3, a small molecule antagonist of cytohesins. The cytohesins are a class of BFA-resistant small GEFs for ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs), which regulate cytoskeletal organization, integrin activation or integrin signalling. The application of SecinH3 in human liver cells showed that insulin-receptor-complex-associated cytohesins are required for insulin signalling. SecinH3-treated mice show increased expression of gluconeogenic genes, reduced expression of glycolytic, fatty acid and ketone body metabolism genes in the liver, reduced liver glycogen stores, and a compensatory increase in plasma insulin. Thus, cytohesin inhibition results in hepatic insulin resistance. Because insulin resistance is among the earliest pathological changes in type 2 diabetes, our results show the potential of chemical biology for dissecting the molecular pathogenesis of this disease.
The de novo synthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides is required for mammalian cells to proliferate. The rate-limiting step in this pathway is catalysed by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (CPS II), part of the multifunctional enzyme CAD. Here we describe the regulation of CAD by the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade. When phosphorylated by MAP kinase in vitro or activated by epidermal growth factor in vivo, CAD lost its feedback inhibition (which is dependent on uridine triphosphate) and became more sensitive to activation (which depends upon phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate). Both these allosteric regulatory changes favour biosynthesis of pyrimidines for growth. They were accompanied by increased epidermal growth factor-dependent phosphorylation of CAD in vivo and were prevented by inhibition of MAP kinase. Mutation of a consensus MAP kinase phosphorylation site abolished the changes in CAD allosteric regulation that were stimulated by growth factors. Finally, consistent with an effect of MAP kinase signalling on CPS II activity, epidermal growth factor increased cellular uridine triphosphate and this increase was reversed by inhibition of MAP kinase. Hence these studies may indicate a direct link between activation of the MAP kinase cascade and de novo biosynthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides.
The telomerase enzyme of Tetrahymena synthesizes repeats of the telomeric DNA sequence TTGGGG de novo in the absence of added template. The essential RNA component of this ribonucleoprotein enzyme has now been cloned and found to contain the sequence CAACCCCAA, which seems to be the template for the synthesis of TTGGGG repeats.
Thermostability of enzyme can be enhanced by single amino acid substitutions. Recent advances in genetic engineering have made it possible to create novel proteins in a predictable manner where structural information for the protein is available. This 'protein engineering' has already been used to enhance enzyme thermostability, but it is usually not clear which amino acid substitutions should be made. We consider that the following approach should be helpful in engineering proteins with enhanced thermostability: highly conserved residues should be left unchanged; the sequences of known mesophilic and thermophilic proteins should be used to suggest the kinds of changes likely to increase thermostability; and substitutions should be made that increase internal hydrophobicity and that stabilize helices for strong internal packing. We describe here the use of this approach to alter the thermostability of the thermostable neutral protease of Bacillus stearothermophilus, the sequence of which is known. Surprisingly we find that a single mutation that decreases thermostability can require two mutations that increase stability to compensate for it. The effects on stability are not additive, suggesting cooperativity.
A strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae capable of simultaneous hydrolysis and fermentation of highly polymerized starch oligosaccharides was constructed. The Aspergillus awamori glucoamylase enzyme, form GAI, was expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by means of the promoter and termination regions from a yeast enolase gene. Yeast transformed with plasmids containing an intron-free recombinant glucoamylase gene efficiently secreted glucoamylase into the medium, permitting growth of the transformants on starch as the sole carbon source. The natural leader sequence of the precursor of glucoamylase (preglucoamylase) was processed correctly by yeast, and the secreted enzyme was glycosylated through both N- and O-linkages at levels comparable to the native Aspergillus enzyme. The data provide evidence for the utility of yeast as an organism for the production, glycosylation, and secretion of heterologous proteins.
Transcription elongation is responsible for rapid synthesis of RNA chains of thousands of nucleotides in vivo. In contrast, a single round of transcription performed in vitro is frequently interrupted by pauses and arrests that drastically reduce the elongation rate and the yield of the full-length transcript. Here we demonstrate that most transcriptional delays disappear if more than one RNA polymerase (RNAP) molecule initiates from the same promoter. Anti-arrest and anti-pause effects of trailing RNAP are due to forward translocation of leading (backtracked) complexes. Such cooperation between RNAP molecules links the rate of elongation to the rate of initiation and explains why elongation is still fast and processive in vivo even without anti-arrest factors.
The NS3 helicase is essential for cytoplasmic RNA replication by the hepatitis C virus, and it is a representative member of helicase superfamily 2 (SF2). NS3 is an important model system for understanding unwinding activities of DExH/D proteins, and it has been the subject of extensive structural and mutational analyses. Despite intense interest in NS3, the molecular and kinetic mechanisms for RNA unwinding by this helicase have remained obscure. We have developed a combinatorial, time-resolved approach for monitoring the microscopic behaviour of a helicase at each nucleotide of a duplex substrate. By applying this analysis to NS3, we have independently established the 'physical' and 'kinetic' step size for unwinding of RNA (18 base pairs, in each case), which we relate to the stoichiometry of the functional, translocating species. Having obtained microscopic unwinding rate constants at each position along the duplex, we demonstrate that NS3 unwinds RNA through a highly coordinated cycle of fast ripping and local pausing that occurs with regular spacing along the duplex substrate, much like the stepping behaviour of cytoskeletal motor proteins.
In higher eukaryotes the RNA polymerase II transcription factor TFIID is composed of a TATA-box-binding protein (TBP) and a set of tightly bound polypeptides, designated TBP-associated factors (TAFIIS). One or more TAFIIS are coactivators that are required for activated but not basal transcription. The eukaryotic transcription machinery is highly conserved and it is therefore puzzling that TAFIIS have not been identified in yeast. Here we use TBP as a protein-affinity ligand to isolate from yeast a multisubunit complex that is required specifically for activated transcription by RNA polymerase II. Microsequence analysis and cloning of two subunits of this complex reveal that they are the homologues of known mammalian and Drosophila TAFIIS. The genes encoding these two yeast TAFIIS are essential, suggesting that activated transcription is required for viability of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Differentiation may be controlled by forks in DNA each having a replicatable protein "switch," stable in either a "left" or a "right" configuration, which determines the path through the DNA network taken by RNA polymerases during transcription. The possibility for dedifferentiation exists, but differentiation could be made irreversible by the exertion of a similar control over parts of the paths through the network taken by DNA polymerases. The concept of bistable switches at DNA branch points can be used to account for antibody variability.
The crystal structure of the initiating form of Thermus aquaticus RNA polymerase, containing core RNA polymerase (alpha2betabeta'omega) and the promoter specificity sigma subunit, has been determined at 4 angstrom resolution. Important structural features of the RNA polymerase and their roles in positioning sigma within the initiation complex are delineated, as well as the role played by sigma in modulating the opening of the RNA polymerase active-site channel. The two carboxyl-terminal domains of sigma are separated by 45 angstroms on the surface of the RNA polymerase, but are linked by an extended loop. The loop winds near the RNA polymerase active site, where it may play a role in initiating nucleotide substrate binding, and out through the RNA exit channel. The advancing RNA transcript must displace the loop, leading to abortive initiation and ultimately to sigma release.
Triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) is used as a model system for the study of how a localized conformational change in a protein structure is produced and related to enzyme reactivity. An 11-residue loop region moves more than 7 angstroms and closes over the active site when substrate binds. The loop acts like a "lid" in that it moves rigidly and is attached by two hinges to the remainder of the protein. The nature of the motion appears to be built into the loop by conserved residues; the hinge regions, in contrast, are not conserved. Results of molecular dynamics calculations confirm the structural analysis and suggest a possible ligand-induced mechanism for loop closure.
Avian myeloblastosis virus is defective in reproductive capacity, requiring a helper virus to provide the viral proteins essential for synthesis of new infectious virus. This virus arose by recombination of the nondefective helper virus and host cellular sequences present within the normal avian genome. These latter sequences are essential for leukemogenic activity. The complete nucleotide sequence of this region is reported. Within the acquired cellular sequences there is an open reading frame of 795 nucleotides starting with the initiation codon ATG (adenine, thymine, guanine) and terminating with the triplet TAG. This open reading frame could code for the putative transforming protein of 265 amino acids with a molecular weight of approximately 30,000.
The ectodomains of numerous proteins are released from cells by proteolysis to yield soluble intercellular regulators. The responsible protease, tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme (TACE), has been identified only in the case when tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) is released. Analyses of cells lacking this metalloproteinase-disintegrin revealed an expanded role for TACE in the processing of other cell surface proteins, including a TNF receptor, the L-selectin adhesion molecule, and transforming growth factor-alpha (TGFalpha). The phenotype of mice lacking TACE suggests an essential role for soluble TGFalpha in normal development and emphasizes the importance of protein ectodomain shedding in vivo.
We have previously shown that a fraction from the nuclei of S phase (DNA-synthesizing) Chinese hamster embryo fibroblasts (CHEF/18 cells) can be obtained that has a number of the enzyme activities required for DNA biosynthesis, and can catalyse the incorporation of labelled precursors into DNA (refs 1-4, also see ref. 8). This fraction, which we have termed the 'replitase', contains spherical particles of diameter approximately 25 nm, apparently multienzyme complexes for de novo DNA biosynthesis. Here we present evidence for the functional association of one of the enzyme activities, thymidylate synthase, with several of the other enzyme activities. Hydroxyurea, novobiocin and aphidicolin, inhibitors of ribonucleotide reductase, topoisomerase and DNA polymerase alpha, respectively, all inhibit thymidylate synthase in intact S phase CHEF/18 cells, but not in their soluble extracts. We suggest that these results reflect allosteric interactions between the subunits of a multienzyme DNA-synthesizing complex, which can be modulated by the specific inhibitors of individual enzyme activities in intact cells.
An ultrasensitive method for detecting protein analytes has been developed. The system relies on magnetic microparticle probes with antibodies that specifically bind a target of interest [prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in this case] and nanoparticle probes that are encoded with DNA that is unique to the protein target of interest and antibodies that can sandwich the target captured by the microparticle probes. Magnetic separation of the complexed probes and target followed by dehybridization of the oligonucleotides on the nanoparticle probe surface allows the determination of the presence of the target protein by identifying the oligonucleotide sequence released from the nanoparticle probe. Because the nanoparticle probe carries with it a large number of oligonucleotides per protein binding event, there is substantial amplification and PSA can be detected at 30 attomolar concentration. Alternatively, a polymerase chain reaction on the oligonucleotide bar codes can boost the sensitivity to 3 attomolar. Comparable clinically accepted conventional assays for detecting the same target have sensitivity limits of approximately 3 picomdar, six orders of magnitude less sensitive than what is observed with this method.
During ageing of the human brain, and particularly in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type (AD), many neurones progressively accumulate abnormal cytoplasmic fibres, called paired helical filaments (PHF). Each such fibre consists of a pair of intermediate (10 nm) filaments twisted into a double helix with a periodicity of 160 nm. PHF accumulate in large perikaryal masses, called neurofibrillary tangles, and are also found in degenerating cortical neurites that form neurite plaques. The density of PHF-containing neurites and cell bodies correlates with the degree of dementia and the extent of loss of cholinergic neurotransmitter function in AD. Recently, we demonstrated that PHF from human cerebral cortex are large, rigid polymers with unusual molecular properties, including insolubility in SDS, urea and other denaturing solvents and apparent resistance to protease digestion. These properties have so far prevented complete purification and analysis of the constituents of PHF. Based on their insolubility, we have developed a new method of preparing highly enriched PHF fractions and have raised an antiserum that is highly specific for PHF. We report here that this antiserum specifically labels PHF, free of any associated normal fibrous proteins and, unexpectedly, it reacts with neither neurofilaments nor any other normal cytoskeletal protein in brain sections or on immunoblotted gels. These anti-PHF antibodies have been used for the specific detection of Alzheimer-type PHF and in the search for cross-reacting antigens in various tissues, and are suitable for immunoaffinity purification of PHF. Our results indicate that PHF contain determinants that are not shared with normal neuronal fibrous proteins.
Antiserum to a synthetic peptide corresponding to the carboxyl-terminus of the human c-myc protein immunoprecipitated a 48,000-dalton protein from a number of normal and malignant human and mouse cells. The size of the protein is consistent with the potential coding region predicted from the c-myc nucleotide sequence, and is the same for malignant cells carrying either a rearranged or an unrearranged c-myc oncogene. Because c-myc transcripts are expressed at higher levels in malignant than in normal B cells, it appears that an increased level of the c-myc protein rather than a change in the gene product is the relevant factor in determining transformation.
The transforming gene (src) of avian sarcoma virus (ASV) and adjacent regions of the viral genome have been isolated by molelcular cloning of viral DNA. Their nucleotide sequence encompasses the whole of src and the portion of the gene env that encodes gp 37, one of two glycoproteins found in the viral envelope. Src encodes a single, hydrophobic protein with structural features that conform to previous descriptions descriptions of the gene product (pp60src). It appears that a single viral protein is responsible for both the initiation and maintenance of neoplastic transformation by avian sarcoma virus. Neither src nor its product bear any obvious structural relationship to several other viral oncogenes and their encoded proteins. Src is flanked by a repeated nucleotide sequence that may facilitate frequent deletion of the gene from the viral genome.
Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by a high incidence of skin cancers. Yeast RAD30 encodes a DNA polymerase involved in the error-free bypass of ultraviolet (UV) damage. Here it is shown that XP variant (XP-V) cell lines harbor nonsense or frameshift mutations in hRAD30, the human counterpart of yeast RAD30. Of the eight mutations identified, seven would result in a severely truncated hRad30 protein. These results indicate that defects in hRAD30 cause XP-V, and they suggest that error-free replication of UV lesions by hRad30 plays an important role in minimizing the incidence of sunlight-induced skin cancers.
Despite recent advances in the identification of ligand-binding and voltage-sensing regions of ion channels, the domains that couple such regions to channel opening have not been identified. Moreover, it is uncertain whether ligand binding or depolarization are obligatory steps that must precede channel opening (according to linear reaction schemes) or whether they act to stabilize the channel in an open state that can exist independently of ligand binding or depolarization (according to cyclic allosteric models). By comparing ligand-independent and ligand-dependent channel openings, we now show that retinal and olfactory cyclic-nucleotide-gated channels are activated by a cyclic allosteric mechanism. We further show that an amino-terminal domain, distinct from the pore and ligand-binding motifs, participates in the allosteric gating transition, accounting for differences in the free energy of gating of the two channels. The allosteric transition provides an important mechanism for tuning the physiological response of ligand-binding proteins, such as cyclic-nucleotide-gated channels, to different biological signals.
New drugs are required to counter the tuberculosis (TB) pandemic. Here, we describe the synthesis and characterization of 1,3-benzothiazin-4-ones (BTZs), a new class of antimycobacterial agents that kill Mycobacterium tuberculosis in vitro, ex vivo, and in mouse models of TB. Using genetics and biochemistry, we identified the enzyme decaprenylphosphoryl-beta-d-ribose 2'-epimerase as a major BTZ target. Inhibition of this enzymatic activity abolishes the formation of decaprenylphosphoryl arabinose, a key precursor that is required for the synthesis of the cell-wall arabinans, thus provoking cell lysis and bacterial death. The most advanced compound, BTZ043, is a candidate for inclusion in combination therapies for both drug-sensitive and extensively drug-resistant TB.
The activity of purified deoxycytidylate deaminase obtained from chick-embryo extracts is dependent upon the presence of deoxycytidine triphosphate and magnesium ions. The stability of the enzyme at 37 degrees C is markedly enhanced by deoxycytidine triphosphate, and less so by the other deoxyribonucleotides. The inhibition by p-chloromercuribenzoate, urea, and deoxythymidine triphosphate, is reversed by deoxycytidine triphosphate. This reversal suggests that the regulation of enzyme activity is effected through configurational changes in the enzyme structure.
The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II becomes multiply phosphorylated by protein kinases during early steps in the gene transcription cycle both in vivo and in vitro. In yeast, the major CTD kinase is a subunit of the general transcription factor TFIIH, and is encoded by an essential gene, KIN28. Although the CTD and its phosphorylation are important for transcription, in vitro studies have challenged whether CTD phosphorylation is an absolutely required step. The general importance of CTD phosphorylation by Kin28 for transcription in yeast has been suggested because, for all genes tested, transcription is inhibited at the non-permissive temperature in temperature-sensitive kin28 mutants. However, using such a mutant and a copper-inducible targeted destruction method, we show here that transcription of certain genes can be highly induced even when cells lack Kin28. We also show that transcription of these Kin28-independent genes is independent of Srb4 and Srb6, critical components of the CTD-associated transcriptional mediator complex. These results indicate that there are at least two distinct pathways for transcriptional activation: one is dependent on Kin28 and the mediator complex, and the other is not.
RNA polymerase, the principal enzyme of gene expression, possesses structural features conserved in evolution. A substitution of an evolutionarily invariant amino acid (Lys1065----Arg) in the beta subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase apparently disrupts its catalytic center. The mutant protein inhibited cell growth when expressed from an inducible promoter. The assembled holoenzyme carrying the mutant subunit formed stable promoter complexes that continuously synthesized promoter-specific dinucleotides but that did not enter the elongation step. The mutant polymerase inhibited transcription by blocking the access of the wild-type enzyme to promoters.
After gene rearrangement, immunoglobulin variable genes are diversified by somatic hypermutation or gene conversion, whereas the constant region is altered by class-switch recombination. All three processes depend on activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), a B-cell-specific protein that has been proposed (because of sequence homology) to function by RNA editing. But indications that the three gene diversification processes might be initiated by a common type of DNA lesion, together with the proposal that there is a first phase of hypermutation that targets dC/dG, suggested to us that AID may function directly at dC/dG pairs. Here we show that expression of AID in Escherichia coli gives a mutator phenotype that yields nucleotide transitions at dC/dG in a context-dependent manner. Mutation triggered by AID is enhanced by a deficiency of uracil-DNA glycosylase, which indicates that AID functions by deaminating dC residues in DNA. We propose that diversification of functional immunoglobulin genes is triggered by AID-mediated deamination of dC residues in the immunoglobulin locus with the outcome--that is, hypermutation phases 1 and 2, gene conversion or switch recombination--dependent on the way in which the initiating dU/dG lesion is resolved.
Lithium is a unique drug with therapeutic as well as prophylactic value for both manic and depressive phases of manic-depressive illness. The precise mechanisms of its clinical efficacy remain unknown, but there are two main theories of its biochemical action. One proposes that lithium inhibits adrenergically activated adenylate cyclase function whereas the other suggests that it inhibits phosphatidyl inositol turnover, which is known to be activated by cholinergic agonists. Neither mechanism alone, however, can explain both the antimanic and antidepressant effects of lithium. Because of the pivotal role of G proteins in post-receptor information transduction, we have investigated the interaction of lithium with G protein function. Lithium at therapeutically efficacious concentrations completely blocked both adrenergic and cholinergic agonist-induced increases in [3H]GTP binding to membranes from rat cerebral cortex, in both in vitro and ex vivo experiments. The same lithium treatments also abolished guanine nucleotide modulation of agonist binding. Our findings suggest G proteins (Gs and Gi or Go) as the molecular site of action for both the antimanic and antidepressant effects of lithium.
A DNA sequence rich in (A+T), located upstream of the -10, -35 region of the Escherichia coli ribosomal RNA promoter rrnB P1 and called the UP element, stimulates transcription by a factor of 30 in vivo, as well as in vitro in the absence of protein factors other than RNA polymerase (RNAP). When fused to other promoters, such as lacUV5, the UP element also stimulates transcription, indicating that it is a separate promoter module. Mutations in the carboxyl-terminal region of the alpha subunit of RNAP prevent stimulation of these promoters by the UP element although the mutant enzymes are effective in transcribing the "core" promoters (those lacking the UP element). Protection of UP element DNA by the mutant RNAPs is severely reduced in footprinting experiments, suggesting that the selective decrease in transcription might result from defective interactions between alpha and the UP element. Purified alpha binds specifically to the UP element, confirming that alpha acts directly in promoter recognition. Transcription of three other promoters was also reduced by the COOH-terminal alpha mutations. These results suggest that UP elements comprise a third promoter recognition region (in addition to the -10, -35 recognition hexamers, which interact with the sigma subunit) and may account for the presence of (A+T)-rich DNA upstream of many prokaryotic promoters. Since the same alpha mutations also block activation by some transcription factors, mechanisms of promoter stimulation by upstream DNA elements and positive control by certain transcription factors may be related.
The complete amino acid sequences of the haemagglutinins (HAs) of one strain of each of the Hav1 and H2 subtypes and of three strains of the H3 subtype of influenza virus have been established. A large external fragment (BHA) of HA can be released from virus particles using the protease bromelain that cleaves the protein close to its carboxyl terminus, which is inserted in the virus membrane (see Fig 1). Here we show that a single disulphide bond joins the two component polypeptide chains BHA1 and BHA2 and establish the location of five intrachain disulphides. These disulphide bonds have been located in the three-dimensional structure of HA which is known to 3 A resolution.
DNA cytosine methylation is crucial for retrotransposon silencing and mammalian development. In a computational search for enzymes that could modify 5-methylcytosine (5mC), we identified TET proteins as mammalian homologs of the trypanosome proteins JBP1 and JBP2, which have been proposed to oxidize the 5-methyl group of thymine. We show here that TET1, a fusion partner of the MLL gene in acute myeloid leukemia, is a 2-oxoglutarate (2OG)- and Fe(II)-dependent enzyme that catalyzes conversion of 5mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (hmC) in cultured cells and in vitro. hmC is present in the genome of mouse embryonic stem cells, and hmC levels decrease upon RNA interference-mediated depletion of TET1. Thus, TET proteins have potential roles in epigenetic regulation through modification of 5mC to hmC.
Calorie restriction extends lifespan in a broad range of organisms, from yeasts to mammals. Numerous hypotheses have been proposed to explain this phenomenon, including decreased oxidative damage and altered energy metabolism. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, lifespan extension by calorie restriction requires the NAD+-dependent histone deacetylase, Sir2 (ref. 1). We have recently shown that Sir2 and its closest human homologue SIRT1, a p53 deacetylase, are strongly inhibited by the vitamin B3 precursor nicotinamide. Here we show that increased expression of PNC1 (pyrazinamidase/nicotinamidase 1), which encodes an enzyme that deaminates nicotinamide, is both necessary and sufficient for lifespan extension by calorie restriction and low-intensity stress. We also identify PNC1 as a longevity gene that is responsive to all stimuli that extend lifespan. We provide evidence that nicotinamide depletion is sufficient to activate Sir2 and that this is the mechanism by which PNC1 regulates longevity. We conclude that yeast lifespan extension by calorie restriction is the consequence of an active cellular response to a low-intensity stress and speculate that nicotinamide might regulate critical cellular processes in higher organisms.
An understanding of the protein-DNA interactions in vivo at origins of DNA replication in eukaryotes is essential to delineate the mechanism of initiation of DNA synthesis and its control in the cell cycle. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a family of sequences known as autonomously replicating sequences (ARSs) function as origins of bidirectional DNA replication on plasmids and, in several instances, also in their normal chromosomal location. Here we use nucleotide resolution genomic footprinting to investigate the association of proteins with ARS1. Nuclease protection patterns indicate that at least two different cellular factors interact with functional elements in ARS1. The first seems to be ARS-binding factor 1. The second seems to be a novel protein that generates extensive protection over the essential ARS consensus sequence and phased DNaseI-sensitive sites across a functionally important flanking sequence. Hypersensitivity of this region to cleavage by copper phenanthroline indicates that it is under torsional strain, analogous to that produced at transcriptional start sites by assembly of an initiation complex. The protection in situ is similar to that generated by the origin recognition complex (ORC) protein.
The MerR protein mediates the induction of the mercury resistance phenotype in bacteria; it has been isolated in order to study the effects of metal-ion induced changes in the metabolism of prokaryotic cells at the molecular level. After DNA sequences responsible for negative autoregulation were removed, the 16-kilodalton protein was overproduced and purified to more than 90 percent homogeneity by a salt extraction procedure that yields about 5 milligrams of protein per gram of cells. Complementation data, amino terminal analysis, gel filtration, and deoxyribonuclease I protection studies demonstrate that the purified merR gene product is a dimer under nondenaturing conditions and that it binds specifically to DNA, in the presence and absence of mercury, at a palindromic site which is directly between the -10 and -35 regions of the structural genes and adjacent to its own promoter. These initial results indicate that MerR is a DNA-binding metalloregulatory protein that plays a central role in this heavy metal responsive system and they delineate an operator site in the mer operon.
The gag-pol gene of HTLV-III (human T-lymphotropic virus), the virus linked to AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), was expressed in yeast, and processing of the gag precursor into proteins of the same size as those in the virion was observed. Processing of the gag gene in yeast cells mimics the process that naturally occurs in mammalian cells during maturation of virions. Therefore it was possible to perform mutational analysis of the virus genome to localize the gene that codes for the protease function to the amino terminal coding region of the pol gene. Since this region overlaps the gag gene, it is likely that ribosomal frameshifting occurs from gag to pol. Antibodies in all of the AIDS patients' sera tested recognized the yeast synthesized gag proteins, although the sera showed differences in relative reactivity to the individual gag proteins and the precursor. This yeast system should be valuable not only for production of viral proteins for diagnostic or vaccine purposes but also for analysis of the genetics and biochemistry of viral gene functions--parameters that are difficult to study otherwise with this virus.
Polioviruses occur as three distinct serotypes, 1, 2 and 3, and are composed of a single-stranded positive-sense RNA genome of approximately 7,450 nucleotides enclosed in an icosahedral particle of diameter 27 nm. The three-dimensional crystallographic structure of poliovirus type 1 has been determined at 2.9 A resolution, providing a detailed knowledge of the folding and arrangement of the individual virus proteins, VP1-VP4. From this and the characterization of monoclonal antibody-resistant mutants, the amino acids contributing to antigenic sites have been identified and located on the surface of the virus particle. Here we describe the construction and characterization of a poliovirus chimaera having a defined region of type 3 inserted into type 1. This virus has composite antigenicity and the substitute site is immunogenic in small animals and primates. The ability to construct such viruses has implications for the design of improved poliovirus vaccine strains or vaccines against other picornaviruses, such as hepatitis A.
The complete nucleotide sequence of the transforming gene of a mouse sarcoma virus has been determined. It codes for a protein of 374 amino acids. The nucleotide sequence of the junctions between a murine leukaemia virus and cellular sequences leading to the formation of the viral transforming gene have also been elucidated. The viral transforming sequence and its cellular homologue share an uninterrupted stretch of 1,159 nucleotides, with few base substitutions. The predicted amino acid sequence of the mouse sarcoma virus transforming gene was found to share considerable homology with the proposed amino acid sequence of the avian sarcoma virus oncogene (src) product.
Receptor protein-tyrosine kinases, through phosphorylation of specific tyrosine residues, generate high-affinity binding sites which direct assembly of multienzyme signalling complexes. Many of these signalling proteins, including phospholipase C gamma, GTPase-activating protein and phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase, contain src-homology 2 (SH2) domains, which bind with high affinity and specificity to tyrosine-phosphorylated sequences. The critical role played by SH2 domains in signalling has been highlighted by recent studies showing that mutation of specific phosphorylation sites on the platelet-derived growth factor receptor impair its association with phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase, preventing growth factor-induced mitogenesis. Here we report the solution structure of an isolated SH2 domain from the 85K regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase, determined using multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The structure is characterized by a central region of beta-sheet flanked by two alpha-helices, with a highly flexible loop close to functionally important residues previously identified by site-directed mutagenesis.
Mitochondria, organelles specialized in energy conservation reactions in eukaryotic cells, have evolved from eubacteria-like endosymbionts whose closest known relatives are the rickettsial group of alpha-proteobacteria. Because characterized mitochondrial genomes vary markedly in structure, it has been impossible to infer from them the initial form of the proto-mitochondrial genome. This would require the identification of minimally derived mitochondrial DNAs that better reflect the ancestral state. Here we describe such a primitive mitochondrial genome, in the freshwater protozoon Reclinomonas americana. This protist displays ultrastructural characteristics that ally it with the retortamonads, a protozoan group that lacks mitochondria. R. americana mtDNA (69,034 base pairs) contains the largest collection of genes (97) so far identified in any mtDNA, including genes for 5S ribosomal RNA, the RNA component of RNase P, and at least 18 proteins not previously known to be encoded in mitochondria. Most surprising are four genes specifying a multisubunit, eubacterial-type RNA polymerase. Features of gene content together with eubacterial characteristics of genome organization and expression not found before in mitochondrial genomes indicate that R. americana mtDNA more closely resembles the ancestral proto-mitochondrial genome than any other mtDNA investigated to date.
The gag and pol genes of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) (ref. 1) are translated as two polyproteins, Pr55gag and Pr160gag-pol (refs 2-6), which are subsequently cleaved by the action of a virus-encoded protease into the four structural gag proteins of the virion core (p17, p24, p7 and p6) and the pol-encoded enzymes essential for retrovirus replication (protease, reverse transcriptase, ribonuclease H, and endonuclease). Mutational inactivation of the proteases of HIV-1 and other retroviruses results in immature, non-infectious virions, indicating that exogenous inhibition of the protease may represent an attractive approach to anti-AIDS therapy. Here we demonstrate that synthetic peptide analogues, which are potent inhibitors of purified HIV-1 protease, inhibit the processing of the viral polyproteins in cultures of HIV-1-infected T lymphocytes and attenuate viral infectivity.
The Ras-MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) signal transduction pathway is well known to control cellular proliferation and differentiation in response to extracellular signals, but its other functions are less understood. In Caenorhabditis elegans this pathway regulates several developmental events, such as vulval induction and progression of meiosis, but its function in the nervous system is unknown. Here we report that the Ras-MAPK pathway is involved in olfaction in this organism. Mutational inactivation and hyperactivation of this pathway impairs efficiency of chemotaxis to a set of odorants. Experiments in which let-60 ras was expressed using a heat-shock promoter and a cell-specific promoter show that a normal activity of LET-60 Ras is required in mature olfactory neurons. Application of the odorant isoamylalcohol to wild-type animals leads to the activation of MAP kinase in olfactory neurons within 10 seconds. This induction is dependent on the function of the nucleotide-gated channel TAX-2/TAX-4 and the voltage-activated calcium channel subunit UNC-2. These results suggest a dynamic regulatory role for the Ras-MAPK pathway in perception and transmission of sensory signals in olfactory neurons.
In mammalian cells, repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) is critical for genome stability. Although the end-bridging and ligation steps of NHEJ have been reconstituted in vitro, little is known about the end-processing reactions that occur before ligation. Recently, functionally homologous end-bridging and ligation activities have been identified in prokarya. Consistent with its homology to polymerases and nucleases, we demonstrate that DNA ligase D from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mt-Lig) possesses a unique variety of nucleotidyl transferase activities, including gap-filling polymerase, terminal transferase, and primase, and is also a 3' to 5' exonuclease. These enzyme activities allow the Mt-Ku and Mt-Lig proteins to join incompatible DSB ends in vitro, as well as to reconstitute NHEJ in vivo in yeast. These results demonstrate that prokaryotic Ku and ligase form a bona fide NHEJ system that encodes all the recognition, processing, and ligation activities required for DSB repair.
How cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and its proinflammatory metabolite prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) enhance colon cancer progression remains poorly understood. We show that PGE2 stimulates colon cancer cell growth through its heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptor, EP2, by a signaling route that involves the activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase and the protein kinase Akt by free G protein betagamma subunits and the direct association of the G protein alphas subunit with the regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) domain of axin. This leads to the inactivation and release of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta from its complex with axin, thereby relieving the inhibitory phosphorylation of beta-catenin and activating its signaling pathway. These findings may provide a molecular framework for the future evaluation of chemopreventive strategies for colorectal cancer.
We report a high-quality draft of the genome sequence of the grey, short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica). As the first metatherian ('marsupial') species to be sequenced, the opossum provides a unique perspective on the organization and evolution of mammalian genomes. Distinctive features of the opossum chromosomes provide support for recent theories about genome evolution and function, including a strong influence of biased gene conversion on nucleotide sequence composition, and a relationship between chromosomal characteristics and X chromosome inactivation. Comparison of opossum and eutherian genomes also reveals a sharp difference in evolutionary innovation between protein-coding and non-coding functional elements. True innovation in protein-coding genes seems to be relatively rare, with lineage-specific differences being largely due to diversification and rapid turnover in gene families involved in environmental interactions. In contrast, about 20% of eutherian conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) are recent inventions that postdate the divergence of Eutheria and Metatheria. A substantial proportion of these eutherian-specific CNEs arose from sequence inserted by transposable elements, pointing to transposons as a major creative force in the evolution of mammalian gene regulation.
The activity of anthramycin and structurally related analogs as chemosterilants of the housefly, Musca domestica L., correlates closely with the action of these compounds as inhibitors of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase. Since inhibition of RNA polymerase by anthramycin reflects binding of this antibiotic to the DNA primer required for enzyme activity, we propose that the interaction of anthramycin with DNA may also account for its action as a chemosterilant.
Alteration in gene structure has been shown to occur in some human tumours. These altered genes, termed oncogenes, were originally identified by their ability to induce foci of transformed cells on transfected mouse 3T3 cultures. The oncogene identified in the EJ/T24 human bladder carcinoma is similar to the transforming gene of BALB and Harvey murine sarcoma virus (MSV) and differs from its counterpart in normal cells by a single amino acid. All three of these Ha-ras genes direct the production of similar proteins (p21). While the ras gene appears to be involved in tumour formation in some situations, its role is unclear. The ras protein product (p21) binds guanine nucleotides and has a unique autophosphorylating activity, but no other enzymatic activity has been found. We report here the injection of purified Ha-ras p21 protein, made in Escherichia coli from the gene of BALB-MSV, into NIH 3T3 cells and show that the purified protein itself is sufficient to induce a transformed morphology. In addition, the injected protein stimulates quiescent cells to enter the S-phase of the cell cycle. This result clearly demonstrates that the ras gene functions directly through the protein product. It also establishes an assay for the protein which depends on its activity within a living cell. The transforming activity of a p21 ras protein equivalent to the product of the normal cellular ras gene, is also demonstrated.
T cells activated by antigen receptor stimulation in the absence of accessory cell-derived costimulatory signals lose the capacity to synthesize the growth factor interleukin-2 (IL-2), a state called clonal anergy. An analysis of CD3- and CD28-induced signal transduction revealed reduced ERK and JNK enzyme activities in murine anergic T cells. The amounts of ERK and JNK proteins were unchanged, and the kinases could be fully activated in the presence of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate. Dephosphorylation of the calcineurin substrate NFATp (preexisting nuclear factor of activated T cells) also remained inducible. These results suggest that a specific block in the activation of ERK and JNK contributes to defective IL-2 production in clonal anergy.
Acetylenic bonds are present in more than 600 naturally occurring compounds. Plant enzymes that catalyze the formation of the Delta12 acetylenic bond in 9-octadecen-12-ynoic acid and the Delta12 epoxy group in 12,13-epoxy-9-octadecenoic acid were characterized, and two genes, similar in sequence, were cloned. When these complementary DNAs were expressed in Arabidopsis thaliana, the content of acetylenic or epoxidated fatty acids in the seeds increased from 0 to 25 or 15 percent, respectively. Both enzymes have characteristics similar to the membrane proteins containing non-heme iron that have histidine-rich motifs.
Triplet repeat diseases are disorders in which there is expansion of a repeat sequence of three nucleotides in the affected gene. Although the pathology usually results from production of a defective protein, myotonic dystrophy (DM) has proved to be a puzzle because the expanded repeats appear in a non-coding region of the affected DMPK gene. In a Perspective, Tapscott explains how findings from a new mouse model of DM (Mankodi et al.) could solve this paradox.
The specialized ribonuclease Dicer initiates RNA interference by cleaving double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) substrates into small fragments about 25 nucleotides in length. In the crystal structure of an intact Dicer enzyme, the PAZ domain, a module that binds the end of dsRNA, is separated from the two catalytic ribonuclease III (RNase III) domains by a flat, positively charged surface. The 65 angstrom distance between the PAZ and RNase III domains matches the length spanned by 25 base pairs of RNA. Thus, Dicer itself is a molecular ruler that recognizes dsRNA and cleaves a specified distance from the helical end.
Bacterial ribosomes stalled on defective messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are rescued by tmRNA, an approximately 300-nucleotide-long molecule that functions as both transfer RNA (tRNA) and mRNA. Translation then switches from the defective message to a short open reading frame on tmRNA that tags the defective nascent peptide chain for degradation. However, the mechanism by which tmRNA can enter and move through the ribosome is unknown. We present a cryo-electron microscopy study at approximately 13 to 15 angstroms of the entry of tmRNA into the ribosome. The structure reveals how tmRNA could move through the ribosome despite its complicated topology and also suggests roles for proteins S1 and SmpB in the function of tmRNA.
Topoisomerases regulate DNA topology and are fundamental to many aspects of chromosome metabolism. Their activity involves the transient cleavage of DNA, which, if it occurs near sites of endogenous DNA damage or in the presence of topoisomerase poisons, can result in abortive topoisomerase-induced DNA strand breaks. These breaks feature covalent linkage of the enzyme to the DNA termini by a 3'- or 5'-phosphotyrosyl bond and are implicated in hereditary human disease, chromosomal instability and cancer, and underlie the clinical efficacy of an important class of anti-tumour poisons. The importance of liberating DNA termini from trapped topoisomerase is illustrated by the progressive neurodegenerative disease observed in individuals containing a mutation in tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1 (TDP1), an enzyme that cleaves 3'-phosphotyrosyl bonds. However, a complementary human enzyme that cleaves 5'-phosphotyrosyl bonds has not been reported, despite the effect of DNA double-strand breaks containing such termini on chromosome instability and cancer. Here we identify such an enzyme in human cells and show that this activity efficiently restores 5'-phosphate termini at DNA double-strand breaks in preparation for DNA ligation. This enzyme, TTRAP, is a member of the Mg(2+)/Mn(2+)-dependent family of phosphodiesterases. Cellular depletion of TTRAP results in increased susceptibility and sensitivity to topoisomerase-II-induced DNA double-strand breaks. TTRAP is, to our knowledge, the first human 5'-tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterase to be identified, and we suggest that this enzyme is denoted tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterase-2 (TDP2).
Aminoacyl-transfer RNA (tRNA) synthetases, which catalyze the attachment of the correct amino acid to its corresponding tRNA during translation of the genetic code, are proven antimicrobial drug targets. We show that the broad-spectrum antifungal 5-fluoro-1,3-dihydro-1-hydroxy-2,1-benzoxaborole (AN2690), in development for the treatment of onychomycosis, inhibits yeast cytoplasmic leucyl-tRNA synthetase by formation of a stable tRNA(Leu)-AN2690 adduct in the editing site of the enzyme. Adduct formation is mediated through the boron atom of AN2690 and the 2'- and 3'-oxygen atoms of tRNA's3'-terminal adenosine. The trapping of enzyme-bound tRNA(Leu) in the editing site prevents catalytic turnover, thus inhibiting synthesis of leucyl-tRNA(Leu) and consequentially blocking protein synthesis. This result establishes the editing site as a bona fide target for aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase inhibitors.
Glutamine synthetase activity in the neural retina of the chick embryo increases sharply during terminal differentiation of this tissue. This characteristic increase can be reproduced in cultures of retinal tissue fragments from late embryos. A similarly sharp increase can be elicited precociously in younger retina by culturing in medium with adult serum. Both the precociously elicited and the later increase in enzyme activity require continuous protein synthesis; both can be suppressed during the first 24 hours of culture by blocking RNA synthesis or by removing the adult serum. Subsequently, the increase in enzyme activity becomes progressively less dependent on RNA synthesis and on the continuous presence of adult serum. This transition is attained more rapidly in the older retina. The data suggest a progressive stabilization of the enzyme-forming system during differentiation.
A variety of molecular chaperones and folding enzymes assist the folding of newly synthesized proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. Here we investigated why some glycoproteins interact with the molecular chaperone BiP, and others with the calnexin/calreticulin pathway. The folding of Semliki forest virus glycoproteins and influenza hemagglutinin was studied in living cells. The initial choice of chaperone depended on the location of N-linked glycans in the growing nascent chain. Direct interaction with calnexin and calreticulin without prior interaction with BiP occurred if glycans were present within about 50 residues of the protein's NH2-terminus.
Gene fusions were constructed between a yeast expression plasmid and a Cellulomonas fimi DNA fragment encoding an endo-1,4-beta-D-glucanase or carboxymethylcellulase. Yeast transformed with the recombinant plasmids secreted carboxymethylcellulase activity. Secretion of active enzyme was greatly increased when the leader of a secreted yeast protein, the Kl toxin, was inserted immediately upstream of and in frame with the bacterial cellulase sequence. This is the first step in constructing a functional cellulase complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. It also provides an excellent system for the detailed examination of the determinants of protein secretion because of the ease with which secreted cellulase can be detected.
During the biosynthesis of selenoproteins in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, selenocysteine is cotranslationally incorporated into the nascent polypeptide chain through a process directed by a UGA codon that normally functions as a stop codon. Recently, four genes have been identified whose products are required for selenocysteine incorporation in Escherichia coli. One of these genes, selC, codes for a novel transfer RNA species (tRNAUCA) that accepts serine and cotranslationally inserts selenocysteine by recognizing the specific UGA codon. The serine residue attached to this tRNA is converted to selenocysteine in a reaction dependent on functional selA and selD gene products. By contrast, the selB gene product (SELB) is not required until after selenocysteyl-tRNA biosynthesis. Here we present evidence indicating that SELB is a novel translation factor. The deduced amino-acid sequence of SELB exhibits extensive homology with the sequences of the translation initiation factor-2 (IF-2) and elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu). Furthermore, purified SELB protein binds guanine nucleotides in a 1:1 molar ratio and specifically complexes selenocysteyl-tRNAUCA, but does not interact with seryl-tRNAUCA. Thus, SELB could be an amino acid-specific elongation factor, replacing EF-Tu in a special translational step.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and lethal type of brain cancer. To identify the genetic alterations in GBMs, we sequenced 20,661 protein coding genes, determined the presence of amplifications and deletions using high-density oligonucleotide arrays, and performed gene expression analyses using next-generation sequencing technologies in 22 human tumor samples. This comprehensive analysis led to the discovery of a variety of genes that were not known to be altered in GBMs. Most notably, we found recurrent mutations in the active site of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) in 12% of GBM patients. Mutations in IDH1 occurred in a large fraction of young patients and in most patients with secondary GBMs and were associated with an increase in overall survival. These studies demonstrate the value of unbiased genomic analyses in the characterization of human brain cancer and identify a potentially useful genetic alteration for the classification and targeted therapy of GBMs.
The GXGD proteases are polytopic membrane proteins with catalytic activities against membrane-spanning substrates that require a pair of aspartyl residues. Representative members of the family include preflagellin peptidase, type 4 prepilin peptidase, presenilin and signal peptide peptidase. Many GXGD proteases are important in medicine. For example, type 4 prepilin peptidase may contribute to bacterial pathogenesis, and mutations in presenilin are associated with Alzheimer's disease. As yet, there is no atomic-resolution structure in this protease family. Here we report the crystal structure of FlaK, a preflagellin peptidase from Methanococcus maripaludis, solved at 3.6 A resolution. The structure contains six transmembrane helices. The GXGD motif and a short transmembrane helix, helix 4, are positioned at the centre, surrounded by other transmembrane helices. The crystal structure indicates that the protease must undergo conformational changes to bring the GXGD motif and a second essential aspartyl residue from transmembrane helix 1 into close proximity for catalysis. A comparison of the crystal structure with models of presenilin derived from biochemical analysis reveals three common transmembrane segments that are similarly arranged around the active site. This observation reinforces the idea that the prokaryotic and human proteases are evolutionarily related. The crystal structure presented here provides a framework for understanding the mechanism of the GXGD proteases, and may facilitate the rational design of inhibitors that target specific members of the family.
Therapeutic efforts to restore biosynthetic processing of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator lacking the F508 residue (DeltaF508CFTR) are hampered by ubiquitin-dependent lysosomal degradation of nonnative, rescued DeltaF508CFTR from the plasma membrane. Here, functional small interfering RNA screens revealed the contribution of chaperones, cochaperones, and ubiquitin-conjugating and -ligating enzymes to the elimination of unfolded CFTR from the cell surface, as part of a peripheral protein quality-control system. Ubiquitination of nonnative CFTR was required for efficient internalization and lysosomal degradation. This peripheral protein quality-control mechanism probably participates in the preservation of cellular homeostasis by degrading damaged plasma membrane proteins that have escaped from the endoplasmic reticulum quality control or are generated by environmental stresses in situ.
The transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) are fatal, neurodegenerative diseases for which no effective treatments are available. The likelihood that a bovine form of TSE has crossed species barriers and infected humans underscores the urgent need to identify anti-TSE drugs. Certain cyclic tetrapyrroles (porphyrins and phthalocyanines) have recently been shown to inhibit the in vitro formation of PrP-res, a protease-resistant protein critical for TSE pathogenesis. We now report that treatment of TSE-infected animals with three such compounds increased survival time from 50 to 300%. The significant inhibition of TSE disease by structurally dissimilar tetrapyrroles identifies these compounds as anti-TSE drugs.
Neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2) is a mammalian transcription factor that binds DNA as an obligate dimeric partner of BMAL1 and is implicated in the regulation of circadian rhythm. Here we show that both PAS domains of NPAS2 bind heme as a prosthetic group and that the heme status controls DNA binding in vitro. NPAS2-BMAL1 heterodimers, existing in either the apo (heme-free) or holo (heme-loaded) state, bound DNA avidly under favorably reducing ratios of the reduced and oxidized forms of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. Low micromolar concentrations of carbon monoxide inhibited the DNA binding activity of holo-NPAS2 but not that of apo-NPAS2. Upon exposure to carbon monoxide, inactive BMAL1 homodimers were formed at the expense of NPAS2-BMAL1 heterodimers. These results indicate that the heterodimerization of NPAS2, and presumably the expression of its target genes, are regulated by a gas through the heme-based sensor described here.
Calcium ions (Ca2+) act as an intracellular second messenger and can enter neurons through various ion channels. Influx of Ca2+ through distinct types of Ca2+ channels may differentially activate biochemical processes. N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and L-type Ca2+ channels, two major sites of Ca2+ entry into hippocampal neurons, were found to transmit signals to the nucleus and regulated gene transcription through two distinct Ca2+ signaling pathways. Activation of the multifunctional Ca(2+)-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase) was evoked by stimulation of either NMDA receptors or L-type Ca2+ channels; however, activation of CaM kinase appeared to be critical only for propagating the L-type Ca2+ channel signal to the nucleus. Also, the NMDA receptor and L-type Ca2+ channel pathways activated transcription by means of different cis-acting regulatory elements in the c-fos promoter. These results indicate that Ca2+, depending on its mode of entry into neurons, can activate two distinct signaling pathways. Differential signal processing may provide a mechanism by which Ca2+ controls diverse cellular functions.
Lipoprotein(a) is an LDL-like lipoprotein whose concentration in plasma is correlated with atherosclerosis. The characteristic protein component of lipoprotein(a) is apolipoprotein(a) which is disulphide-linked to apolipoprotein B-100. Sequencing of cloned human apolipoprotein(a) complementary DNA shows that it is very similar to human plasminogen. It contains a serine protease domain and two types of plasminogen-like kringle domains, one of which is present in 37 copies.
Active transport of calcium into inside-out vesicles of red blood cell membranes was stimulated equally by (i) the purified protein activator of calcium-activated, magnesium-dependent adenosinetriphosphatase isolated from red cell hemolyzates and (ii) calmodulin, a protein activator of cylic nucleotide phosphodiesterase isolated from bovine brain. The results provide further evidence for the identity of red blood cell activator and calmodulin and show that this cytoplasmic protein may participate in the regulation of plasma membrane calcium transport.
Pycnodysostosis, an autosomal recessive osteochondrodysplasia characterized by osteosclerosis and short stature, maps to chromosome 1q21. Cathepsin K, a cysteine protease gene that is highly expressed in osteoclasts, localized to the pycnodysostosis region. Nonsense, missense, and stop codon mutations in the gene encoding cathepsin K were identified in patients. Transient expression of complementary DNA containing the stop codon mutation resulted in messenger RNA but no immunologically detectable protein. Thus, pycnodysostosis results from gene defects in a lysosomal protease with highest expression in osteoclasts. These findings suggest that cathepsin K is a major protease in bone resorption, providing a possible rationale for the treatment of disorders such as osteoporosis and certain forms of arthritis.
Man derives 70% of his dietary requirements of protein directly from the grains of cereals and legumes. These sources are respectively deficient in lysine (and secondarily threonine) and methionine and much effort is being devoted to their improvement. All three amino acids are derived from aspartate via a common metabolic pathway (Fig. 1) in which the first reaction catalysed by aspartate kinase is a key regulatory step limiting their production. In microorganisms, regulation of aspartate kinase occurs by a variety of mechanisms, commonly involving feedback inhibition of one or more isoenzymes by Lys plus Thr, Lys alone or Thr alone. On the other hand, Met control of this step does not seem to conform to a general pattern. Met represses, but does not inhibit aspartate kinase II of Escherichia coli; in other species Met can enhance or modify the effects of Lys or Thr. Similarly, varied controls involving Lys and Thr have been reported for the enzymes from higher plants with only one report of an effect of Met. In contrast to these previous results, we suggest here that the methionine derivative (S)-S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) is an important regulator of the Lys-sensitive aspartate kinase of higher plants, and that this regulatory mechanism is highly conserved. There is thus a major synergistic interaction of the two nutritionally deficient amino acids Lys and Met to inhibit their own syntheses at the primary regulatory step in the pathway.
Related DNA binding proteins often recognize similar DNA sites but can distinguish among them with the use of different protein-DNA contacts. Here, it is shown that members of the C6 zinc cluster family of yeast transcriptional activators distinguish related DNA sites by a different mechanism. The DNA binding site for each of these proteins contains identical nucleotide triplets (CGG ... CCG) but differs in the spacings between the triplets. It is shown that zinc clusters of these proteins work interchangeably to recognize the conserved triplets and that the region 19 amino acids to the carboxyl-terminal side of the zinc cluster, comprising the linker and the beginning of a dimerization element as inferred from the GAL4 crystal structure, directs the protein to its preferred site.
The cell type specificity of certain enhancers, competition experiments and the interactions that occur between proteins and enhancer sequences demonstrate that enhancers are the targets of specific factors involved in transcription control. The 246-base pair BclI-PvuII restriction enzyme fragment of polyoma virus has been shown to include two distinct enhancers, Py A and Py B, composed of several subdomains which interact with nuclear proteins from mouse fibroblasts. Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells do not permit polyoma virus infection: both viral transcription and DNA replication are blocked. Host-range mutants of polyoma virus (EC mutants) capable of overcoming the expression block in EC cells have mutations or sequence rearrangements in their enhancer region. In an attempt to understand the molecular basis of this host restriction we compared the binding patterns displayed on the viral enhancer sequences by nuclear proteins prepared from EC cells or from fibroblasts. We show that one of the fibroblast factors required for Py A enhancer function, almost undetectable in EC cells, is induced after differentiation of these cells into parietal endoderm, suggesting that this protein is crucial in the regulation of viral gene expression during cellular differentiation, and perhaps more generally in the control of gene expression during early embryonic development.
Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase deficiency in man is responsible for familial porphyria cutanea tarda and hepatoerythropoietic porphyria. A recent study of a family with hepatoerythropoietic porphyria showed that the enzyme defect resulted from rapid degradation of the protein in vivo. Cloning and sequencing of a complementary DNA for the mutated gene revealed that the mutation was due to the replacement of a glycine residue by a glutamic acid residue at position 281. This base change leads to a protein that is very rapidly degraded in the presence of cell lysate. Characterization of the mutation will allow comparison of this defect in a homozygous patient with defects in other patients with familial porphyria cutanea tarda.
Replication is accomplished by multienzyme systems whose operations are usefully considered in respect to three stages of the process: initiation, elongation, anid termination. 1) Initiation entails synthesis of a short RNA fragment that serves as primer for the elongation step of DNA synthesis. This stage, probed by SS phage DNA templates, reveals three distinctive and highly specific systems in E. coli. The Ml3 DNA utilizes RNA polymerase in a manner that may reflect how plasmid elements are replicated in the cell. The OX174 DNA does not rely on RNA-polymerase, but requires instead five distinctive proteins which may belong to an apparatus for initiating a host chromosome replication cycle at the origin. The G4 DNA, also independent of RNA polymerase, needs simply the dnaG protein for its distinctive initiation and may thus resemble the system that initiates the replication fragments at the nascent growing fork. In each case it is essential that in vitro the DNA-unwinding protein coat the viral DNA and influence its structure. 2) Elongation is achieved in every case by the multisubunit, holoenzyme form of DNA polymerase III. Copolymerase III, which is an enzyme subunit, and adenosine triphosphate are required to form a proper complex with the primer template but appear dispensable for the ensuing chain growth by DNA polymerase (33). 3) Termination requires excision of the RNA priming fragment, filling of gaps and sealing of interruptions to produce a covalently intact phosphodiester backbone. DNA polymerase I has the capacity for excision and gapfilling and DNA ligase is required for sealing. What once appeared to be a simple DNA polymerase-mediated conversion of a single-strand to a duplex circle (34) is now seen as a complex series of events in which diverse multienzyme systems function. Annoyance with the difficulties in resolving and reconstituting these systems is tempered by the conviction that these are the very systems used ,by the cell in replicating its chromosome and extrachromosomal elements. Thus, understanding of the regulation of replication events in the cell, their localization at membrane surfaces and integration with cell division, and their coordination with phage DNA maturation and particle assembly will all be advanced by knowledge of the components of the replicative machinery.
The Fas/APO-1 receptor is one of the major regulators of apoptosis. We report here that Fas/APO-1-mediated apoptosis requires the activation of a new class of cysteine proteases, including interleukin-1 beta-converting enzyme (ICE), which are homologous to the product of the Caenorhabditis elegans cell-death gene ced-3 (refs 11, 12). Triggering of Fas/APO-1 rapidly stimulated the proteolytic activity of ICE. Overexpression of ICE, achieved by electroporation and microinjection, strongly potentiated Fas/APO-1-mediated cell death. In addition, inhibition of ICE activity by protease inhibitors, as well as by transient expression of the pox virus-derived serpin inhibitor CrmA or an antisense ICE construct, substantially suppressed Fas/APO-1-triggered cell death. We conclude that activation of ICE or an ICE-related protease is a critical event in Fas/APO-1-mediated cell death.
The human genome is thought to harbor 50,000 to 100,000 genes, of which about half have been sampled to date in the form of expressed sequence tags. An international consortium was organized to develop and map gene-based sequence tagged site markers on a set of two radiation hybrid panels and a yeast artificial chromosome library. More than 16,000 human genes have been mapped relative to a framework map that contains about 1000 polymorphic genetic markers. The gene map unifies the existing genetic and physical maps with the nucleotide and protein sequence databases in a fashion that should speed the discovery of genes underlying inherited human disease. The integrated resource is available through a site on the World Wide Web at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SCIENCE96/.
Entry of a cell into mitosis induces a series of structural and functional changes including arrest of intracellular transport. Knowledge of how the mitotic cycle is driven progressed substantially with the identification of the p34cdc2 protein kinase as a subunit of maturation-promoting factor, the universal regulating component of the mitotic cycle. Activation of the kinase at the onset of mitosis is thought to trigger the important mitotic events by phosphorylating key proteins. Small guanine nucleotide-binding proteins have been implicated in regulating transport pathways. For instance, two small Ras-related GTP-binding proteins, Sec4p and Ypt1p, control distinct stages of the secretory pathway in budding yeast. The GTP-binding proteins of the Rab family in rats and humans display strong homologies with Sec4p and Ypt1p, and might therefore also be involved in regulating intracellular transport. Indeed, distinct Rab proteins are located in the exocytotic and endocytotic compartments. Interruption of vesicular transport during mitosis might involve modification of these proteins. We now present biochemical evidence for a mitosis-specific p34cdc2 phosphorylation of Rab1Ap and Rab4p. By contrast, Rab2p and Rab6p are not phosphorylated. We also show that the distribution of Rab1Ap and Rab4p between cytosolic and membrane-bound forms is different in interphase and mitotic cells. This may provide a clue to the mechanism by which phosphorylation could affect membrane traffic during mitosis.
The enzyme cytochrome c nitrite reductase catalyses the six-electron reduction of nitrite to ammonia as one of the key steps in the biological nitrogen cycle, where it participates in the anaerobic energy metabolism of dissimilatory nitrate ammonification. Here we report on the crystal structure of this enzyme from the microorganism Sulfurospirillum deleyianum, which we solved by multiwavelength anomalous dispersion methods. We propose a reaction scheme for the transformation of nitrite based on structural and spectroscopic information. Cytochrome c nitrite reductase is a functional dimer, with 10 close-packed haem groups of type c and an unusual lysine-coordinated high-spin haem at the active site. By comparing the haem arrangement of this nitrite reductase with that of other multihaem cytochromes, we have been able to identify a family of proteins in which the orientation of haem groups is conserved whereas structure and function are not.
Gene silencing mediated by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is a sequence-specific, highly conserved mechanism in eukaryotes. In plants, it serves as an antiviral defence mechanism. Animal cells also possess this machinery but its specific function is unclear. Here we demonstrate that dsRNA can effectively protect human cells against infection by a rapidly replicating and highly cytolytic RNA virus. Pre-treatment of human and mouse cells with double-stranded, short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to the poliovirus genome markedly reduces the titre of virus progeny and promotes clearance of the virus from most of the infected cells. The antiviral effect is sequence-specific and is not attributable to either classical antisense mechanisms or to interferon and the interferon response effectors protein kinase R (PKR) and RNaseL. Protection is the result of direct targeting of the viral genome by siRNA, as sequence analysis of escape virus (resistant to siRNAs) reveals one nucleotide substitution in the middle of the targeted sequence. Thus, siRNAs elicit specific intracellular antiviral resistance that may provide a therapeutic strategy against human viruses.
Tobacco and Arabidopsis plants, expressing a transgene for the calcium-sensitive luminescent protein apoaequorin, revealed circadian oscillations in free cytosolic calcium that can be phase-shifted by light-dark signals. When apoaequorin was targeted to the chloroplast, circadian chloroplast calcium rhythms were likewise observed after transfer of the seedlings to constant darkness. Circadian oscillations in free calcium concentrations can be expected to control many calcium-dependent enzymes and processes accounting for circadian outputs. Regulation of calcium flux is therefore fundamental to the organization of circadian systems.
Mimicking the efficiency of enzyme catalysis is a daunting challenge. An enzyme selectively binds and stabilizes the transition state (s) for a particular reaction. Artificial host systems can bind ground states just as efficiently, and rate enhancements comparable to those in enzymatic reactions can be achieved by bringing catalytic and substrate groups together in intramolecular reactions. But the combination of selective binding and efficient catalysis remains elusive. The best enzyme mimics currently known are catalytic antibodies. They bind transition-state analogues with high affinity, but their catalytic efficiency generally falls far short of that of enzymes. Thorn et al. recently described an antibody that catalyses the eliminative ring-opening of a benziosoxazole "exceptionally efficiently" using carboxylate as the general base, raising the intriguing possibility that this high efficiency derives from precise positioning of catalytic and substrate groups. Here we show that familiar 'off-the-shelf' proteins--serum albumins--catalyse the same reaction at similar rates, using a lysine side-chain amino group as the catalytic general base. Comparisons suggest that formal general base catalysis is of only modest efficiency in both systems, and that the antibody catalysis is boosted by a non-specific medium effect.
Mice homozygous for the targeted deletion of the c/ebp alpha gene, which expresses the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha), did not store hepatic glycogen and died from hypoglycemia within 8 hours after birth. In these mutant mice, the amounts of glycogen synthase messenger RNA were 50 to 70 percent of normal and the transcriptional induction of the genes for two gluconeogenic enzymes, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucose-6-phosphatase, was delayed. The hepatocytes and adipocytes of the mutant mice failed to accumulate lipid and the expression of the gene for uncoupling protein, the defining marker of brown adipose tissue, was reduced. This study demonstrates that C/EBP alpha is critical for the establishment and maintenance of energy homeostasis in neonates.
The conventional activity of electrophoretically purified horseradish peroxidase toward guaiacol, pyrogallol, 2,6-dimethoxyphenol, and benzidine is abolished by removal of the heme prosthetic group with a mixture of cold acetone and hydrogen chloride. The apoenzyme, though devoid of peroxidase activity, retains its activity as an indoleacetic acid oxidase when it is supplied with 10(-5) mole of manganous ion and 2,4-dachlorophenol per liter. This oxidase activity is cyanide-sensitive; azide also inhibits under specific conditions of both pH and cofactor concentration. Partial restoration of the peroxidase activity by recombination of apoprotein with heme produces no effect on the oxidase activity, except that cofactors are no longer absolutely required. Therefore, it appears that the activity of peroxidase as an indoleacetic acid oxidase need not directly involve the heme prosthetic group, or that manganous ions and dichlorophenol can substitute for the heme group in the reaction between indoleacetic acid and oxidase.
In neuronal cells, opioid peptides and opiates inhibit neurotransmitter release, which is a calcium-dependent process. They also inhibit adenylyl cyclase, presumably via the membrane signal-transducing component, Gi, a guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G-protein). No causal relationship between these two events has yet been demonstrated. Besides Gi, membranes of neuronal tissues contain large amounts of Go, a G-protein with unknown function. Both G-proteins are heterotrimers consisting of alpha-, beta- and gamma-subunits; the alpha-subunits can be ADP-ribosylated by an exotoxin from Bordetella pertussis (PT), which modification inhibits receptor-mediated activation of the G-protein. It was recently shown that noradrenaline, dopamine and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) inhibit the voltage-dependent calcium channels in dorsal root and sympathetic ganglia; this inhibition is mimicked by intracellular application of guanine nucleotides and blocked by PT, suggesting the involvement of a G-protein. Here we report an inhibitory effect of the opioid D-Ala2, D-Leu5-enkephalin (DADLE) on the calcium current (ICa) in neuroblastoma X glioma hybrid cells (N X G cells). Pretreatment with PT almost completely abolishes the DADLE effect. The effect is restored by intracellular application of Gi and Go. As the alpha-subunit of Go (with or without beta-gamma complex) is 10 times more potent than Gi, we propose that Go is involved in the functional coupling of opiate receptors to neuronal voltage-dependent calcium channels.
A(2), a capsid protein of RNA phage Qbeta, is also responsible for host lysis. A(2) blocked synthesis of murein precursors in vivo by inhibiting MurA, the catalyst of the committed step of murein biosynthesis. An A(2)-resistance mutation mapped to an exposed surface near the substrate-binding cleft of MurA. Moreover, purified Qbeta virions inhibited wild-type MurA, but not the mutant MurA, in vitro. Thus, the two small phages characterized for their lysis strategy, Qbeta and the small DNA phage phiX174, effect host lysis by targeting different enzymes in the multistep, universally conserved pathway of cell wall biosynthesis.
The extensive breakdown of immune homeostasis in the motheaten mouse (me/me) has been ascribed to a single gene defect on chromosome 6 (ref. 1). These mice develop skin lesions within the first week of life, do not thrive, and die within the first 3--8 weeks. There is severe hypergammaglobulinaemia with multiple species of circulating autoantibody and deposition of immune complexes in the thymus, skin, lungs and kidneys. A single gene defect producing such catastrophic results may provide an important model for understanding autoimmune phenomena. We report here a virtual absence of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-positive (TdT+) cells in the bone marrow, thymus and spleen of motheaten mice. TdT is a DNA polymerase which has the unique capacity to polymerize nucleotides in the absence of template direction. Although no in vivo biological function of this enzyme has been established, its unique appearance in the bone marrow and thymus of adult mammals and its in vitro biochemical activity have led to a proposed role for TdT in the somatic diversification of lymphocytes. Bone marrow TdT+ cells have been shown to belong to both T and B cell populations and may also include precursor cells common to these lineages. Although the role of TdT in the acquisition of appropriate T- and B-cell specificities is not known, our results are the first to correlate the virtual absence of TdT+ cells with a severe autoimmune syndrome. We investigated the level of TdT+ cells in neonatal me/me mice and their normal littermates and the susceptibility of TdT+ cells to circulating autoantibody in motheaten mouse serum.
Cytokines affect a variety of cellular functions, including regulation of cell numbers by suppression of programmed cell death. Suppression of apoptosis requires receptor signalling through the activation of Janus kinases and the subsequent regulation of members of the B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) family. Here we demonstrate that a Bcl-2-family-related protein, Hax1, is required to suppress apoptosis in lymphocytes and neurons. Suppression requires the interaction of Hax1 with the mitochondrial proteases Parl (presenilin-associated, rhomboid-like) and HtrA2 (high-temperature-regulated A2, also known as Omi). These interactions allow Hax1 to present HtrA2 to Parl, and thereby facilitates the processing of HtrA2 to the active protease localized in the mitochondrial intermembrane space. In mouse lymphocytes, the presence of processed HtrA2 prevents the accumulation of mitochondrial-outer-membrane-associated activated Bax, an event that initiates apoptosis. Together, the results identify a previously unknown sequence of interactions involving a Bcl-2-family-related protein and mitochondrial proteases in the ability to resist the induction of apoptosis when cytokines are limiting.
The amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) is a principal component of the cerebral plaques found in the brains of patients with Alzeheimer's disease (AD). This insoluble 40- to 42-amino acid peptide is formed by the cleavage of the Abeta precursor protein (APP). The three proteases that cleave APP, alpha-, beta-, and gamma-secretases, have been implicated in the etiology of AD. beta-Secretase is a membrane-anchored protein with clear homology to soluble aspartyl proteases, and alpha-secretase displays characteristics of certain membrane-tethered metalloproteases. gamma-Secretase is apparently an oligomeric complex that includes the presenilins, which may be the catalytic component of this protease. Identification of the alpha-, beta-, and gamma-secretases provides potential targets for designing new drugs to treat AD.
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) pose a potent threat to genome integrity. These lesions also contribute to the efficacy of radiotherapy and many cancer chemotherapeutics. DSBs elicit a signalling cascade that modifies the chromatin surrounding the break, first by ATM-dependent phosphorylation and then by RNF8-, RNF168- and BRCA1-dependent regulatory ubiquitination. Here we report that OTUB1, a deubiquitinating enzyme, is an inhibitor of DSB-induced chromatin ubiquitination. Surprisingly, we found that OTUB1 suppresses RNF168-dependent poly-ubiquitination independently of its catalytic activity. OTUB1 does so by binding to and inhibiting UBC13 (also known as UBE2N), the cognate E2 enzyme for RNF168. This unusual mode of regulation is unlikely to be limited to UBC13 because analysis of OTUB1-associated proteins revealed that OTUB1 binds to E2s of the UBE2D and UBE2E subfamilies. Finally, OTUB1 depletion mitigates the DSB repair defect associated with defective ATM signalling, indicating that pharmacological targeting of the OTUB1-UBC13 interaction might enhance the DNA damage response.
The Pseudomonas syringae protein AvrPtoB is translocated into plant cells, where it inhibits immunity-associated programmed cell death (PCD). The structure of a C-terminal domain of AvrPtoB that is essential for anti-PCD activity reveals an unexpected homology to the U-box and RING-finger components of eukaryotic E3 ubiquitin ligases, and we show that AvrPtoB has ubiquitin ligase activity. Mutation of conserved residues involved in the binding of E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes abolishes this activity in vitro, as well as anti-PCD activity in tomato leaves, which dramatically decreases virulence. These results show that Pseudomonas syringae uses a mimic of host E3 ubiquitin ligases to inactivate plant defenses.
Cholesterol balance in mammalian cells is maintained in part by sterol-mediated repression of gene transcription for the low density lipoprotein receptor and enzymes in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway. A promoter sequence termed the sterol regulatory element (SRE) is essential for this repression. With the use of an oligonucleotide containing the SRE to screen a human hepatoma complementary DNA expression library, a clone for a DNA binding protein was isolated that binds to the conserved SRE octanucleotide in both a sequence-specific and a single-strand--specific manner. This protein contains seven highly conserved zinc finger repeats that exhibit striking sequence similarity to retroviral nucleic acid binding proteins (NBPs). We have designated the protein "cellular NBP" (CNBP). CNBP is expressed in a wide variety of tissues, is up regulated by sterols, and exhibits binding specificity that correlates with in vivo function. These properties are consistent with a role in sterol-mediated control of transcription.
An enzyme in extracts of Euglena gracilis splits both purine and pyrimidine internucleotide bonds of ribonucleic acid. Its pH optimum is at 4.5; it is very heat-labile and is rather insensitive to inhibition by metal ions or sulfhydryl group reagents. A partial purification of the enzyme is described.
The recent demonstrations that thrombolytic therapy with plasminogen activators can result in substantial reductions in mortality from coronary thrombosis have generated considerable interest in the properties of fibrinolytic enzymes. Examination of the primary sequence of these proteins (which include tissue plasminogen activator, plasminogen, and urokinase) reveals that each is composed of a mosaic of domains which appear to be spatially distinct and connected by short peptide linkers. There is, however, little experimental information about the three-dimensional structure of any of the proteins, although several X-ray diffraction and NMR studies of isolated domains have been reported. Here we report two-dimensional NMR spectra of intact urokinase which are remarkably well resolved for a protein of this molecular weight. This effect is a consequence of substantial independent motion between individual domains of the protein, which overcomes the broadening effects anticipated for the slow overall tumbling rate of the intact molecule. As well as having significance for the physiological role of the protein, these results provide a direct means for the comparison of structural features determined for the isolated domains with those of the intact protein and may provide a basis for proposing or evaluating models for the overall structure of fibrinolytic proteins. Preliminary results with other proteins indicate that this approach may be generally applicable to other multidomain proteins of the fibrinolytic family.
Nearly 50 years ago, inorganic carbon was shown to be fixed in microalgae as the C3 compound phosphoglyceric acid. The enzyme responsible for C3 carbon fixation, ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase (Rubisco), however, requires inorganic carbon in the form of CO2 (ref. 2), and Rubisco enzymes from diatoms have half-saturation constants for CO2 of 30-60 microM (ref. 3). As a result, diatoms growing in seawater that contains about 10 microM CO2 may be CO2 limited. Kinetic and growth studies have shown that diatoms can avoid CO2 limitation, but the biochemistry of the underlying mechanisms remains unknown. Here we present evidence that C4 photosynthesis supports carbon assimilation in the marine diatom Thalassiosira weissflogii, thus providing a biochemical explanation for CO2-insensitive photosynthesis in marine diatoms. If C4 photosynthesis is common among marine diatoms, it may account for a significant portion of carbon fixation and export in the ocean, and would explain the greater enrichment of 13C in diatoms compared with other classes of phytoplankton. Unicellular C4 carbon assimilation may have predated the appearance of multicellular C4 plants.
Evenly spaced nucleosomes directly correlate with condensed chromatin and gene silencing. The ATP-dependent chromatin assembly factor (ACF) forms such structures in vitro and is required for silencing in vivo. ACF generates and maintains nucleosome spacing by constantly moving a nucleosome towards the longer flanking DNA faster than the shorter flanking DNA. How the enzyme rapidly moves back and forth between both sides of a nucleosome to accomplish bidirectional movement is unknown. Here we show that nucleosome movement depends cooperatively on two ACF molecules, indicating that ACF functions as a dimer of ATPases. Further, the nucleotide state determines whether the dimer closely engages one or both sides of the nucleosome. Three-dimensional reconstruction by single-particle electron microscopy of the ATPase-nucleosome complex in an activated ATP state reveals a dimer architecture in which the two ATPases face each other. Our results indicate a model in which the two ATPases work in a coordinated manner, taking turns to engage either side of a nucleosome, thereby allowing processive bidirectional movement. This novel dimeric motor mechanism differs from that of dimeric motors such as kinesin and dimeric helicases that processively translocate unidirectionally and reflects the unique challenges faced by motors that move nucleosomes.
The TATA-binding protein (TBP) is believed to function as a key component of the general transcription machinery. We tested the role of TBP during the onset of embryonic transcription by antisense oligonucleotide-mediated turnover of maternal TBP messenger RNA. Embryos without detectable TBP initiated gastrulation but died before completing gastrulation. The expression of many genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II and III was reduced; however, some genes were transcribed with an efficiency identical to that of TBP-containing embryos. Using a similar antisense strategy, we found that the TBP-like factor TLF/TRF2 is essential for development past the mid-blastula stage. Because TBP and a TLF factor play complementary roles in embryonic development, our results indicate that although similar mechanistic roles exist in common, TBP and TLF function differentially to control transcription of specific genes.
The Rev1 DNA polymerase is highly specialized for the incorporation of C opposite template G. We present here the crystal structure of yeast Rev1 bound to template G and incoming 2'-deoxycytidine 5'-triphosphate (dCTP), which reveals that the polymerase itself dictates the identity of the incoming nucleotide, as well as the identity of the templating base. Template G and incoming dCTP do not pair with each other. Instead, the template G is evicted from the DNA helix, and it makes optimal hydrogen bonds with a segment of Rev1. Also, unlike other DNA polymerases, incoming dCTP pairs with an arginine rather than the templating base, which ensures the incorporation of dCTP over other incoming nucleotides. This mechanism provides an elegant means for promoting proficient and error-free synthesis through N2-adducted guanines that obstruct replication.
Numerous degenerative disorders are associated with elevated levels of prooxidants and declines in mitochondrial aconitase activity. Deficiency in the mitochondrial iron-binding protein frataxin results in diminished activity of various mitochondrial iron-sulfur proteins including aconitase. We found that aconitase can undergo reversible citrate-dependent modulation in activity in response to pro-oxidants. Frataxin interacted with aconitase in a citrate-dependent fashion, reduced the level of oxidant-induced inactivation, and converted inactive [3Fe-4S]1+ enzyme to the active [4Fe-4S]2+ form of the protein. Thus, frataxin is an iron chaperone protein that protects the aconitase [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster from disassembly and promotes enzyme reactivation.
A method is described for directly cloning enzymatically amplified segments of genomic DNA into an M13 vector for sequence analysis. A 110-base pair fragment of the human beta-globin gene and a 242-base pair fragment of the human leukocyte antigen DQ alpha locus were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction method, a procedure based on repeated cycles of denaturation, primer annealing, and extension by DNA polymerase I. Oligonucleotide primers with restriction endonuclease sites added to their 5' ends were used to facilitate the cloning of the amplified DNA. The analysis of cloned products allowed the quantitative evaluation of the amplification method's specificity and fidelity. Given the low frequency of sequence errors observed, this approach promises to be a rapid method for obtaining reliable genomic sequences from nanogram amounts of DNA.
Type II topoisomerases disentangle DNA to facilitate chromosome segregation, and represent a major class of therapeutic targets. Although these enzymes have been studied extensively, a molecular understanding of DNA binding has been lacking. Here we present the structure of a complex between the DNA-binding and cleavage core of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Topo II (also known as Top2) and a gate-DNA segment. The structure reveals that the enzyme enforces a 150 degrees DNA bend through a mechanism similar to that of remodelling proteins such as integration host factor. Large protein conformational changes accompany DNA deformation, creating a bipartite catalytic site that positions the DNA backbone near a reactive tyrosine and a coordinated magnesium ion. This configuration closely resembles the catalytic site of type IA topoisomerases, reinforcing an evolutionary link between these structurally and functionally distinct enzymes. Binding of DNA facilitates opening of an enzyme dimerization interface, providing visual evidence for a key step in DNA transport.
Previous experiments indicated that only a small subset of the approximately equal to 24 small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae have binding sites for the Sm antigen, a hallmark of metazoan small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) involved in pre-messenger RNA splicing. Antibodies from human serum to Sm proteins were used to show that four snRNAs (snR7, snR14, snR19, and snR20) can be immunoprecipitated from yeast extracts. Three of these four, snR7, snR14, and snR20, have been shown to be analogs of mammalian U5, U4, and U2, respectively. Several regions of significant homology to U1 (164 nucleotides) have now been found in cloned and sequenced snR19 (568 nucleotides). These include ten out of ten matches to the 5' end of U1, the site known to interact with the 5' splice site of mammalian introns. Surprisingly, the precise conservation of this sequence precludes perfect complementarity between snR19 and the invariant yeast 5' junction (GTATGT), which differs from the mammalian consensus at the fourth position (GTPuAGT).
The ability of cells to form cell contacts, adhere to the extracellular matrix, change morphology, and migrate is essential for development, wound healing, metastasis, cell survival and the immune response. These events depend on the binding of integrin to the extracellular matrix, and assembly of focal adhesions, which are complexes comprising scaffolding and signalling proteins organized by adhesion to the extracellular matrix. Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P(2)) regulates interactions between these proteins, including the interaction of vinculin with actin and talin. The binding of talin to beta-integrin is strengthened by PtdIns(4,5)P(2), suggesting that the basis of focal adhesion assembly is regulated by this lipid mediator. Here we show that the type I phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase isoform-gamma 661 (PIPKI gamma 661), an enzyme that makes PtdIns(4,5)P(2), is targeted to focal adhesions by an association with talin. PIPKI gamma 661 is tyrosine phosphorylated by focal adhesion associated kinase signalling, increasing both the activity of phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase and its association with talin. This defines a mechanism for spatial generation of PtdIns(4,5)P(2) at focal adhesions.
On fertilization of a sea urchin egg, marked changes occur in the cytoplasmic concentration of calcium and hydrogen ions. These ionic signals represent the necessary and sufficient stimuli for the increased metabolism, protein synthesis and DNA synthesis that constitute egg activation. Cytoplasmic alkalinization, the major immediate cause of the increased rate of protein synthesis which occurs at fertilization, arises because the sperm-induced intracellular calcium transient activates a coupled flux of sodium ions and hydrogen ions across the oolemma. The experiments reported here suggest that the second messenger which links the activation of the Na/H exchange to the calcium transient may be a substance which stimulates protein kinase C8, as 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate (TPA), a known activator of protein kinase C9, appears to stimulate protein synthesis by turning on the Na/H exchanger and causing a cytoplasmic alkalinization. Our data indicate that one consequence of treating other tissues with TPA, a tumour promoter, may be an increase in intracellular pH.
Enoyl reductase (ENR), an enzyme involved in fatty acid biosynthesis, is the target for antibacterial diazaborines and the front-line antituberculosis drug isoniazid. Analysis of the structures of complexes of Escherichia coli ENR with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide and either thienodiazaborine or benzodiazaborine revealed the formation of a covalent bond between the 2' hydroxyl of the nicotinamide ribose and a boron atom in the drugs to generate a tight, noncovalently bound bisubstrate analog. This analysis has implications for the structure-based design of inhibitors of ENR, and similarities to other oxidoreductases suggest that mimicking this molecular linkage may have generic applications in other areas of medicinal chemistry.
In the modern ocean, a significant amount of nitrogen fixation is attributed to filamentous, nonheterocystous cyanobacteria of the genus Trichodesmium. In these organisms, nitrogen fixation is confined to the photoperiod and occurs simultaneously with oxygenic photosynthesis. Nitrogenase, the enzyme responsible for biological N2 fixation, is irreversibly inhibited by oxygen in vitro. How nitrogenase is protected from damage by photosynthetically produced O2 was once an enigma. Using fast repetition rate fluorometry and fluorescence kinetic microscopy, we show that there is both temporal and spatial segregation of N2 fixation and photosynthesis within the photoperiod. Linear photosynthetic electron transport protects nitrogenase by reducing photosynthetically evolved O2 in photosystem I (PSI). We postulate that in the early evolutionary phase of oxygenic photosynthesis, nitrogenase served as an electron acceptor for anaerobic heterotrophic metabolism and that PSI was favored by selection because it provided a micro-anaerobic environment for N2 fixation in cyanobacteria.
Misfolded proteins are associated with several pathological conditions including neurodegeneration. Although some of these abnormally folded proteins result from mutations in genes encoding disease-associated proteins (for example, repeat-expansion diseases), more general mechanisms that lead to misfolded proteins in neurons remain largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that low levels of mischarged transfer RNAs (tRNAs) can lead to an intracellular accumulation of misfolded proteins in neurons. These accumulations are accompanied by upregulation of cytoplasmic protein chaperones and by induction of the unfolded protein response. We report that the mouse sticky mutation, which causes cerebellar Purkinje cell loss and ataxia, is a missense mutation in the editing domain of the alanyl-tRNA synthetase gene that compromises the proofreading activity of this enzyme during aminoacylation of tRNAs. These findings demonstrate that disruption of translational fidelity in terminally differentiated neurons leads to the accumulation of misfolded proteins and cell death, and provide a novel mechanism underlying neurodegeneration.
Apoptosis plays an important role during neuronal development, and defects in apoptosis may underlie various neurodegenerative disorders. To characterize molecular mechanisms that regulate neuronal apoptosis, the contributions to cell death of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family members, including ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase), JNK (c-JUN NH2-terminal protein kinase), and p38, were examined after withdrawal of nerve growth factor (NGF) from rat PC-12 pheochromocytoma cells. NGF withdrawal led to sustained activation of the JNK and p38 enzymes and inhibition of ERKs. The effects of dominant-interfering or constitutively activated forms of various components of the JNK-p38 and ERK signaling pathways demonstrated that activation of JNK and p38 and concurrent inhibition of ERK are critical for induction of apoptosis in these cells. Therefore, the dynamic balance between growth factor-activated ERK and stress-activated JNK-p38 pathways may be important in determining whether a cell survives or undergoes apoptosis.
DNA methylation of CpG dinucleotides is an important epigenetic modification of mammalian genomes and is essential for the regulation of chromatin structure, of gene expression and of genome stability. Differences in DNA methylation patterns underlie a wide range of biological processes, such as genomic imprinting, inactivation of the X chromosome, embryogenesis, and carcinogenesis. Inheritance of the epigenetic methylation pattern is mediated by the enzyme DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), which methylates newly synthesized CpG sequences during DNA replication, depending on the methylation status of the template strands. The protein UHRF1 (also known as Np95 and ICBP90) recognizes hemi-methylation sites via a SET and RING-associated (SRA) domain and directs Dnmt1 to these sites. Here we report the crystal structures of the SRA domain in free and hemi-methylated DNA-bound states. The SRA domain folds into a globular structure with a basic concave surface formed by highly conserved residues. Binding of DNA to the concave surface causes a loop and an amino-terminal tail of the SRA domain to fold into DNA interfaces at the major and minor grooves of the methylation site. In contrast to fully methylated CpG sites recognized by the methyl-CpG-binding domain, the methylcytosine base at the hemi-methylated site is flipped out of the DNA helix in the SRA-DNA complex and fits tightly into a protein pocket on the concave surface. The complex structure suggests that the successive flip out of the pre-existing methylated cytosine and the target cytosine to be methylated is associated with the coordinated transfer of the hemi-methylated CpG site from UHRF1 to Dnmt1.
Amyloid or amyloid-like fibrils are elongated, insoluble protein aggregates, formed in vivo in association with neurodegenerative diseases or in vitro from soluble native proteins, respectively. The underlying structure of the fibrillar or 'cross-beta' state has presented long-standing, fundamental puzzles of protein structure. These include whether fibril-forming proteins have two structurally distinct stable states, native and fibrillar, and whether all or only part of the native protein refolds as it converts to the fibrillar state. Here we show that a designed amyloid-like fibril of the well-characterized enzyme RNase A contains native-like molecules capable of enzymatic activity. In addition, these functional molecular units are formed from a core RNase A domain and a swapped complementary domain. These findings are consistent with the zipper-spine model in which a cross-beta spine is decorated with three-dimensional domain-swapped functional units, retaining native-like structure.
The Escherichia coli isocitrate dehydrogenase kinase/phosphatase (AceK) is a unique bifunctional enzyme that phosphorylates or dephosphorylates isocitrate dehydrogenase (ICDH) in response to environmental changes, resulting in the inactivation or, respectively, activation of ICDH. ICDH inactivation short-circuits the Krebs cycle by enabling the glyoxlate bypass. It was the discovery of AceK and ICDH that established the existence of protein phosphorylation regulation in prokaryotes. As a 65-kDa protein, AceK is significantly larger than typical eukaryotic protein kinases. Apart from the ATP-binding motif, AceK does not share sequence homology with any eukaryotic protein kinase or phosphatase. Most intriguingly, AceK possesses the two opposing activities of protein kinase and phosphatase within one protein, and specifically recognizes only intact ICDH. Additionally, AceK has strong ATPase activity. It has been shown that AceK kinase, phosphatase and ATPase activities reside at the same site, although the molecular basis of such multifunctionality and its regulation remains completely unknown. Here we report the structures of AceK and its complex with ICDH. The AceK structure reveals a eukaryotic protein-kinase-like domain containing ATP and a regulatory domain with a novel fold. As an AceK phosphatase activator and kinase inhibitor, AMP is found to bind in an allosteric site between the two AceK domains. An AMP-mediated conformational change exposes and shields ATP, acting as a switch between AceK kinase and phosphatase activities, and ICDH-binding induces further conformational change for AceK activation. The substrate recognition loop of AceK binds to the ICDH dimer, allowing higher-order substrate recognition and interaction, and inducing critical conformational change at the phosphorylation site of ICDH.
Aldose reductase is the first enzyme in the polyol pathway and catalyses the NADPH-dependent reduction of D-glucose to D-sorbitol. Under normal physiological conditions aldose reductase participates in osmoregulation, but under hyperglycaemic conditions it contributes to the onset and development of severe complications in diabetes. Here we present the crystal structure of pig lens aldose reductase refined to an R-factor of 0.232 at 2.5-A resolution. It exhibits a single domain folded in an eight-stranded parallel alpha/beta barrel, similar to that in triose phosphate isomerase and a score of other enzymes. Hence, aldose reductase does not possess the expected canonical dinucleotide-binding domain. Crystallographic analysis of the binding of 2'-monophospho-adenosine-5'-diphosphoribose, which competitively inhibits NADPH binding reveals that it binds into a cleft located at the C-terminal end of the strands of the alpha/beta barrel. This represents a new type of binding for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide coenzymes.
Fukuyama muscular dystrophy (FCMD; MIM253800), one of the most common autosomal recessive disorders in Japan, was the first human disease found to result from ancestral insertion of a SINE-VNTR-Alu (SVA) retrotransposon into a causative gene. In FCMD, the SVA insertion occurs in the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of the fukutin gene. The pathogenic mechanism for FCMD is unknown, and no effective clinical treatments exist. Here we show that aberrant messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing, induced by SVA exon-trapping, underlies the molecular pathogenesis of FCMD. Quantitative mRNA analysis pinpointed a region that was missing from transcripts in patients with FCMD. This region spans part of the 3' end of the fukutin coding region, a proximal part of the 3' UTR and the SVA insertion. Correspondingly, fukutin mRNA transcripts in patients with FCMD and SVA knock-in model mice were shorter than the expected length. Sequence analysis revealed an abnormal splicing event, provoked by a strong acceptor site in SVA and a rare alternative donor site in fukutin exon 10. The resulting product truncates the fukutin carboxy (C) terminus and adds 129 amino acids encoded by the SVA. Introduction of antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) targeting the splice acceptor, the predicted exonic splicing enhancer and the intronic splicing enhancer prevented pathogenic exon-trapping by SVA in cells of patients with FCMD and model mice, rescuing normal fukutin mRNA expression and protein production. AON treatment also restored fukutin functions, including O-glycosylation of a-dystroglycan (a-DG) and laminin binding by a-DG. Moreover, we observe exon-trapping in other SVA insertions associated with disease (hypercholesterolemia, neutral lipid storage disease) and human-specific SVA insertion in a novel gene. Thus, although splicing into SVA is known, we have discovered in human disease a role for SVA-mediated exon-trapping and demonstrated the promise of splicing modulation therapy as the first radical clinical treatment for FCMD and other SVA-mediated diseases.
A partial amino acid sequence obtained for porcine atrial muscarinic acetylcholine receptor was used to isolate complementary DNA clones containing the complete receptor coding region. The deduced 466-amino acid polypeptide exhibits extensive structural and sequence homology with other receptors coupled to guanine nucleotide binding (G) proteins (for example, the beta-adrenergic receptor and rhodopsins); this similarity predicts a structure of seven membrane-spanning regions distinguished by the disposition of a large cytoplasmic domain. Stable transfection of the Chinese hamster ovary cell line with the atrial receptor complementary DNA leads to the binding of muscarinic antagonists in these cells with affinities characteristic of the M2 receptor subtype. The atrial muscarinic receptor is encoded by a unique gene consisting of a single coding exon and multiple, alternatively spliced 5' noncoding regions. The atrial receptor is distinct from the cerebral muscarinic receptor gene product, sharing only 38% overall amino acid homology and possessing a completely nonhomologous large cytoplasmic domain, suggesting a role for the latter region in differential effector coupling.
The c-Myc oncoprotein belongs to a family of proteins whose DNA binding domains contain a basic region-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif. Systematic mutagenesis of c-Myc revealed that dimerized bHLH motifs formed a parallel four-helix bundle with the amino termini of helices 1 and 2 directed toward the inner and outer nucleotides of the DNA binding site, respectively. Both the basic region and the carboxyl-terminal end of the loop contributed to DNA binding specificity. The DNA binding domain of c-Myc may therefore be structurally similar to that of restriction endonuclease Eco RI.
The metallothioneins (MTs) are a family of proteins of low relative molecular mass which bind heavy-metal ions. MTs exist in several molecular forms (MT-I, MT-II) and are encoded by a multi-gene family containing at least 14 closely related genes and pseudogenes. These proteins function in the regulation of trace-metal metabolism, the storage of these ions in the liver, and as a protective mechanism against heavy-metal toxicity. Somatic cell hybridization has shown that most MT genes, including the functional MT genes (MT1A, MT1B, MT2A), lie on human chromosome 16. Using in situ hybridization, we have now localized the MT genes to band q22 of chromosome 16. This chromosomal band is also a breakpoint in two specific rearrangements, the inv(16)(p13q22) and t(16; 16)(p13;q22) rearrangements, found in a subgroup of patients with acute myelomonocytic leukaemia (AMML). Hybridization of a MT probe to malignant cells from two patients with an inv(16) showed labelled sites on both arms of the inverted chromosome, indicating that the breakpoint at 16q22 splits the MT gene cluster. Similar results were obtained when this probe was hybridized to metaphase cells from two patients with a t(16; 16). These results suggest that the MT genes or their regulatory regions may function as an 'activating' sequence for an as yet unidentified cellular gene located at 16p13.
Targeting of newly synthesized membrane proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum is an essential cellular process. Most membrane proteins are recognized and targeted co-translationally by the signal recognition particle. However, nearly 5% of membrane proteins are 'tail-anchored' by a single carboxy-terminal transmembrane domain that cannot access the co-translational pathway. Instead, tail-anchored proteins are targeted post-translationally by a conserved ATPase termed Get3. The mechanistic basis for tail-anchored protein recognition or targeting by Get3 is not known. Here we present crystal structures of yeast Get3 in 'open' (nucleotide-free) and 'closed' (ADP.AlF(4)(-)-bound) dimer states. In the closed state, the dimer interface of Get3 contains an enormous hydrophobic groove implicated by mutational analyses in tail-anchored protein binding. In the open state, Get3 undergoes a striking rearrangement that disrupts the groove and shields its hydrophobic surfaces. These data provide a molecular mechanism for nucleotide-regulated binding and release of tail-anchored proteins during their membrane targeting by Get3.
Genomic sequencing permits studies of in vivo DNA methylation and protein-DNA interactions, but its use has been limited because of the complexity of the mammalian genome. A newly developed genomic sequencing procedure in which a ligation mediated polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is used generates high quality, reproducible sequence ladders starting with only 1 microgram of uncloned mammalian DNA per reaction. Different sequence ladders can be created simultaneously by inclusion of multiple primers and visualized separately by rehybridization. Relatively little radioactivity is needed for hybridization and exposure times are short. Methylation patterns in genomic DNA are readily detectable; for example, 17 CpG dinucleotides in the 5' region of human X-linked PGK-1 (phosphoglycerate kinase 1) were found to be methylated on an inactive human X chromosome, but unmethylated on an active X chromosome.
The activation of protein kinase C by diacylglycerol and by tumour promoters has implicated this enzyme in transmembrane signalling and in the regulation of the cell cycle. In vitro studies revealed that catalytic activity requires the presence of calcium and phospholipids with a preference for phosphatidylserine. Diacylglycerol and tumour promoters such as phorbol esters bind to the enzyme, leading to its activation while sharply increasing its affinity for Ca2+ and phospholipid. Addition of diacylglycerol analogues or phorbol esters to intact cells results in the phosphorylation of specific polypeptides. Several cellular processes, including hormone and neurotransmitter release and receptor down-regulation, are modulated by the activation of protein kinase C, while phorbol ester-induced stimulation of the enzyme in whole cells has been associated with its translocation from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane. Moreover, the use of Ca2+ ionophores has revealed an apparent synergism between Ca2+ mobilization and protein kinase C activation. This synergism has recently also been found to apply to receptor down-regulation (ref. 23 and accompanying paper). Here we describe a reconstitution system in which intracellular translocation of protein kinase C and the synergism between Ca2+ and enzyme activators can be studied. The results suggest a rationale for concomitant Ca2+ mobilization and diacylglycerol formation in response to some hormones, neurotransmitters and growth factors.
Subunits of guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins purified from bovine cerebral cortex were used to perfuse the intracellular surface of excised patches of chick embryonic atrial cells. Single-channel current measurements unexpectedly indicate that the beta gamma, and not the alpha subunits, are responsible for activating the muscarinic-gated potassium channel.
Ribose is cardioprotective in the rat in a variety of pathophysiological conditions. The metabolic basis for this effect is the low capacity of the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway in the myocardium. Ribose bypasses this pathway, elevates the available pool of 5-phosphoribosyl-l-pyrophosphate, and thus stimulates the biosynthesis of adenine nucleotides. In this study reported here the activity of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, the first and rate-limiting enzyme of the oxidative pentose phosphate shunt, was very low in the human heart and was of the same order of magnitude in the myocardium of various animal species. Furthermore, ribose had a similar stimulating effect on myocardial adenine nucleotide biosynthesis in the guinea pig, in which hemodynamic parameters are different from those in the rat. It is concluded that the metabolic basis for the effectiveness of ribose is similar in all species investigated.
The biological importance of DNA methylation for gene expression in eukaryotes is becoming increasingly evident, and a direct role of methylation in gene expression has been suggested by an analysis of the infectivity of integrated retroviral genomes in a transfection assay. These studies, however, did not address whether specific methylatable residues are involved in gene regulation. Methylation by sequence-specific bacterial DNA methylases has been shown to suppress the expression of some genes, but not others. To investigate the effect of methylation on gene expression without having to rely on sequence-specific methylases, a rat liver enzyme was used to methylate in vitro all C-G dinucleotides of a proviral genomic clone. This treatment reduced the biological activity of Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV) proviral DNA by more than three orders of magnitude, whereas complete methylation of 35 HpaII sites in the same DNA had only a marginal effect. The rat methylase-induced inactivation was reversible, as treatment of recipient cells with 5-azacytidine rendered the non-infectious viral genomes biologically active. This suggests that methylation in other C-G dinucleotides than those detectable with restriction enzymes can be crucial for gene expression.
Aminoacyl transfer RNA synthetases catalyse the first step of protein synthesis and establish the rules of the genetic code through the aminoacylation of tRNAs. There is a distinct synthetase for each of the 20 amino acids and throughout evolution these enzymes have been divided into two classes of ten enzymes each. These classes are defined by the distinct architectures of their active sites, which are associated with specific and universal sequence motifs. Because the synthesis of aminoacyl-tRNAs containing each of the twenty amino acids is a universally conserved, essential reaction, the absence of a recognizable gene for cysteinyl tRNA synthetase in the genomes of Archae such as Methanococcus jannaschii and Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum has been difficult to interpret. Here we describe a different cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase from M. jannaschii and Deinococcus radiodurans and its characterization in vitro and in vivo. This protein lacks the characteristic sequence motifs seen in the more than 700 known members of the two canonical classes of tRNA synthetase and may be of ancient origin. The existence of this protein contrasts with proposals that aminoacylation with cysteine in M. jannaschii is an auxiliary function of a canonical prolyl-tRNA synthetase.
In the course of Legionnaires' disease, the bacterium Legionella pneumophila affects the intracellular vesicular trafficking of infected eukaryotic cells by recruiting the small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) Rab1 to the cytosolic face of the Legionella-containing vacuole. In order to accomplish this, the Legionella protein DrrA contains a specific guanine nucleotide exchange activity for Rab1 activation that exchanges guanosine triphosphate (GTP) for guanosine diphosphate on Rab1. We found that the amino-terminal domain of DrrA possesses adenosine monophosphorylation (AMPylation) activity toward the switch II region of Rab1b, leading to posttranslational covalent modification of tyrosine 77. AMPylation of switch II by DrrA restricts the access of GTPase activating proteins, thereby rendering Rab1b constitutively active.
Medical imaging technologies have undergone explosive growth over the past few decades and now play a central role in clinical oncology. But the truly transformative power of imaging in the clinical management of cancer patients lies ahead. Today, imaging is at a crossroads, with molecularly targeted imaging agents expected to broadly expand the capabilities of conventional anatomical imaging methods. Molecular imaging will allow clinicians to not only see where a tumor is located in the body, but also to visualize the expression and activity of specific molecules (e.g., proteases and protein kinases) and biological processes (e.g., apoptosis, angiogenesis, and metastasis) that influence tumor behavior and/or response to therapy. This information is expected to have a major impact on cancer detection, individualized treatment, and drug development, as well as our understanding of how cancer arises.
Receptors for excitatory amino acids in the mammalian central nervous system are classified into three major subtypes, ones which prefer N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), quisqualate (QA), or kainate (KA) as type agonists respectively. These receptors are considered to mediate fast postsynaptic potentials by activating ion channels directly (ionotropic type). Recently it was reported that exposure of mammalian brain cells to glutamate (Glu) or its analogues causes enhanced hydrolysis of inositol phospholipids, but it is not clear whether the enhanced hydrolysis is the cause or effect of physiological responses. Membrane depolarization or Ca2+ influx, which can result from Glu receptor activation, can induce enhanced hydrolysis of inositol phospholipids. We have characterized the functional properties of two types of excitatory amino-acid responses, those activated by QA (or Glu) and those activated by KA, induced in Xenopus oocytes injected with rat-brain messenger RNA. We report evidence for a new type of Glu receptor, which prefers QA as agonist, and which directly activates inositol phospholipid metabolism through interaction with GTP-binding regulatory proteins (Gi or Go), leading to the formation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3) and mobilization of intracellular Ca2+. This QA/Glu reaction is inhibited by islet-activating protein (IAP, pertussis toxin), but was not blocked by Joro spider toxin (JSTX), a specific blocker of traditional ionotropic QA/Glu receptors.
Phosphoinositides are a family of lipid signalling molecules that regulate many cellular functions in eukaryotes. Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns4,5P2), the central component in the phosphoinositide signalling circuitry, is generated primarily by type I phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinases (PIPKIalpha, PIPKIbeta and PIPKIgamma). In addition to functions in the cytosol, phosphoinositides are present in the nucleus, where they modulate several functions; however, the mechanism by which they directly regulate nuclear functions remains unknown. PIPKIs regulate cellular functions through interactions with protein partners, often PtdIns4,5P2 effectors, that target PIPKIs to discrete subcellular compartments, resulting in the spatial and temporal generation of PtdIns4,5P2 required for the regulation of specific signalling pathways. Therefore, to determine roles for nuclear PtdIns4,5P2 we set out to identify proteins that interacted with the nuclear PIPK, PIPKIalpha. Here we show that PIPKIalpha co-localizes at nuclear speckles and interacts with a newly identified non-canonical poly(A) polymerase, which we have termed Star-PAP (nuclear speckle targeted PIPKIalpha regulated-poly(A) polymerase) and that the activity of Star-PAP can be specifically regulated by PtdIns4,5P2. Star-PAP and PIPKIalpha function together in a complex to control the expression of select mRNAs, including the transcript encoding the key cytoprotective enzyme haem oxygenase-1 (refs 8, 9) and other oxidative stress response genes by regulating the 3'-end formation of their mRNAs. Taken together, the data demonstrate a model by which phosphoinositide signalling works in tandem with complement pathways to regulate the activity of Star-PAP and the subsequent biosynthesis of its target mRNA. The results reveal a mechanism for the integration of nuclear phosphoinositide signals and a method for regulating gene expression.
The NF-kappaB family of transcription factors is activated in response to many stimuli, including pro-inflammatory cytokines, environmental stresses and, in the case of B and T lymphocytes, by antigenic stimulation. Bcl10 is essential for NF-kappaB activation by T- and B-cell receptors. T and B lymphocytes from Bcl10-deficient mice fail to activate NF-kappaB in response to antigen-receptor stimulation and, as a consequence, are unable to proliferate. Bcl10 overexpression is sufficient to activate NF-kappaB, a process that requires the NF-kappaB essential modulator NEMO (also known as IKK-gamma), which is the regulatory subunit of the IkappaB kinase complex. However, the cellular mechanism by which Bcl10 activates the NF-kappaB pathway remains unclear. Here we show that Bcl10 targets NEMO for lysine-63-linked ubiquitination. Notably, a mutant form of NEMO that cannot be ubiquitinated inhibited Bcl10-induced NF-kappaB activation. Paracaspase and a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (UBC13) were both required for Bcl10-induced NEMO ubiquitination and subsequent NF-kappaB activation. Furthermore, short interfering RNAs that reduced the expression of paracaspase and UBC13 abrogated the effects of Bcl10. Thus, the adaptor protein Bcl10 promotes activation of NF-kappaB transcription factors through paracaspase- and UBC13-dependent ubiquitination of NEMO.
cAMP (3',5' cyclic adenosine monophosphate) is a second messenger that in eukaryotic cells induces physiological responses ranging from growth, differentiation, and gene expression to secretion and neurotransmission. Most of these effects have been attributed to the binding of cAMP to cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). Here, a family of cAMP-binding proteins that are differentially distributed in the mammalian brain and body organs and that exhibit both cAMP-binding and guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) domains is reported. These cAMP-regulated GEFs (cAMP-GEFs) bind cAMP and selectively activate the Ras superfamily guanine nucleotide binding protein Rap1A in a cAMP-dependent but PKA-independent manner. Our findings suggest the need to reformulate concepts of cAMP-mediated signaling to include direct coupling to Ras superfamily signaling.
Here it is shown, with the use of protein-protein photocrosslinking, that the carboxyl-terminal region of the alpha subunit of RNA polymerase (RNAP) is in direct physical proximity to the activating region of the catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) in the ternary complex of the lac promoter, RNAP, and CAP. These results strongly support the proposal that transcription activation by CAP involves protein-protein contact between the carboxyl-terminal region of the alpha subunit and the activating region of CAP.
The 14S messenger RNA (1300 to 1500 nucleotides) for the alpha A chain of alpha-crystallin of the mammalian lens is nearly three times larger than required to code for the polypeptide that contains 173 amino acids. As a means of accounting for this anomaly, a complementary DNA clone for the mouse alpha A-crystallin messenger RNA was constructed in pBR322 and sequenced. Derivation of the protein sequence from the nucleic acid sequence showed that mouse alpha A-crystallin is similar to that of other organisms. The messenger RNA contains 536 nucleotides located on the 3' side of the coding region, excluding the polyadenylate stretch. This 3' sequence does not encode any other crystallin and has multiple termination codons in the three possible reading frames.
Mutations of the Drosophila melanogaster ninaA gene affect phototransduction: ninaA mutant flies have a 10-fold reduction in the levels of rhodopsin in the R1-R6 photoreceptor cells. The ninaA gene was isolated and found to encode a 237-amino-acid protein that has over 40% amino-acid sequence identity with the vertebrate cyclosporin A-binding protein, cyclophilin, a protein that seems to be involved in T-lymphocyte activation. The remarkable evolutionary conservation of cyclophilin in two phylogenetically distant organisms and its involvement in diverse transduction processes suggests that this protein plays an important role in cellular metabolism. Indeed, cyclophilin has recently been shown to be a prolyl cis-trans isomerase that catalyses, in vitro, rate-limiting steps in the folding of a number of proteins. Here, we present evidence for the involvement of cyclophilin-like molecules in a defined cellular process. The availability of mutations in a cyclophilin gene provides a new model system for the study of cyclophilin and cyclosporin action.
For life to be sustained, mistakes in DNA repair must be tolerated when damage obscures the genetic information. In bacteria such as Escherichia coli, DNA damage elicits the well regulated 'SOS response'. For the extreme case of damage that cannot be repaired by conventional enzymes, there are proteins that allow the replication of DNA through such lesions, but with a reduction in the fidelity of replication. Essential proteins in this mutagenic process are RecA, DNA polymerase III, UmuD, UmuD' and UmuC (umu: UV mutagenesis). Regulation of this response involves a RecA-mediated self-cleavage of UmuD to produce UmuD'. To understand this system in more detail, we have determined the crystal structure of the E. coli UmuD' mutagenesis protein at 2.5 A resolution. Globular heads folded in an unusual Beta-structure associate to form molecular dimers, and extended amino-terminal tails associate to produce crystallized filaments. The structure provides insight into the mechanism of the self-cleavage reaction that UmuD-like proteins undergo as part of the global SOS response.
The postsynaptic actions of some neurotransmitters may be mediated through cyclic nucleotides and cyclic nucleotide-dependent phosphorylation of specific membrane proteins in postsynaptic cells. In addition to providing a molecular basis for the actions of several neurotransmitters and of certain drugs affecting behaviour, the model suggests a mechanism by which neurotransmitter signals may be converted into electrophysiological responses in postsynaptic cells.
Neutrophils, especially in acute infection or the myeloid leukemias, may shed platelet-sized particles that can readily be distinguished from true platelets because they contain neutrophil myeloperoxidase. This enzyme, unlike platelet peroxidase, is not inhibited by glutaraldehyde. The myeloperoxidase and acid hydrolase levels and continuous plasma membranes of these cell-like particles suggest that they are functional cellular entities. They further differ from platelets in that they contain nuclear remnants, occur in bacteria-laden pus and inflammatory exudates, are ingested by macrophages, and do not adhere to each other or aggregate. They could be involved in the immune response to pathogens or contribute to trauma and healing by facilitating deployment of neutrophil acid hydrolase, neutral protease, and myeloperoxidase.
A molecule of chlorophyll is synthesized from eight molecules of delta-aminolevulinate (DALA), the universal precursor of porphyrins. The light-regulated conversion of glutamate to delta-aminolevulinate in the stroma of greening plastids involves the reduction of glutamate to glutamate-1-semialdehyde and its subsequent transamination. The components performing this conversion have been isolated from barley and Chlamydomonas and separated into three fractions by serial affinity chromatography on Blue Sepharose and haem- or chlorophyllin-Sepharose. The complete reaction can be performed in vitro in a reconstituted assay by combining all three fractions. An RNA is the essential component of the chlorophyllin-Sepharose-bound fraction. By nucleotide sequence analysis, we have now identified this RNA as a chloroplast glutamate acceptor RNA. Glutamate attached by an aminoacyl bond to the 3'-terminal adenosine of this RNA is a substrate for the enzyme(s) which perform the subsequent reactions. This reaction represents a novel role for transfer RNA: participation in the metabolic conversion of its cognate amino acid into another metabolite of low relative molecular mass which subsequently is not used in peptide bond synthesis.
Nuclear protein import is mediated mainly by the transport factor importin-beta that binds cytoplasmic cargo, most often via the importin-alpha adaptor, and then transports it through nuclear pore complexes. This active transport is driven by disassembly of the import complex by nuclear RanGTP. The switch I and II loops of Ran change conformation with nucleotide state, and regulate its interactions with nuclear trafficking components. Importin-beta consists of 19 HEAT repeats that are based on a pair of antiparallel alpha-helices (referred to as the A- and B-helices). The HEAT repeats stack to yield two C-shaped arches, linked together to form a helicoidal molecule that has considerable conformational flexibility. Here we present the structure of full-length yeast importin-beta (Kap95p or karyopherin-beta) complexed with RanGTP, which provides a basis for understanding the crucial cargo-release step of nuclear import. We identify a key interaction site where the RanGTP switch I loop binds to the carboxy-terminal arch of Kap95p. This interaction produces a change in helicoidal pitch that locks Kap95p in a conformation that cannot bind importin-alpha or cargo. We suggest an allosteric mechanism for nuclear import complex disassembly by RanGTP.
A number of systems that generate oxygen free radicals catalyze the oxidative modification of proteins. Such modifications mark enzymes for degradation by cytosolic neutral alkaline proteases. Protein oxidation contributes to the pool of damaged enzymes, which increases in size during aging and in various pathological states. The age-related increase in amounts of oxidized protein may reflect the age-dependent accumulation of unrepaired DNA damage that, in a random manner, affects the concentrations or activities of numerous factors that govern the rates of protein oxidation and the degradation of oxidized protein.
Most eukaryotic cells produce proteins with relative molecular masses in the range of 100,000 to 110,000 after exposure to high temperatures. These proteins have been studied only in yeast and mammalian cells. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, heat-shock protein hsp104 is vital for tolerance to heat, ethanol and other stresses. The mammalian hsp110 protein is nucleolar and redistributes with growth state, nutritional conditions and heat shock. The relationships between hsp110, hsp104 and the high molecular mass heat-shock proteins of other organisms were unknown. We report here that hsp104 is a member of the highly conserved ClpA/ClpB protein family first identified in Escherichia coli and that additional heat-inducible members of this family are present in Schizosaccharomyces pombe and in mammals. Mutagenesis of two putative nucleotide-binding sites in hsp104 indicates that both are essential for function in thermotolerance.
Signal transmission by many cell surface receptors results in the activation of phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinases that phosphorylate the 3' position of polyphosphoinositides. From a screen for mouse proteins that bind phosphoinositides, the protein GRP1was identified. GRP1 binds phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate [PtdIns(3,4, 5)P3] through a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain and displays a region of high sequence similarity to the yeast Sec7 protein. The PH domain of the closely related protein cytohesin-1, which, through its Sec7 homology domain, regulates integrin beta2 and catalyzes guanine nucleotide exchange of the small guanine nucleotide-binding protein ARF1, was also found to specifically bind PtdIns(3,4,5)P3. GRP1 and cytohesin-1 appear to connect receptor-activated PI 3-kinase signaling pathways with proteins that mediate biological responses such as cell adhesion and membrane trafficking.
Serum and growth factors can increase the proportion of Ras in the active guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-bound form. Growth factors might stimulate guanine nucleotide exchange or decrease the activity of the guanosine triphosphatase-activating proteins GAP and neurofibromin (NF1). In NIH 3T3 cells that overexpress the mutant Ras protein His116, which releases bound guanine nucleotide at a constitutively high rate and retains sensitivity to GAP and NF1, the proportion of GTP bound to the His116 protein was not altered by serum or platelet-derived growth factor. However, these mitogens increased the proportion of Ras in the GTP-bound form in cells that overexpressed control Ras proteins with a normal intrinsic rate of guanine nucleotide release. The amount of GTP-bound His116 or control Ras proteins was higher in cells at low density than in cells at high density, which have more GAP-like activity. The lower proportion of GTP-bound Ras in NIH 3T3 cells at high density may result from increased GAP-like activity. By contrast, serum and platelet-derived growth factors appear to stimulate guanine nucleotide exchange.
The small DNA tumour virus simian virus 40 (SV40) has served as an excellent model for many studies on the mechanism and control of gene expression in eukaryotic cells. The SV40 early region produces two protein products. One product (large-T antigen) is known both to repress early viral transcription and to stimulate viral replication by binding to specific sites in the origin-promoter region. The early promoter has several similarities to other RNA polymerase II promoters, for example, it possesses a TATA box, an upstream element and an enhancer. However, the SV40 early promoter differs from other known RNA polymerase II promoters in that the origin of viral DNA replication is embedded within it. Here we show that the SV40 early region is expressed at an extremely low level following its introduction ito human 293 cells, contrasting with results observed in a large number of other cells lines. We show further that the lack of expression is due to repression of transcription from the SV40 early promoter by viral DNA replication which occurs efficiently in 293 cells.
Alkyl isocyanates react specifically with the two serine proteinases, chymotrypsin and elastase, to yield inactive enzyme derivatives containing 1 male of reagent per mole of enzyme. Octyl isocyanate inactivates chymotrypsin only, while butyl isocyanate inactivates both enzymes but shows greater efficiency toward elastase than toward chymotrypsin. These reagents may thus represent unique chemical "yardsticks" for the measurement of the relative dimensions of the active sites of the two very similar enzymes.
The 4,639,221-base pair sequence of Escherichia coli K-12 is presented. Of 4288 protein-coding genes annotated, 38 percent have no attributed function. Comparison with five other sequenced microbes reveals ubiquitous as well as narrowly distributed gene families; many families of similar genes within E. coli are also evident. The largest family of paralogous proteins contains 80 ABC transporters. The genome as a whole is strikingly organized with respect to the local direction of replication; guanines, oligonucleotides possibly related to replication and recombination, and most genes are so oriented. The genome also contains insertion sequence (IS) elements, phage remnants, and many other patches of unusual composition indicating genome plasticity through horizontal transfer.
Plant disease resistance genes function is highly specific pathogen recognition pathways. PRS2 is a resistance gene of Arabidopsis thaliana that confers resistance against Pseudomonas syringae bacteria that express avirulence gene avrRpt2. RPS2 was isolated by the use of a positional cloning strategy. The derived amino acid sequence of RPS2 contains leucine-rich repeat, membrane-spanning, leucine zipper, and P loop domains. The function of the RPS2 gene product in defense signal transduction is postulated to involve nucleotide triphosphate binding and protein-protein interactions and may also involve the reception of an elicitor produced by the avirulent pathogen.
While bile acids (BAs) have long been known to be essential in dietary lipid absorption and cholesterol catabolism, in recent years an important role for BAs as signalling molecules has emerged. BAs activate mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, are ligands for the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) TGR5 and activate nuclear hormone receptors such as farnesoid X receptor alpha (FXR-alpha; NR1H4). FXR-alpha regulates the enterohepatic recycling and biosynthesis of BAs by controlling the expression of genes such as the short heterodimer partner (SHP; NR0B2) that inhibits the activity of other nuclear receptors. The FXR-alpha-mediated SHP induction also underlies the downregulation of the hepatic fatty acid and triglyceride biosynthesis and very-low-density lipoprotein production mediated by sterol-regulatory-element-binding protein 1c. This indicates that BAs might be able to function beyond the control of BA homeostasis as general metabolic integrators. Here we show that the administration of BAs to mice increases energy expenditure in brown adipose tissue, preventing obesity and resistance to insulin. This novel metabolic effect of BAs is critically dependent on induction of the cyclic-AMP-dependent thyroid hormone activating enzyme type 2 iodothyronine deiodinase (D2) because it is lost in D2-/- mice. Treatment of brown adipocytes and human skeletal myocytes with BA increases D2 activity and oxygen consumption. These effects are independent of FXR-alpha, and instead are mediated by increased cAMP production that stems from the binding of BAs with the G-protein-coupled receptor TGR5. In both rodents and humans, the most thermogenically important tissues are specifically targeted by this mechanism because they coexpress D2 and TGR5. The BA-TGR5-cAMP-D2 signalling pathway is therefore a crucial mechanism for fine-tuning energy homeostasis that can be targeted to improve metabolic control.
Structural studies of antibiotics not only provide a shortcut to medicine allowing for rational structure-based drug design, but may also capture snapshots of dynamic intermediates that become 'frozen' after inhibitor binding. Myxopyronin inhibits bacterial RNA polymerase (RNAP) by an unknown mechanism. Here we report the structure of dMyx--a desmethyl derivative of myxopyronin B--complexed with a Thermus thermophilus RNAP holoenzyme. The antibiotic binds to a pocket deep inside the RNAP clamp head domain, which interacts with the DNA template in the transcription bubble. Notably, binding of dMyx stabilizes refolding of the beta'-subunit switch-2 segment, resulting in a configuration that might indirectly compromise binding to, or directly clash with, the melted template DNA strand. Consistently, footprinting data show that the antibiotic binding does not prevent nucleation of the promoter DNA melting but instead blocks its propagation towards the active site. Myxopyronins are thus, to our knowledge, a first structurally characterized class of antibiotics that target formation of the pre-catalytic transcription initiation complex-the decisive step in gene expression control. Notably, mutations designed in switch-2 mimic the dMyx effects on promoter complexes in the absence of antibiotic. Overall, our results indicate a plausible mechanism of the dMyx action and a stepwise pathway of open complex formation in which core enzyme mediates the final stage of DNA melting near the transcription start site, and that switch-2 might act as a molecular checkpoint for DNA loading in response to regulatory signals or antibiotics. The universally conserved switch-2 may have the same role in all multisubunit RNAPs.
The proto-oncogene c-jun is a component of the AP-1 transcription factor family involved in the mediation of nuclear events elicited by extracellular stimuli. The c-jun protein is negatively regulated by phosphorylation of residues near the carboxy terminus which are dephosphorylated in response to phorbol esters. Here we identify two serine residues in the amino terminal A1 transactivation domain which are phosphorylated in response to a variety of mitogens, phorbol esters and activated ras. We present evidence that mitogen-activated protein-serine (MAP) kinases (pp54 and pp42/44) specifically phosphorylate these sites and that their phosphorylation positively regulates the transacting activity of c-jun. The MAP kinase enzymes pp54 and pp42/44 are regulated by tyrosine as well as serine/threonine phosphorylation. MAP kinase activation of c-jun may underlie the common stimulation of this transcription factor by mitogens, growth factors and oncogenes.
Stimuli-responsive polymers exhibit reversible phase changes in response to changes in environmental factors such as pH or temperature. Conjugating such polymers to antibodies and proteins provides molecular systems for applications such as affinity separations, immunoassays and enzyme recovery and recycling. Here we show that conjugating a temperature-sensitive polymer to a genetically engineered site on a protein allows the protein's ligand binding affinity to be controlled. We synthesized a mutant of the protein streptavidin to enable site-specific conjugation of the responsive polymer near the protein's binding site. Normal binding of biotin to the modified protein occurs below 32 degrees C, whereas above this temperature the polymer collapses and blocks binding. The collapse of the polymer and thus the enabling and disabling of binding, is reversible. Such environmentally triggered control of binding may find many applications in biotechnology and biomedicine, such as the control of enzyme reaction rates and of biosensor activity, and the controlled release of drugs.
The primary function of alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1-AT), an antiprotease produced by the liver, is the inhibition of neutrophil elastase, a protease capable of hydrolysing most connective tissue components. The importance of alpha 1-AT is demonstrated by the high incidence of early-onset emphysema in individuals with hereditary alpha 1-AT deficiency (Type PiZZ), in whom serum levels of alpha 1-AT are 10-20% of normal. Oxidants in tobacco smoke can inactivate alpha 1-AT in vitro, and studies have shown that alpha 1-AT from the lungs of individuals who smoke cigarettes may also be partially inactivated, perhaps explaining the high incidence of emphysema associated with cigarette smoking. Oxidative inactivation is probably due to modification of the Met residue (Met358) at the P1 subsite position of the elastase binding site of the protein. To study the possibility of modulating the biological properties of alpha 1-AT, we have introduced selected sequence modifications at the reactive site by in vitro mutation of a cloned alpha 1-AT complementary DNA. We describe here the characterization of two alpha 1-AT analogues produced in Escherichia coli. The first, alpha 1-AT(Met385----Val), is not only fully active as an elastase inhibitor but is also resistant to oxidative inactivation. The other, alpha 1-AT(Met358----Arg), no longer inhibits elastase but is an efficient thrombin inhibitor. The active site of the latter is identical to that of the alpha 1-AT (Pittsburgh) variant, which was associated with a fatal bleeding disorder.
Planktonic Bacteria, Archaea and Eukarya reside and compete in the ocean's photic zone under the pervasive influence of light. Bacteria in this environment were recently shown to contain photoproteins called proteorhodopsins, thought to contribute to cellular energy metabolism by catalysing light-driven proton translocation across the cell membrane. So far, proteorhodopsin genes have been well documented only in proteobacteria and a few other bacterial groups. Here we report the presence and distribution of proteorhodopsin genes in Archaea affiliated with the order Thermoplasmatales, in the ocean's upper water column. The genomic context and phylogenetic relationships of the archaeal and proteobacterial proteorhodopsins indicate its probable lateral transfer between planktonic Bacteria and Archaea. About 10% of the euryarchaeotes in the photic zone contained the proteorhodopsin gene adjacent to their small-subunit ribosomal RNA. The archaeal proteorhodopsins were also found in other genomic regions, in the same or in different microbial lineages. Although euryarchaeotes were distributed throughout the water column, their proteorhodopsins were found only in the photic zone. The cosmopolitan phylogenetic distribution of proteorhodopsins reflects their significant light-dependent fitness contributions, which drive the photoprotein's lateral acquisition and retention, but constrain its dispersal to the photic zone.
Translation uses the genetic information in messenger RNA (mRNA) to synthesize proteins. Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are charged with an amino acid and brought to the ribosome, where they are paired with the corresponding trinucleotide codon in mRNA. The amino acid is attached to the nascent polypeptide and the ribosome moves on to the next codon. The cycle is then repeated to produce a full-length protein. Proofreading and editing processes are used throughout protein synthesis to ensure the faithful translation of genetic information. The maturation of tRNAs and mRNAs is monitored, as is the identity of amino acids attached to tRNAs. Accuracy is further enhanced during the selection of aminoacyl-tRNAs on the ribosome and their base pairing with mRNA. Recent studies have begun to reveal the molecular mechanisms underpinning quality control and go some way to explaining the phenomenal accuracy of translation first observed over three decades ago.
The product of the cdc2 gene, designated p34cdc2, is a serine-threonine protein kinase that controls entry of eukaryotic cells into mitosis. Freshly isolated human T lymphocytes (G0 phase) were found to have very low amounts of p34cdc2 and cdc2 messenger RNA. Expression of cdc2 increased 18 to 24 hours after exposure of T cells to phytohemagglutinin, coincident with the G1 to S transition. Antisense oligodeoxynucleotides could reduce the increase in cdc2 expression and inhibited DNA synthesis, but had no effect on several early and mid-G1 events, including blastogenesis and expression of interleukin-2 receptors, transferrin receptors, c-myb, and c-myc. Induction of cdc2 required prior induction of c-myb and c-myc. These results suggest that cdc2 induction is part of an orderly sequence of events that occurs at the G1 to S transition in T cells.
In plants, the small GTP-binding proteins called Rops work as signalling switches that control growth, development and plant responses to various environmental stimuli. Rop proteins (Rho of plants, Rac-like and AtRac in Arabidopsis thaliana) belong to the Rho family of Ras-related GTP-binding proteins that turn on signalling pathways by switching from a GDP-bound inactive to a GTP-bound active conformation. Activation depends on guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) that catalyse the otherwise slow GDP dissociation for subsequent GTP binding. Although numerous RhoGEFs exist in animals and yeasts, no Rop-specific GEFs have yet been identified in plants and so Rop activation has remained elusive. Here we describe a new family of RhoGEF proteins that are exclusive to plants. We define a unique domain within these RopGEFs, termed PRONE (plant-specific Rop nucleotide exchanger), which is exclusively active towards members of the Rop subfamily. It increases nucleotide dissociation from Rop more than a thousand-fold and forms a tight complex with nucleotide-free Rop. RopGEFs may represent the missing link in signal transduction from receptor kinases to Rops and their identification has implications for the evolution of the Rho molecular switch.
In eukaryotic cells, transcription of every protein-coding gene begins with the assembly of an RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex (PIC) on the promoter. The promoters, in conjunction with enhancers, silencers and insulators, define the combinatorial codes that specify gene expression patterns. Our ability to analyse the control logic encoded in the human genome is currently limited by a lack of accurate information regarding the promoters for most genes. Here we describe a genome-wide map of active promoters in human fibroblast cells, determined by experimentally locating the sites of PIC binding throughout the human genome. This map defines 10,567 active promoters corresponding to 6,763 known genes and at least 1,196 un-annotated transcriptional units. Features of the map suggest extensive use of multiple promoters by the human genes and widespread clustering of active promoters in the genome. In addition, examination of the genome-wide expression profile reveals four general classes of promoters that define the transcriptome of the cell. These results provide a global view of the functional relationships among transcriptional machinery, chromatin structure and gene expression in human cells.
The complete DNA sequence of the human papovavirus BK is presented. From the 4963 base-pair sequence of BK virus (MM strain), the amino acid sequence of at least five proteins can be deduced: a T antigen and a t antigen, which share amino terminal peptides; proteins VP2 and VP3, which share 232 amino acids; and protein VP1, whose coding sequence overlaps those for VP2 and VP3 by 113 nucleotides but is read in a different frame. The gene loci and the arrangement of genes are strikingly similar in BK virus and simian virus 40 (SV40). The sequence of the deduced proteins in BK virus shares 73 percent amino acid homology with those in SV40, whereas the DNA sequence of the two viruses shares 70 percent homology, suggesting close evolutionary relationship. However, the repeated DNA sequences in the noncoding regions of these viruses are different.
Polyphosphate (polyP) occurs ubiquitously in cells, but its functions are poorly understood and its synthesis has only been characterized in bacteria. Using x-ray crystallography, we identified a eukaryotic polyphosphate polymerase within the membrane-integral vacuolar transporter chaperone (VTC) complex. A 2.6 angstrom crystal structure of the catalytic domain grown in the presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) reveals polyP winding through a tunnel-shaped pocket. Nucleotide- and phosphate-bound structures suggest that the enzyme functions by metal-assisted cleavage of the ATP gamma-phosphate, which is then in-line transferred to an acceptor phosphate to form polyP chains. Mutational analysis of the transmembrane domain indicates that VTC may integrate cytoplasmic polymer synthesis with polyP membrane translocation. Identification of the polyP-synthesizing enzyme opens the way to determine the functions of polyP in lower eukaryotes.
Accuracy in transfer RNA (tRNA) splicing is essential for the formation of functional tRNAs, and hence for gene expression, in both Eukaryotes and Archaea. The specificity for recognition of the tRNA precursor (pre-tRNA) resides in the endonuclease, which removes the intron by making two independent endonucleolytic cleavages. Although the eukaryal and archaeal enzymes appear to use different features of pre-tRNAs to determine the sites of cleavage, analysis of hybrid pre-tRNA substrates containing eukaryal and archaeal sequences, described here, reveals that the eukaryal enzyme retains the ability to use the archaeal recognition signals. This result indicates that there may be a common ancestral mechanism for recognition of pre-tRNA by proteins.
The human Ras-related nuclear protein Ran/TC4 (refs 1-4) is the prototype of a well conserved family of GTPases that can regulate both cell-cycle progression and messenger RNA transport. Ran has been proposed to undergo tightly controlled cycles of GTP binding and hydrolysis, to operate as a GTPase switch whose GTP- and GDP-bound forms interact differentially with regulators and effectors. One known regulator, the protein RCC1 (refs 12, 13), interacts with Ran to catalyse guanine nucleotide exchange, and both RCC1 and Ran are components of an intrinsic checkpoint control that prevents the premature initiation of mitosis. To test and extend the GTPase-switch model, we searched for a Ran-specific GTPase-activating protein (GAP), and for putative effectors (proteins that interact specifically with Ran/TC4-GTP). We report here the identification of a Ran GAP and its use to characterize the GTP-hydrolysing properties of mutant Ran proteins, and the identification and cloning of a binding protein specific for Ran/TC4-GTP.
The formation of disulphide bonds is essential to the structure and function of proteins. These bonds rapidly form either cotranslationally or immediately post-translationally in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. Native disulphide pairing for such proteins has been achieved in vitro; however, the rates of reassembly are slow and the conditions non-physiological. To account for these observations, Anfinsen et al. proposed that a 'disulphide interchange protein' was the in vivo catalyst of disulphide bond rearrangement. Other groups discovered an activity with similar characteristics that catalysed the reductive cleavage of insulin and may be associated with insulin degradation, although this result has been disputed. The enzyme involved, protein disulphide isomerase (PDI; EC 5.3.4.1), may be the in vivo catalyst of disulphide bond formation. Here we describe the sequence of cloned rat liver PDI complementary DNA which predicts a protein with two distinct regions homologous with Escherichia coli thioredoxin, a known cofactor in oxidation-reduction reactions. Each of these regions contains the presumed active site sequence Trp-Cys-Gly-His-Cys-Lys, suggesting that PDI, similar in action to thioredoxin, catalyses disulphide bond interchange via an internal disulphide-sulphydryl interchange. The cDNA predicts a signal peptide consistent with the view that PDI is a luminal endoplasmic reticulum protein. PDI messenger RNA, although ubiquitous, is more highly concentrated in secretory cells.
Retroviruses encode a protease which needs to be active for the production of infectious virions. A disabling mutation in the protease results in the production of non-infectious virus particles and examination of proteins from these mutant virions reveals unprocessed Gag and Gag-Pol precursor proteins, the substrates of the viral protease. Each amino acid of the HIV-1 protease was individually mutated using a simple mutagenesis procedure which is capable of introducing and identifying missense mutations in each residue of a protein. Phenotypic screening of these mutants in a heterologous assay system reveals three regions within the protease where multiple consecutive amino-acid residues are sensitive to mutation. These results show that random mutagenesis can be used to identify functionally important regions within a protein. Mutants with conditional phenotypes have also been identified within this collection.
Isolated intact mitochondria selectively incorporate monosaccharides from nucleotide diphosphate monosaccharides into protein. Fucose, mannose, glucose, and galactose were incorporated by the mitochondria into glycoprotein; xylose was not. Structural integrity of the mitochondria was not necessary for the incorporation of monosaccharide into glycoprotein; mitochondria broken by homogenization also incorporated monosaccharide. The monosaccharides incorporated into glycoprotein were localized in the inner mitochondrial membranes, the same membranes which contain the protein into which leucine is incorporated by the isolated mitochondria.
The initial interaction between the ColE1 plasmid specific transcripts RNA I and RNA II, which function as antisense regulators of plasmid replication, comprises a transient complex between complementary loops found within the RNA secondary structures. Multidimensional heteronuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy was used to characterize complexes formed between model RNA hairpins having seven nucleotide complementary loops. Seven base pairs are formed in the loop-loop helix, with continuous helical stacking of the loop residues on the 3' side of their helical stems. A sharp bend in the loop-loop helix, documented by gel electrophoresis, narrows the major groove and allows bridging of the phosphodiester backbones across the major groove in order to close the hairpin loops at their 5'-ends. The bend is further enhanced by the binding of Rom, a ColE1 encoded protein that regulates replication.
The bacteriocinogenic plasmid Clo DF13, originally isolated from Escherichia cloacae, is stably maintained in Escherichia coli to the extent of about 10 copies per cell. Its replication resembles that of many other small, multicopy plasmids; plasmid-encoded protein is not required but plasmid-specific genetic information is involved in regulation of replication as both conditional and nonconditional copy-number mutants of Clo DF13, and transcomplementable copy-number mutants of plasmid Col E1 have been described. The sequences essential for replication of Col E1 (refs 16, 17) and Clo DF13 (refs 18, 19) have been identified within a region surrounding the replication origin. Initiation of Col E1 replication is preceded by transcription of the origin region, providing the RNA primer at the origin. However, transcription in the opposite direction results in a small transcript of approximately 100 nucleotides (RNA-100) for both Col E1 (refs 21, 22) and Clo DF13 (ref. 23). Data suggest that Col E1 RNA-100 acts as a negative control element for the initiation of replication. We show here that single base transitions in the RNA-100 cistron of Clo DF13 can result in a nonconditional increase in plasmid copy-number. Also, sequence analysis has revealed that a specific base transition in a DNA region, apparently involved in both termination and initiation of transcription towards the replication origin, results in a thermosensitive plasmid copy-number.
Fas is a type-I membrane protein that transduces an apoptotic signal. Binding of Fas ligand or agonistic anti-Fas antibody to Fas kills the cells by apoptosis. Studies in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans have suggested that proteases such as interleukin-1 beta-converting enzyme (ICE) or the product of the C. elegans cell-death gene ced-3 are involved in apoptotic signal transduction. The activity of ICE can be inhibited by the product of crmA, a cytokine-response modifier gene encoded by cowpox virus. We report here that expression of crmA inhibits cytotoxicity induced by anti-Fas antibody or tumour necrosis factor (TNF). We have found a specific ICE inhibitor tetrapeptide (acetyl-Tyr-Val-Ala-Asp-chloromethylketone) that also prevents apoptosis induced by anti-Fas antibody. These results suggest an involvement of an ICE-like protease in Fas-mediated apoptosis and TNF-induced cytotoxicity.
Heterotrimeric G-proteins bind to cell-surface receptors and are integral in transmission of signals from outside the cell. Upon activation of the Galpha subunit by binding of GTP, the Galpha and Gbetagamma subunits dissociate and interact with effector proteins for signal transduction. Regulatory proteins with the 19-amino-acid GoLoco motif can bind to Galpha subunits and maintain G-protein subunit dissociation in the absence of Galpha activation. Here we describe the structural determinants of GoLoco activity as revealed by the crystal structure of Galpha(i1) GDP bound to the GoLoco region of the 'regulator of G-protein signalling' protein RGS14. Key contacts are described between the GoLoco motif and Galpha protein, including the extension of GoLoco's highly conserved Asp/Glu-Gln-Arg triad into the nucleotide-binding pocket of Galpha to make direct contact with the GDP alpha- and beta-phosphates. The structural organization of the GoLoco Galpha(i1) complex, when combined with supporting data from domain-swapping experiments, suggests that the Galpha all-helical domain and GoLoco-region carboxy-terminal residues control the specificity of GoLoco Galpha interactions.
A wide variety of nonexcitable cells generate repetitive transient increases in cytosolic calcium ion concentration ([Ca2+]i) when stimulated with agonists that engage the phosphoinositide signalling pathway. Current theories regarding the mechanisms of oscillation disagree on whether Ca2+ inhibits or stimulates its own release from internal stores and whether inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DG) also undergo oscillations linked to the Ca2+ spikes. In this study, Ca2+ was found to stimulate its own release in REF52 fibroblasts primed by mitogens plus depolarization. However, unlike Ca2+ release in muscle and nerve cells, this amplification was insensitive to caffeine or ryanodine and required hormone receptor occupancy and functional IP3 receptors. Oscillations in [Ca2+]i were accompanied by oscillations in IP3 concentration but did not require functional protein kinase C. Therefore, the dominant feedback mechanism in this cell type appears to be Ca2+ stimulation of phospholipase C once this enzyme has been activated by hormone receptors.
Box C/D RNA protein complexes (RNPs) direct site-specific 2'-O-methylation of RNA and ribosome assembly. The guide RNA in C/D RNP forms base pairs with complementary substrates and selects the modification site using a molecular ruler. Despite many studies of C/D RNP structure, the fundamental questions of how C/D RNAs assemble into RNPs and how they guide modification remain unresolved. Here we report the crystal structure of an entire catalytically active archaeal C/D RNP consisting of a bipartite C/D RNA associated with two substrates and two copies each of Nop5, L7Ae and fibrillarin at 3.15-A resolution. The substrate pairs with the second through the eleventh nucleotide of the 12-nucleotide guide, and the resultant duplex is bracketed in a channel with flexible ends. The methyltransferase fibrillarin binds to an undistorted A-form structure of the guide-substrate duplex and specifically loads the target ribose into the active site. Because interaction with the RNA duplex alone does not determine the site specificity, fibrillarin is further positioned by non-specific and specific protein interactions. Compared with the structure of the inactive C/D RNP, extensive domain movements are induced by substrate loading. Our results reveal the organization of a monomeric C/D RNP and the mechanism underlying its site-specific methylation activity.
The gene mutated in the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia telangiectasia (AT), designated ATM (for 'AT mutated'), is a member of a family of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase-like enzymes that are involved in cell-cycle control, meiotic recombination, telomere length monitoring and DNA-damage response. Previous results have demonstrated that AT cells are hypersensitive to ionizing radiation and are defective at the G1/S checkpoint after radiation damage. Because cells lacking the protein tyrosine kinase c-Abl are also defective in radiation-induced G1 arrest, we investigated the possibility that ATM might interact with c-Abl in response to radiation damage. Here we show that ATM binds c-Abl constitutively in control cells but not in AT cells. Our results demonstrate that the SH3 domain of c-Abl interacts with a DPAPNPPHFP motif (residues 1,373-1,382) of ATM. The results also reveal that radiation-induction of c-Abl tyrosine kinase activity is diminished in AT cells. These findings indicate that ATM is involved in the activation of c-Abl by DNA damage and this interaction may in part mediate radiation-induced G1 arrest.
Only five mitochondrial proteins are known to be essential for viability of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae; all of them are key components of the mitochondrial protein import system. Other components of this system are not essential for life; they include functionally redundant import receptors on the mitochondrial surface and enzymes acting upon only a few precursor proteins.
Hydroxyurea, hydroxyurethane, and dihydroxyurea inhibit incorporation of thymidine into the DNA of monolayers of HeLa cells. They do not affect incorporation of uridine into RNA or of leucine into protein. In contrast, hydroxylamine inhibits cellular incorporation of all three precursors: thymidine, uridine, and leucine. Hydroxyurea does not affect thymidine kinase, thymidylate kinase, or DNA polymerase reactions, but it does inhibit incorporation of cytidylic and guanylic acids into DNA in cell-free supernatants.
Gastrula-stage embryos of the brine shrimp Artemia undergo reversible transitions between metabolically active and dormant states that are promoted by changes in intracellular pH. A macromolecular mechanism for this suppression of energy metabolism that involves regulation of the enzyme trehalase is reported here. Isolated trehalase from these embryos existed in two active forms that interconverted when exposed to physiological transitions in pH. This hysteretic interconversion was reversible, required minutes for completion, and involved a change in enzyme polymerization. The two states differed twofold in molecular size and were distinguishable electrophoretically. Compared to the smaller species, the polymerized form was strongly inhibited by acidic pH, adenosine 5'-triphosphate, and the substrate trehalose. Thus, the shift in assembly equilibrium toward the aggregated enzyme caused by pH values less than or equal to 7.4 may mediate the arrest of trehalose-fueled metabolism and respiration during dormancy in this cryptobiotic organism.
The interaction of Escherichia coli threonyl-transfer RNA (tRNA) synthetase with the leader sequence of its own messenger RNA inhibits ribosome binding, resulting in negative translational feedback regulation. The leader sequence resembles the substrate (tRNA(Thr)) of the enzyme, and the nucleotides that mediate the correct recognition of the leader and the tRNA may be the same. A mutation suggested by tRNA identity rules that switches the resemblance of the leader sequence from tRNA(Thr) to tRNA(Met) causes the translation of the threonyl-tRNA synthetase messenger RNA to become regulated by methionyl-tRNA synthetase. This identity swap in the leader messenger RNA indicates that tRNA identity rules may be extended to interactions of synthetases with other RNAs.
Reelin is an extracellular protein that is crucial for layer formation in the embryonic brain. Here, we demonstrate that Reelin functions postnatally to regulate the development of the neuromuscular junction. Reelin is required for motor end-plate maturation and proper nerve-muscle connectivity, and it directly promotes synapse elimination. Unlike layer formation, neuromuscular junction development requires a function of Reelin that is not mediated by Disabled1 or very-low-density lipoprotein receptors and apolipoprotein E receptor 2 receptors but by a distinct mechanism involving its protease activity.
Cypoviruses and baculoviruses are notoriously difficult to eradicate because the virus particles are embedded in micrometre-sized protein crystals called polyhedra. The remarkable stability of polyhedra means that, like bacterial spores, these insect viruses remain infectious for years in soil. The environmental persistence of polyhedra is the cause of significant losses in silkworm cocoon harvests but has also been exploited against pests in biological alternatives to chemical insecticides. Although polyhedra have been extensively characterized since the early 1900s, their atomic organization remains elusive. Here we describe the 2 A crystal structure of both recombinant and infectious silkworm cypovirus polyhedra determined using crystals 5-12 micrometres in diameter purified from insect cells. These are the smallest crystals yet used for de novo X-ray protein structure determination. We found that polyhedra are made of trimers of the viral polyhedrin protein and contain nucleotides. Although the shape of these building blocks is reminiscent of some capsid trimers, polyhedrin has a new fold and has evolved to assemble in vivo into three-dimensional cubic crystals rather than icosahedral shells. The polyhedrin trimers are extensively cross-linked in polyhedra by non-covalent interactions and pack with an exquisite molecular complementarity similar to that of antigen-antibody complexes. The resulting ultrastable and sealed crystals shield the virus particles from environmental damage. The structure suggests that polyhedra can serve as the basis for the development of robust and versatile nanoparticles for biotechnological applications such as microarrays and biopesticides.
To date no nucleic acid has been found in the purified infectious agent which causes the spongiform encephalopathy known as scrapie. In an attempt to identify a unique scrapie virus-associated messenger RNA in tissues of infected animals, we have synthesized an oligonucleotide probe complementary to the mRNA sequence corresponding to the amino-acid sequence of the prion protein, PrP27-30 (ref. 1). We report here that, with this probe, a complementary DNA clone representing PrP27-30 was obtained from scrapie-infected mouse brain; the DNA sequence of this clone could be translated into a protein that matches exactly the published sequence of PrP27-30. The cDNA clone hybridized to a single 2.4-2.5-kilobase (kb) mRNA from both normal and scrapie-infected brain. Thus, the PrP27-30 mRNA is not uniquely associated with scrapie infectivity, suggesting that PrP27-30 may be a normal component of mouse and hamster brain.
Squid nerve contains an enzyme that hydrolyzes the nerve gas Tabun at about one-tenth the rate it hydrolyzes diisopropylphosphorofluoridate (DFP), and at about one-third to one-fourth the rate it hydrolyzes Sarin and Soman. Tabun is a more potent inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase than is DFP, is both lipid-and water-soluble, and penetrates readily into the squid giant axon in its inhibitory form. The failure of Tabun to block or markedly decrease the conducted action potential in the squid axon makes it likely that the blocking of conduction caused by DFP is probably not due to inhibition of acetylcholinesterase. Sub-strate specificity with regard to organophosphate metabolism by squid enzyme has possible implications for the disposal and detoxication of nerve gases in the ocean.
Fertilization is initiated by the species-specific binding of sperm to the extracellular coat of the egg. One sperm receptor for the mouse egg is beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase (GalTase), which binds O-linked oligosaccharides on the egg coat glycoprotein ZP3. ZP3 binding induces acrosomal exocytosis through the activation of a pertussis toxin-sensitive heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein). The cytoplasmic domain of sperm surface GalTase bound to and activated a heterotrimeric G protein complex that contained the Gi alpha subunit. Aggregation of GalTase by multivalent ligands elicited G protein activation. Sperm from transgenic mice that overexpressed GalTase had higher rates of G protein activation than did wild-type sperm, which rendered transgenic sperm hypersensitive to their ZP3 ligand. Thus, the cytoplasmic domain of cell surface GalTase appears to enable it to function as a signal-transducing receptor for extracellular oligosaccharide ligands.
A new paradigm for oxygen activation is required for enzymes such as methane monooxygenase (MMO), for which catalysis depends on a nonheme diiron center instead of the more familiar Fe-porphyrin cofactor. On the basis of precedents from synthetic diiron complexes, a high-valent Fe2(micro-O)2 diamond core has been proposed as the key oxidizing species for MMO and other nonheme diiron enzymes such as ribonucleotide reductase and fatty acid desaturase. The presence of a single short Fe-O bond (1.77 angstroms) per Fe atom and an Fe-Fe distance of 2.46 angstroms in MMO reaction intermediate Q, obtained from extended x-ray absorption fine structure and Mossbauer analysis, provides spectroscopic evidence that the diiron center in Q has an Fe2IVO2 diamond core.
Basal transcription from the human RNA polymerase III U6 promoter depends on a TATA box that recruits the TATA box-binding protein (TBP) and a proximal sequence element that recruits the small nuclear RNA (snRNA)-activating protein complex (SNAPc). TBP consists of a conserved carboxyl-terminal domain that performs all known functions of the protein and a nonconserved amino-terminal region of unknown function. Here, the amino-terminal region is shown to down-regulate binding of TBP to the U6 TATA box, mediate cooperative binding with SNAPc to the U6 promoter, and enhance U6 transcription.
Procedures, such as teat removal (thelectomy) or teat duct ligation, which prevent removal of milk, lead to rapid involution of the lactating mammary gland; performed unilaterally they have been used previously to study the biochemistry of involution, enabling a comparison of normal and involuting glands in the same animal against the same systematic hormonal environment. Both the protein hormone prolactin and the steroid hormone oestrogen are of importance in the development and function of the mammary gland. In the present experiments, female Sprague-Dawley rats were unilaterally thelectomised and the binding to the mammary gland of prolactin and oestrogen was examined through pregnancy, lactation and weaning. There was an effect of thelectomy during lactation only, when levels of both receptors increased in the intact lactating gland but failed to rise in the thelectomised, involuting gland. Capillary closure is known to occur in the mammary glands of rats after 36-48 h of milk accumulation. The rate of delivery of hormones to the tissue will be drastically reduced and it is concluded that this, rather than systemic hormone levels, is of importance in controlling receptor levels.
Desensitization, the tendency of biological responses to wane over time despite the continuous presence of a stimulus of constant intensity, is observed in organisms as diverse as bacteria and mammals. Recently, new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying these phenomena have emerged from the study of the receptors coupled to the ubiquitous second messenger-generating system adenylate cyclase. These mechanisms involve sequestration or down-regulation of the receptors from the cell surface as well as functionally significant covalent modifications of the receptors and/or guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins.
The molybdoenzyme dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) reductase contributes to the release of dimethylsulfide, a compound that has been implicated in cloud nucleation and global climate regulation. The crystal structure of DMSO reductase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides reveals a monooxo molybdenum cofactor containing two molybdopterin guanine dinucleotides that asymmetrically coordinate the molybdenum through their dithiolene groups. One of the pterins exhibits different coordination modes to the molybdenum between the oxidized and reduced states, whereas the side chain oxygen of Ser147 coordinates the metal in both states. The change in pterin coordination between the Mo(VI) and Mo(IV) forms suggests a mechanism for substrate binding and reduction by this enzyme. Sequence comparisons of DMSO reductase with a family of bacterial oxotransferases containing molybdopterin guanine dinucleotide indicate a similar polypeptide fold and active site with two molybdopterins within this family.
Activation of gene transcription in metazoans is a multistep process that is triggered by factors that recognize transcriptional enhancer sites in DNA. These factors work with co-activators to direct transcriptional initiation by the RNA polymerase II apparatus. One class of co-activator, the TAF(II) subunits of transcription factor TFIID, can serve as targets of activators and as proteins that recognize core promoter sequences necessary for transcription initiation. Transcriptional activation by enhancer-binding factors such as Sp1 requires TFIID, but the identity of other necessary cofactors has remained unknown. Here we describe a new human factor, CRSP, that is required together with the TAF(II)s for transcriptional activation by Sp1. Purification of CRSP identifies a complex of approximate relative molecular mass 700,000 (M(r) approximately 700K) that contains nine subunits with M(r) values ranging from 33K to 200K. Cloning of genes encoding CRSP subunits reveals that CRSP33 is a homologue of the yeast mediator subunit Med7, whereas CRSP150 contains a domain conserved in yeast mediator subunit Rgr1. CRSP p200 is identical to the nuclear hormone-receptor co-activator subunit TRIP2/PBP. CRSPs 34, 77 and 130 are new proteins, but the amino terminus of CRSP70 is homologous to elongation factor TFIIS. Immunodepletion studies confirm that these subunits have an essential cofactor function. The presence of common subunits in distinct cofactor complexes suggests a combinatorial mechanism of co-activator assembly during transcriptional activation.
Transcriptional control signals of a model eukaryotic protein-coding gene have been identified by a new procedure of in vitro mutagenesis. This method allows small clusters of nucleotide residues to be substituted in a site-directed manner without causing the addition or deletion of other sequences. Transcription assays of a systematic series of these clustered point mutants have led to the identification of three distinct control signals located within the 105-nucleotide residues immediately upstream from the point where transcription begins.
The upper temperature at which a living system can exist is limited by the hydrolytic breakdown rate of its chemical constituents. The peptide bonds of proteins, the phosphodiester and N-glycosyl bonds in RNA and DNA, and the pyrophosphate and N-glycosyl bonds in nucleotides such as ATP and NAD are among the more important bonds that will undergo hydrolysis. The decomposition of biomolecules via non-hydrolytic pathways such as decarboxylations and dehydrations may also be critical factors in determining this upper temperature limit. Baross and Deming recently reported 'black smoker' bacteria, which they isolated from deep-sea hydrothermal vents, growing at 250 degrees C. Here I have attempted to establish the rates for the hydrolysis and/or decomposition of critical biomolecules to determine their ability to exist at this temperature. My results clearly indicate that if these organisms exist, and if their metabolic reactions occur in an aqueous environment, they could not survive at this temperature if they were composed of biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids, due to the very rapid rate of decomposition of such molecules.
The chemically synthesized dodecamer d(pA-G-G-T-C-G-C-C-G-C-C-C) was annealed, and was covalently joined to lambda phage DNA with bacterio-phage T(4) ligase. The 5'-end of the dodecamer was joined to a deoxyguanosine residue. Repair with DNA polymerase I established that the position of joining was the left-hand end of lambda DNA. This is the first time that a chemically synthesized oligonucleotide has been covalently joined to a naturally occurring DNA molecule.
Clostridal neurotoxins (CNTs) are the causative agents of the neuroparalytic diseases botulism and tetanus. CNTs impair neuronal exocytosis through specific proteolysis of essential proteins called SNAREs. SNARE assembly into a low-energy ternary complex is believed to catalyse membrane fusion, precipitating neurotransmitter release; this process is attenuated in response to SNARE proteolysis. Site-specific SNARE hydrolysis is catalysed by the CNT light chains, a unique group of zinc-dependent endopeptidases. The means by which a CNT properly identifies and cleaves its target SNARE has been a subject of much speculation; it is thought to use one or more regions of enzyme-substrate interaction remote from the active site (exosites). Here we report the first structure of a CNT endopeptidase in complex with its target SNARE at a resolution of 2.1 A: botulinum neurotoxin serotype A (BoNT/A) protease bound to human SNAP-25. The structure, together with enzyme kinetic data, reveals an array of exosites that determine substrate specificity. Substrate orientation is similar to that of the general zinc-dependent metalloprotease thermolysin. We observe significant structural changes near the toxin's catalytic pocket upon substrate binding, probably serving to render the protease competent for catalysis. The novel structures of the substrate-recognition exosites could be used for designing inhibitors specific to BoNT/A.
In prokaryotes, the degree of supercoiling of DNA can profoundly influence the use of specific promoters. In eukaryotes, a variety of indirect observations suggest that DNA topology has a similar importance in proper gene expression. Much attention has therefore been focused on the cellular proteins that control DNA supercoiling, among which are the enzymes topoisomerase I and II. A hexadecameric sequence functions as a strong attraction site for topoisomerase I. Here we report that the interaction of topoisomerase I with this sequence motif is highly specific, because a single base-pair substitution prevents strand cleavage and thereby catalytic activity at the sequence. Thus, supercoiled DNA containing the recognition sequence is relaxed preferentially by topoisomerase I compared to a control, but no difference in the relaxation rate is observed for supercoiled DNA carrying the mutated sequence. The preference for the recognition sequence seems to be an intrinsic property of all eukaryotic type I topoisomerases, suggesting that the interaction might be important in a fundamental biological process.
Cell types associated with angiotensinogen mRNA in rat brain were identified in individual brain sections by in situ hybridization with tritiated RNA probes or with a sulfur-35--labeled oligonucleotide combined with immunocytochemical detection of either glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) for astrocytes or microtubule-associated protein (MAP-2) for neurons. Autoradiography revealed silver grains clustered primarily over GFAP-reactive soma and processes; most grain clusters were not associated with MAP-2--reactive cells. These results demonstrate that, in contrast to other known neuropeptide precursors, angiotensinogen is synthesized by glia.
The complete coding sequence for the constant region of the mouse gamma 2b immunoglobulin heavy chain and the 3' untranslated region has been determined. The coding portion of the sequence is 1008 nucleotides long (amino acid residues 114 to 449), and the 3' noncoding region contains 102 nucleotides preceeding the polyadenylate. An extra carboxyl-terminal lysine residue which had not been observed in the gamma 2b or other gamma subclass protein sequences occurs in the nucleotide sequence and is probably processed posttranslationally. A 17-nucleotide sequence occurs with slight variation twice in CH1 and once in CH2 domains in the same relative location but with different translational phase. This sequence may be the site of crossover in a gamma 2b . gamma 2a heavy chain variant, an indication of possible recombinational activity of some kind.
Sliding clamps are ring-shaped proteins that encircle DNA and confer high processivity on DNA polymerases. Here we report the crystal structure of the five-protein clamp loader complex (replication factor-C, RFC) of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, bound to the sliding clamp (proliferating cell nuclear antigen, PCNA). Tight interfacial coordination of the ATP analogue ATP-gammaS by RFC results in a spiral arrangement of the ATPase domains of the clamp loader above the PCNA ring. Placement of a model for primed DNA within the central hole of PCNA reveals a striking correspondence between the RFC spiral and the grooves of the DNA double helix. This model, in which the clamp loader complex locks onto primed DNA in a screw-cap-like arrangement, provides a simple explanation for the process by which the engagement of primer-template junctions by the RFC:PCNA complex results in ATP hydrolysis and release of the sliding clamp on DNA.
Lactate dehydrogenase isozyme 5 from rabbit skeletal muscle is activated by citrate, cis-aconitate, isocitrate, alpha-ketoglutarate, succinate, fumarate, malate, aspartate, and glutamate. In the presence of these activators the shape of the pyruvate saturation curve is changed from sigmoid to hyperbolic. Lactate dehydrogenase isozyme 1 from rabbit heart gives a hyperbolic pyruvate saturation curve and is not activated by these compounds. Oxalacetate is a competitive inhibitor of both isozyme 5 and isozyme 1 but at low concentration it activates the former. These results indicate that lactate dehydrogenase isozyme 5 from rabbit skeletal muscle is an allosteric protein and a regulatory enzyme, while lactate dehydrogenase isozyme 1 from rabbit heart is apparently neither.
In Trypanosomatidae the messenger RNA's (mRNA's) that code for the variant surface glycoproteins (VSG's), tubulins, calmodulin, and at least a subset of other proteins contain a common 35-nucleotide leader sequence at their 5' ends. Hybrid-arrested in vitro translation has been used to show that all mRNA's in both African and South American trypanosomes contain this 35-nucleotide sequence. Oligonucleotides complementary to this sequence blocked translation of all trypanosome mRNA's in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate system, but did not inhibit translation of mRNA's from other organisms lacking this sequence. An oligonucleotide complementary to the VSG mRNA downstream from the spliced leader sequence arrested only VSG synthesis. Thus, the 35-nucleotide leader sequence is a general feature of all trypanosome mRNA's. The high specificity of oligonucleotides complementary to the spliced leader for their target sequence suggests that analogues permeable to the cell membrane may be useful in the treatment of trypanosomal infections.
A chloroplast RNA polymerase sigma factor is encoded by a nuclear gene, sigA, in the red alga Cyanidium caldarium RK-1. The encoded protein functions as an RNA polymerase sigma factor in vitro and it is localized to the chloroplast in vivo. SigA shows high sequence similarity to the sigma factors of cyanobacteria, which is indicative of the ancestral endosymbiotic event and subsequent transfer of the sigA gene to the nuclear genome.
Homing salmon were injected intracranially with puromycin, actinomycin D, or cycloheximide. From 4 to 7 hours after such treatment these agents markedly inhibited olfactory bulbar discrimination between home water and other natural waters, including spawning sites for other groups of salmon. At longer intervals after treatment there was a partial restoration of olfactory memory-based discrimination. The dosages of the inhibitors used could be shown to have depressed incorporation of H(3)-leucine into protein by 78 percent or of H(3)-uridine into RNA by 41 percent in the salmon brains 4 hours after intracranial injection. These findings suggest that acute blockage of RNA synthesis or protein synthesis can interfere with long-term olfactory memory in anadromous salmon, at least as this function can be analyzed by electrophysiological methods. This implies that long-term olfactory memory depends upon continued metabolism of RNA and continued protein synthesis.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has a small genome and therefore relies heavily on the host cellular machinery to replicate. Identifying which host proteins and complexes come into physical contact with the viral proteins is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of how HIV rewires the host's cellular machinery during the course of infection. Here we report the use of affinity tagging and purification mass spectrometry to determine systematically the physical interactions of all 18 HIV-1 proteins and polyproteins with host proteins in two different human cell lines (HEK293 and Jurkat). Using a quantitative scoring system that we call MiST, we identified with high confidence 497 HIV-human protein-protein interactions involving 435 individual human proteins, with ~40% of the interactions being identified in both cell types. We found that the host proteins hijacked by HIV, especially those found interacting in both cell types, are highly conserved across primates. We uncovered a number of host complexes targeted by viral proteins, including the finding that HIV protease cleaves eIF3d, a subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3. This host protein is one of eleven identified in this analysis that act to inhibit HIV replication. This data set facilitates a more comprehensive and detailed understanding of how the host machinery is manipulated during the course of HIV infection.
The functional regulation of chromatin is closely related to its spatial organization within the nucleus. In yeast, perinuclear chromatin domains constitute areas of transcriptional repression. These 'silent' domains are defined by the presence of perinuclear telomere clusters. The only protein found to be involved in the peripheral localization of telomeres is Yku70/Yku80. This conserved heterodimer can bind telomeres and functions in both repair of DNA double-strand breaks and telomere maintenance. These findings, however, do not address the underlying structural basis of perinuclear silent domains. Here we show that nuclear-pore-complex extensions formed by the conserved TPR homologues Mlp1 and Mlp2 are responsible for the structural and functional organization of perinuclear chromatin. Loss of MLP2 results in a severe deficiency in the repair of double-strand breaks. Furthermore, double deletion of MLP1 and MLP2 disrupts the clustering of perinuclear telomeres and releases telomeric gene repression. These effects are probably mediated through the interaction with Yku70. Mlp2 physically tethers Yku70 to the nuclear periphery, thus forming a link between chromatin and the nuclear envelope. We show, moreover, that this structural link is docked to nuclear-pore complexes through a cleavable nucleoporin, Nup145. We propose that, through these interactions, nuclear-pore complexes organize a nuclear subdomain that is intimately involved in the regulation of chromatin metabolism.
Axonal degeneration is an active program of self-destruction that is observed in many physiological and pathological settings. In Wallerian degeneration slow (wlds) mice, Wallerian degeneration in response to axonal injury is delayed because of a mutation that results in overexpression of a chimeric protein (Wlds) composed of the ubiquitin assembly protein Ufd2a and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) biosynthetic enzyme Nmnat1. We demonstrate that increased Nmnat activity is responsible for the axon-sparing activity of the Wlds protein. Furthermore, we demonstrate that SIRT1, a mammalian ortholog of Sir2, is the downstream effector of increased Nmnat activity that leads to axonal protection. These findings suggest that novel therapeutic strategies directed at increasing the supply of NAD and/or Sir2 activation may be effective for treatment of diseases characterized by axonopathy and neurodegeneration.
Stem cells within diverse tissues share the need for a chromatin configuration that promotes self-renewal, yet few chromatin proteins are known to regulate multiple types of stem cells. We describe a Drosophila gene, scrawny (scny), encoding a ubiquitin-specific protease, which is required in germline, epithelial, and intestinal stem cells. Like its yeast relative UBP10, Scrawny deubiquitylates histone H2B and functions in gene silencing. Consistent with previous studies of this conserved pathway of chromatin regulation, scny mutant cells have elevated levels of ubiquitinylated H2B and trimethylated H3K4. Our findings suggest that inhibiting H2B ubiquitylation through scny represents a common mechanism within stem cells that is used to repress the premature expression of key differentiation genes, including Notch target genes.
The crystal structure of a 70-kilodalton ribonucleoprotein complex from the central domain of the Thermus thermophilus 30S ribosomal subunit was solved at 2.6 angstrom resolution. The complex consists of a 104-nucleotide RNA fragment composed of two three-helix junctions that lie at the end of a central helix, and the ribosomal proteins S15, S6, and S18. S15 binds the ribosomal RNA early in the assembly of the 30S ribosomal subunit, stabilizing a conformational reorganization of the two three-helix junctions that creates the RNA fold necessary for subsequent binding of S6 and S18. The structure of the complex demonstrates the central role of S15-induced reorganization of central domain RNA for the subsequent steps of ribosome assembly.
The cerebellar cortex is implicated in the learning of complex motor skills. This learning may require synaptic remodeling of Purkinje cell inputs. An extracellular serine protease, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), is involved in remodeling various nonneural tissues and is associated with developing and regenerating neurons. In situ hybridization showed that expression of tPA messenger RNA was increased in the Purkinje neurons of rats within an hour of their being trained for a complex motor task. Antibody to tPA also showed the induction of tPA protein associated with cerebellar Purkinje cells. Thus, the induction of tPA during motor learning may play a role in activity-dependent synaptic plasticity.
Direct genomic sequencing revealed that cytosine residues known to have undergone a germ-line mutation in the low density lipoprotein receptor gene or somatic mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene were methylated in all normal human tissues analyzed. Thus, these mutations should be scored as transitions from 5-methylcytosine to thymine rather than from cytosine to thymine. Methylated cytosines occur exclusively at CpG dinucleotides, which, although markedly underrepresented in human DNA, are sites for more than 30 percent of all known disease-related point mutations. Thus, 5-methylcytosine functions as an endogenous mutagen and carcinogen in humans, in that methylation seems to increase the potential for mutation at cytosine residues at least by a factor of 10.
(Na+ + K+)ATPase contains two different subunits, a catalytic subunit (alpha) and a subunit with uncertain function (beta). The enzyme binds ATP, ouabain and vanadate, and can be phosphorylated by ATP as well as by inorganic phosphate. From the previously reported maximal binding and phosphorylation capacities of 3.5--4.3 nmol P per mg protein (based on Lowry protein determination) and the earlier molecular weight value of approximately 250,000, a molar binding and phosphorylation capacity of 0.87--1.07 mol per mol enzyme was derived. As it is generally agreed that the enzyme molecule contains two alpha subunits or even a multiple of two, it has been suggested that the enzyme operates by means of a so-called "half-of-the-sites mechanism" whereby only of the two alpha subunits can be phosphorylated at any one time. We now present evidence that every alpha subunit can be phosphorylated simultaneously, which rules out the operation of such a mechanism.
Clostridiopeptidase B, a sulfhydryl protease from Clostridium histolyticum, hydrolyzes the arginylproline bond in the synthetic polypeptide methionyllysyl-bradykinin. Hydrolysis also occurs at a reduced rate at the lysylarginine bond, further delineating the environment necessary for the minor proteolysis seen with this enzyme at lysine residues. The specificity of clostridiopeptidase B differs from trypsin, which hydrolyzes this synthetic polypeptide only at the lysylarginine bond.
The plant signalling molecule auxin provides positional information in a variety of developmental processes by means of its differential distribution (gradients) within plant tissues. Thus, cellular auxin levels often determine the developmental output of auxin signalling. Conceptually, transmembrane transport and metabolic processes regulate the steady-state levels of auxin in any given cell. In particular, PIN auxin-efflux-carrier-mediated, directional transport between cells is crucial for generating auxin gradients. Here we show that Arabidopsis thaliana PIN5, an atypical member of the PIN gene family, encodes a functional auxin transporter that is required for auxin-mediated development. PIN5 does not have a direct role in cell-to-cell transport but regulates intracellular auxin homeostasis and metabolism. PIN5 localizes, unlike other characterized plasma membrane PIN proteins, to endoplasmic reticulum (ER), presumably mediating auxin flow from the cytosol to the lumen of the ER. The ER localization of other PIN5-like transporters (including the moss PIN) indicates that the diversification of PIN protein functions in mediating auxin homeostasis at the ER, and cell-to-cell auxin transport at the plasma membrane, represent an ancient event during the evolution of land plants.
Photosynthetic plants are the principal solar energy converter sustaining life on Earth. Despite its fundamental importance, little is known about how plants sense and adapt to darkness in the daily light-dark cycle, or how they adapt to unpredictable environmental stresses that compromise photosynthesis and respiration and deplete energy supplies. Current models emphasize diverse stress perception and signalling mechanisms. Using a combination of cellular and systems screens, we show here that the evolutionarily conserved Arabidopsis thaliana protein kinases, KIN10 and KIN11 (also known as AKIN10/At3g01090 and AKIN11/At3g29160, respectively), control convergent reprogramming of transcription in response to seemingly unrelated darkness, sugar and stress conditions. Sensing and signalling deprivation of sugar and energy, KIN10 targets a remarkably broad array of genes that orchestrate transcription networks, promote catabolism and suppress anabolism. Specific bZIP transcription factors partially mediate primary KIN10 signalling. Transgenic KIN10 overexpression confers enhanced starvation tolerance and lifespan extension, and alters architecture and developmental transitions. Significantly, double kin10 kin11 deficiency abrogates the transcriptional switch in darkness and stress signalling, and impairs starch mobilization at night and growth. These studies uncover surprisingly pivotal roles of KIN10/11 in linking stress, sugar and developmental signals to globally regulate plant metabolism, energy balance, growth and survival. In contrast to the prevailing view that sucrose activates plant SnRK1s (Snf1-related protein kinases), our functional analyses of Arabidopsis KIN10/11 provide compelling evidence that SnRK1s are inactivated by sugars and share central roles with the orthologous yeast Snf1 and mammalian AMPK in energy signalling.
The TATA-box-binding protein TBP exists in the cell complexed with different sets of TBP-associated factors (TAFs). In general, each of these TBP-TAF complexes is dedicated to transcription by a single RNA polymerase. Thus, SL1, TFIID and TFIIIB are required for transcription by polymerases I, II and III, respectively. Here we characterize a fourth TBP-TAF complex called SNAPc. Unlike the other TBP-TAF complexes, SNAPc is implicated in transcription by two types of polymerases; it is required for transcription of both the RNA polymerase II and III small-nuclear RNA genes and binds specifically to the proximal sequence element PSE, a non-TATA-box basal promoter element common to these two types of genes. In addition to TBP, SNAPc is composed of at least three TAFs, SNAP43, SNAP45 and SNAP50. The predicted amino-acid sequence of SNAP43 reveals that it corresponds to a new protein.
Little is known about metabolic regulation in stem cells and how this modulates tissue regeneration or tumour suppression. We studied the Lkb1 tumour suppressor and its substrate AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), kinases that coordinate metabolism with cell growth. Deletion of the Lkb1 (also called Stk11) gene in mice caused increased haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) division, rapid HSC depletion and pancytopenia. HSCs depended more acutely on Lkb1 for cell-cycle regulation and survival than many other haematopoietic cells. HSC depletion did not depend on mTOR activation or oxidative stress. Lkb1-deficient HSCs, but not myeloid progenitors, had reduced mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP levels. HSCs deficient for two catalytic a-subunits of AMPK (AMPK-deficient HSCs) showed similar changes in mitochondrial function but remained able to reconstitute irradiated mice. Lkb1-deficient HSCs, but not AMPK-deficient HSCs, exhibited defects in centrosomes and mitotic spindles in culture, and became aneuploid. Lkb1 is therefore required for HSC maintenance through AMPK-dependent and AMPK-independent mechanisms, revealing differences in metabolic and cell-cycle regulation between HSCs and some other haematopoietic progenitors.
The ability of insulin to promote the phosphorylation of some proteins and the dephosphorylation of others is paradoxical. An insulin-stimulated protein kinase is shown to activate the type-1 protein phosphatase that controls glycogen metabolism, by phosphorylating its regulatory subunit at a specific serine. Furthermore, the phosphorylation of this residue is stimulated by insulin in vivo. Increased and decreased phosphorylation of proteins by insulin can therefore be explained through the same basic underlying mechanism.
The reverse transcriptase of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) catalyses a series of reactions to convert the single-stranded RNA genome of HIV into double-stranded DNA for host-cell integration. This task requires the reverse transcriptase to discriminate a variety of nucleic-acid substrates such that active sites of the enzyme are correctly positioned to support one of three catalytic functions: RNA-directed DNA synthesis, DNA-directed DNA synthesis and DNA-directed RNA hydrolysis. However, the mechanism by which substrates regulate reverse transcriptase activities remains unclear. Here we report distinct orientational dynamics of reverse transcriptase observed on different substrates with a single-molecule assay. The enzyme adopted opposite binding orientations on duplexes containing DNA or RNA primers, directing its DNA synthesis or RNA hydrolysis activity, respectively. On duplexes containing the unique polypurine RNA primers for plus-strand DNA synthesis, the enzyme can rapidly switch between the two orientations. The switching kinetics were regulated by cognate nucleotides and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, a major class of anti-HIV drugs. These results indicate that the activities of reverse transcriptase are determined by its binding orientation on substrates.
Cytokine and proto-oncogene messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are rapidly degraded through AU-rich elements in the 3' untranslated region. Rapid decay involves AU-rich binding protein AUF1, which complexes with heat shock proteins hsc70-hsp70, translation initiation factor eIF4G, and poly(A) binding protein. AU-rich mRNA decay is associated with displacement of eIF4G from AUF1, ubiquitination of AUF1, and degradation of AUF1 by proteasomes. Induction of hsp70 by heat shock, down-regulation of the ubiquitin-proteasome network, or inactivation of ubiquitinating enzyme E1 all result in hsp70 sequestration of AUF1 in the perinucleus-nucleus, and all three processes block decay of AU-rich mRNAs and AUF1 protein. These results link the rapid degradation of cytokine mRNAs to the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.
The parasite Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for hundreds of millions of cases of malaria, and kills more than one million African children annually. Here we report an analysis of the genome sequence of P. falciparum clone 3D7. The 23-megabase nuclear genome consists of 14 chromosomes, encodes about 5,300 genes, and is the most (A + T)-rich genome sequenced to date. Genes involved in antigenic variation are concentrated in the subtelomeric regions of the chromosomes. Compared to the genomes of free-living eukaryotic microbes, the genome of this intracellular parasite encodes fewer enzymes and transporters, but a large proportion of genes are devoted to immune evasion and host-parasite interactions. Many nuclear-encoded proteins are targeted to the apicoplast, an organelle involved in fatty-acid and isoprenoid metabolism. The genome sequence provides the foundation for future studies of this organism, and is being exploited in the search for new drugs and vaccines to fight malaria.
Antibodies are considered to play a specific pathogenic role in certain disease states such as myasthenia gravis, Graves' disease and autoimmune haemolytic anaemia. Autoantibodies which interfere with the function of enzyme cascade systems have also been described in diseases such as acquired haemophilia (anti-factor VIII antibodies) and glomerulonephritis (C3 nephritic factor). The identification of these autoantibodies is crucial to an understanding of the aetiology of such diseases and is also of importance in revealing the inter-relationships of the immune system with other biological pathways. This is the first report of an immunoglobulin G (IgG) autoantibody reactive with C1-inhibitor (C1-Inh), a pivotal inhibitor of the inflammatory response which is known to inactivate proteins of the complement, kinin, fibrinolytic and 'contact phase' systems. This autoantibody was isolated from a patient with a novel variant of acquired angioedema and C1-Inh dysfunction. This finding highlights the involvement of the immune system in the pathogenesis of disorders characterized by the presence of dysfunctional inflammatory response proteins.
Experiments are presented that confirm earlier predictions that the mode of supply of reactants to a nonlinear (bio)chemical reaction determines or controls concentrations at steady states far from equilibrium. The oxidation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) catalyzed by the enzyme horseradish peroxidase with continuous input of oxygen was studied; NAD+ is continuously recycled to NADH through a glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase system. A comparison of steady-state concentrations is made with an oscillatory oxygen input and a constant input at the same average oxygen input for both modes. By varying the frequency and amplitude of the perturbation (O2 influx), the following may be changed: the average concentration of NADH; the Gibbs free energy difference delta G of the reactants and products at steady state; the average rate of the reaction; the phase relation between the oscillatory rate and delta G; and the dissipation. These results confirm the possibility of an "alternating current chemistry," of control and optimization of thermodynamic efficiency and dissipation by means of external variation of constraints in classes of nonlinear reactions and biological pumps, and of improvements of the yield in such reactions (heterogeneous catalysis, for example).
Inositol pyrophosphates are a diverse group of high-energy signaling molecules whose cellular roles remain an active area of study. We report a previously uncharacterized class of inositol pyrophosphate synthase and find it is identical to yeast Vip1 and Asp1 proteins, regulators of actin-related protein-2/3 (ARP 2/3) complexes. Vip1 and Asp1 acted as enzymes that encode inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6) and inositol heptakisphosphate (IP7) kinase activities. Alterations in kinase activity led to defects in cell growth, morphology, and interactions with ARP complex members. The functionality of Asp1 and Vip1 may provide cells with increased signaling capacity through metabolism of IP6.
Archaeoglobus fulgidus is the first sulphur-metabolizing organism to have its genome sequence determined. Its genome of 2,178,400 base pairs contains 2,436 open reading frames (ORFs). The information processing systems and the biosynthetic pathways for essential components (nucleotides, amino acids and cofactors) have extensive correlation with their counterparts in the archaeon Methanococcus jannaschii. The genomes of these two Archaea indicate dramatic differences in the way these organisms sense their environment, perform regulatory and transport functions, and gain energy. In contrast to M. jannaschii, A. fulgidus has fewer restriction-modification systems, and none of its genes appears to contain inteins. A quarter (651 ORFs) of the A. fulgidus genome encodes functionally uncharacterized yet conserved proteins, two-thirds of which are shared with M. jannaschii (428 ORFs). Another quarter of the genome encodes new proteins indicating substantial archaeal gene diversity.
There has recently been rapid progress in understanding receptors that generate intracellular signals from inositol lipids. One of these lipids, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, is hydrolysed to diacylglycerol and inositol trisphosphate as part of a signal transduction mechanism for controlling a variety of cellular processes including secretion, metabolism, phototransduction and cell proliferation. Diacylglycerol operates within the plane of the membrane to activate protein kinase C, whereas inositol trisphosphate is released into the cytoplasm to function as a second messenger for mobilizing intracellular calcium.
Intact digestive enzymes can be absorbed by the intestine and resecreted by the pancreas. The pancreas, therefore, appears to be able to recycle proteins much as the liver recycles bile salts, although the magnitude of this process remains uncertain.
Signaling by guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) involves sequential protein-protein interactions. G protein-betagamma subunit (Gbetagamma) interactions with phospholipase C-beta2 (PLC-beta2) were studied to determine if all Gbeta contacts are required for signaling. A peptide encoding Gbeta amino acid residues 86 to 105 stimulated PLC-beta2. Six residues (96 to 101) within this sequence could transfer signals and thus constitute a core signal transfer region. Another peptide, encoding Gbeta amino acid residues 115 to 135, did not substantially stimulate PLC-beta2 by itself but inhibited Gbetagamma stimulation, indicating that residues 115 to 135 constitute a general binding domain. Resolution of signal transfer regions from general binding domains indicates that all protein-protein contacts are not required for signal transfer and that it may be feasible to synthesize agonists and antagonists that regulate intracellular signal flow.
In plants, the growth regulator indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) is found both free and conjugated to a variety of amino acids, peptides, and carbohydrates. IAA conjugated to leucine has effects in Arabidopsis thaliana similar to those of free IAA. The ilr1 mutant is insensitive to exogenous IAA-Leu and was used to positionally clone the Arabidopsis ILR1 gene. ILR1 encodes a 48-kilodalton protein that cleaves IAA-amino acid conjugates in vitro and is homologous to bacterial amidohydrolase enzymes. DNA sequences similar to that of ILR1 are found in other plant species.
Here we present a draft genome sequence of the common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes). Through comparison with the human genome, we have generated a largely complete catalogue of the genetic differences that have accumulated since the human and chimpanzee species diverged from our common ancestor, constituting approximately thirty-five million single-nucleotide changes, five million insertion/deletion events, and various chromosomal rearrangements. We use this catalogue to explore the magnitude and regional variation of mutational forces shaping these two genomes, and the strength of positive and negative selection acting on their genes. In particular, we find that the patterns of evolution in human and chimpanzee protein-coding genes are highly correlated and dominated by the fixation of neutral and slightly deleterious alleles. We also use the chimpanzee genome as an outgroup to investigate human population genetics and identify signatures of selective sweeps in recent human evolution.
Periodic changes in membrane ionic current linked to intrinsic oscillations of energy metabolism were identified in guinea pig cardiomyocytes. Metabolic stress initiated cyclical activation of adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium current and concomitant suppression of depolarization-evoked intracellular calcium transients. The oscillations in membrane current and excitation-contraction coupling were linked to oscillations in the oxidation state of pyridine nucleotides but were not driven by pacemaker currents or alterations in the concentration of cytosolic calcium. Interventions that altered the rate of glucose metabolism modulated the oscillations, suggesting that the rhythms originated at the level of glycolysis. The energy-driven oscillations in potassium currents produced cyclical changes in the cardiac action potential and thus may contribute to the genesis of arrhythmias during metabolic compromise.
Mutations in the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway can cause the xeroderma pigmentosum skin cancer predisposition syndrome. NER lesions are limited to one DNA strand, but otherwise they are chemically and structurally diverse, being caused by a wide variety of genotoxic chemicals and ultraviolet radiation. The xeroderma pigmentosum C (XPC) protein has a central role in initiating global-genome NER by recognizing the lesion and recruiting downstream factors. Here we present the crystal structure of the yeast XPC orthologue Rad4 bound to DNA containing a cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD) lesion. The structure shows that Rad4 inserts a beta-hairpin through the DNA duplex, causing the two damaged base pairs to flip out of the double helix. The expelled nucleotides of the undamaged strand are recognized by Rad4, whereas the two CPD-linked nucleotides become disordered. These findings indicate that the lesions recognized by Rad4/XPC thermodynamically destabilize the Watson-Crick double helix in a manner that facilitates the flipping-out of two base pairs.
Coated vesicles, which are membrane vesicles enclosed by a polyhedral protein lattice, are involved in many cellular events, including intracellular membrane transport and protein secretion, in which they must be able to undergo repeated membrane fusion and fission. The icosahedral lattice of protein surrounding the core of coated vesicles is composed predominantly of clathrin, a 180,000 (180 K) molecular weight protein, and other 30K and 36K polypeptides. In native conditions, the basic subunit of the coat consists of a trimer of clathrin with probably three polypeptides of 30K and/or 36K (refs 9-11). Additional minor proteins of 100K and 55K have been reported in purified coated vesicles. We describe here the presence of cyclic nucleotide- and Ca2+-independent protein kinase activity in coated vesicles. This protein kinase phosphorylates specifically a unique 50K protein which can be co-purified with clathrin and seems to be an integral protein of coated vesicles.
When a membrane-bound receptor acts on a G protein, the GTP-binding or G alpha subunit dissociates from the G beta gamma dimer. Until recently, the G alpha subunit alone was thought to act on the enzymes and ion channels controlled by these proteins. Newer evidence indicates that the G beta gamma dimer also plays a major part in signal transmission, enhancing the complexity of the possible interactions between the G proteins and their targets.
LIV-I, a high-affinity system that transports neutral, branched-chain amino acids into Escherichia coli, has two components, LivG and LivF, that are homologous to the cystic fibrosis (CF) transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). CF-associated mutations of human CFTR were introduced into corresponding regions of LivG, and their effects on leucine transport could be grouped into three classes. Mutations were found that (i) abolished LIV-I--directed transport, (ii) retained about a quarter of wild-type activity at the Michaelis-Menten constant (KM), and (iii) had minimal activity at the KM. A mutation equivalent to a benign polymorphism had no effect on transport. The correlation of these mutational phenotypes in LivG and CFTR suggests that the LIV-I prokaryotic transporter is functionally similar to the CF protein and that this similarity can be exploited to clarify the properties of the nucleotide-binding fold in this superfamily of proteins.
PDZ domains (also known as DHR domains or GLGF repeats) are approximately 90-residue repeats found in a number of proteins implicated in ion-channel and receptor clustering, and the linking of receptors to effector enzymes. PDZ domains are protein-recognition modules; some recognize proteins containing the consensus carboxy-terminal tripeptide motif S/TXV with high specificity. Other PDZ domains form homotypic dimers: the PDZ domain of the neuronal enzyme nitric oxide synthase binds to the PDZ domain of PSD-95, an interaction that has been implicated in its synaptic association. Here we report the crystal structure of the third PDZ domain of the human homologue of the Drosophila discs-large tumour-suppressor gene product, DlgA. It consists of a five-stranded antiparallel beta-barrel flanked by three alpha-helices. A groove runs over the surface of the domain, ending in a conserved hydrophobic pocket and a buried arginine; we suggest that this is the binding site for the C-terminal peptide.
Arginine methylation occurs on a number of proteins involved in a variety of cellular functions. Histone tails are known to be mono- and dimethylated on multiple arginine residues where they influence chromatin remodeling and gene expression. To date, no enzyme has been shown to reverse these regulatory modifications. We demonstrate that the Jumonji domain-containing 6 protein (JMJD6) is a JmjC-containing iron- and 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase that demethylates histone H3 at arginine 2 (H3R2) and histone H4 at arginine 3 (H4R3) in both biochemical and cell-based assays. These findings may help explain the many developmental defects observed in the JMJD6(-/-) knockout mice.
In anaerobic organisms, the decarboxylation of pyruvate, a crucial component of intermediary metabolism, is catalyzed by the metalloenzyme pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR) resulting in the generation of low potential electrons and the subsequent acetylation of coenzyme A (CoA). PFOR is the only enzyme for which a stable acetyl thiamine diphosphate (ThDP)-based free radical reaction intermediate has been identified. The 1.87 A-resolution structure of the radical form of PFOR from Desulfovibrio africanus shows that, despite currently accepted ideas, the thiazole ring of the ThDP cofactor is markedly bent, indicating a drastic reduction of its aromaticity. In addition, the bond connecting the acetyl group to ThDP is unusually long, probably of the one-electron type already described for several cation radicals but not yet found in a biological system. Taken together, our data, along with evidence from the literature, suggest that acetyl-CoA synthesis by PFOR proceeds via a condensation mechanism involving acetyl (PFOR-based) and thiyl (CoA-based) radicals.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is the most potent mitogen for mature parenchymal hepatocytes in primary culture, and seems to be a hepatotrophic factor that acts as a trigger for liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy and liver injury. The partial purification and characterization of HGF have been reported. We have demonstrated that pure HGF from rat platelets is a new growth factor effective at concentrations as low as 1 ng ml-1. The effects of HGF and epidermal growth factor (EGF) are additive. The activity of HGF is not species-specific, although it does not stimulate growth in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts. HGF has a relative molecular mass (Mr) of 82,000 and is a heterodimer composed of a large alpha-subunit of Mr 69,000 and a small beta-subunit of Mr 34,000. Here we report the amino-acid sequence of human HGF determined by complementary DNA cloning and the expression of biologically active human HGF from COS-1 cells transfected with cloned cDNA. The nucleotide sequence of the human HGF cDNA reveals that both alpha- and beta-chains are contained in a single open reading frame coding for a pre-pro precursor protein of 728 amino acids.
In eukaryotes, protein function can be modulated by ligation to ubiquitin or to ubiquitin-like proteins (Ubl proteins). The vertebrate Ubl protein SUMO-1 is only 18% identical to ubiquitin but is 48% identical to the yeast protein Smt3. Both SUMO-1 and Smt3 are ligated to cellular proteins, and protein conjugation to SUMO-1/Smt3 is involved in many physiological processes. It remained unknown, however, whether deconjugation of SUMO-1/Smt3 from proteins is also essential. Here we describe a yeast Ubl-specific protease, Ulp1, which cleaves proteins from Smt3 and SUMO-1 but not from ubiquitin. Ulp1 is unrelated to any known deubiquitinating enzyme but shows distant similarity to certain viral proteases, indicating the existence of a widely conserved protease fold. Proteins related to Ulp1 are present in many organisms, including several human pathogens. The pattern of Smt3-coupled proteins in yeast changes markedly throughout the cell cycle, and specific conjugates accumulate in ulp1 mutants. Ulp1 has several functions, including an essential role in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle.
Retinoids (vitamin A and its metabolites) are suspected of regulating diverse aspects of growth, differentiation, and patterning during embryogenesis, but many questions remain about the identities and functions of the endogenous active retinoids involved. The pleiotropic effects of retinoids may be explained by the existence of complex signal transduction pathways involving diverse nuclear receptors of the retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) families, and at least two types of cellular retinoic acid binding proteins (CRABP-I and -II). The different RARs, RXRs, and CRABPs have different expression patterns during vertebrate embryogenesis, suggesting that they each have particular functions. Another level at which fine tuning of retinoid action could occur is the metabolism of vitamin A to active metabolites, which may include all-trans-retinoic acid, all-trans-3,4-didehydroretinoic acid, 9-cis-retinoic acid, and 14-hydroxy-4,14-retroretinol. Formation of the metabolite all-trans-4-oxo-retinoic acid from retinoic acid was considered to be an inactivation pathway during growth and differentiation. We report here that, in contrast, 4-oxo-retinoic acid is a highly active metabolite which can modulate positional specification in early embryos. We also show that this retinoid binds avidly to and activates RAR beta, and that it is available in early embryos. The different activities of 4-oxo-retinoic acid and retinoic acid in modulating positional specification on the one hand, and growth and differentiation on the other, interest us in the possibility that specific retinoid ligands regulate different physiological processes in vivo.
The Golgi apparatus in animal cells comprises a reticulum of linked stacks in the pericentriolar and often in the juxtanuclear regions of the cell. The unique architecture of this organelle is thought to depend on the cytoskeleton and cytoplasmic matrix proteins--the best characterized being the golgin family of fibrous, coiled-coil proteins and the GRASP family of stacking proteins. Here we show that these matrix proteins can be separated from oligosaccharide-modifying enzymes in the Golgi stack without affecting their ability to form a ribbon-like reticulum in the correct location near to the nucleus. Our data suggest that the Golgi is a structural scaffold that can exist independently of, but is normally populated by, the enzyme-containing membranes that modify transiting cargo. This new concept of the Golgi further indicates that the Golgi may be an autonomous organelle rather than one that is in simple dynamic equilibrium with the endoplasmic reticulum.
The degradation of cytosolic proteins is carried out predominantly by the proteasome, which generates peptides of 7-9 amino acids long. These products need further processing. Recently, a proteolytic system was identified in the model organism Thermoplasma acidophilum that performs this processing. The hexameric core protein of this modular system, referred to as tricorn protease, is a 720K protease that is able to assemble further into a giant icosahedral capsid, as determined by electron microscopy. Here, we present the crystal structure of the tricorn protease at 2.0 A resolution. The structure reveals a complex mosaic protein whereby five domains combine to form one of six subunits, which further assemble to form the 3-2-symmetric core protein. The structure shows how the individual domains coordinate the specific steps of substrate processing, including channelling of the substrate to, and the product from, the catalytic site. Moreover, the structure shows how accessory protein components might contribute to an even more complex protein machinery that efficiently collects the tricorn-released products.
Olfactory transduction is thought to be mediated by a membrane-bound receptor protein initiating a multistep reaction cascade which ultimately leads to a depolarizing generator current. There is considerable evidence for the involvement of adenylate cyclase in vertebrate olfactory transduction, and some data indicate that phospholipase C may have a central role in insect olfaction. However, one must show that odorants not only stimulate enzyme activity but also induce changes in concentrations of relevant second messengers. One important criterion for a candidate second messenger of chemo-electrical transduction is that its formation must precede the onset of the odorant-induced membrane permeability changes which proceed on a subsecond time-scale. Here we report an odorant-induced, transient accumulation of cyclic AMP in isolated olfactory cilia from rats, and the generation of inositol trisphosphate in antennal preparations from insects, both of which show subsecond time courses that are sufficiently rapid to mediate the odorant-regulated permeability of olfactory receptor cells.
COP9 signalosome (CSN) cleaves the ubiquitin-like protein Nedd8 from the Cul1 subunit of SCF ubiquitin ligases. The Jab1/MPN domain metalloenzyme (JAMM) motif in the Jab1/Csn5 subunit was found to underlie CSN's Nedd8 isopeptidase activity. JAMM is found in proteins from archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes, including the Rpn11 subunit of the 26S proteasome. Metal chelators and point mutations within JAMM abolished CSN-dependent cleavage of Nedd8 from Cul1, yet had little effect on CSN complex assembly. Optimal SCF activity in yeast and both viability and proper photoreceptor cell (R cell) development in Drosophila melanogaster required an intact Csn5 JAMM domain. We propose that JAMM isopeptidases play important roles in a variety of physiological pathways.
A 47-kilodalton neutrophil cytosol factor (NCF-47k), required for activation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase superoxide (O2-.) production, is absent in most patients with autosomal recessive chronic granulomatous disease (AR-CGD). NCF-47k cDNAs were cloned from an expression library. The largest clone predicted a 41.9-kD protein that contained an arginine and serine-rich COOH-terminal domain with potential protein kinase C phosphorylation sites. A 33-amino acid segment of NCF-47k shared 49% identity with ras p21 guanosine triphosphatase activating protein. Recombinant NCF-47k restored O2-. -producing activity to AR-CGD neutrophil cytosol in a cell-free assay. Production of active recombinant NCF-47k will enable functional regions of this molecule to be mapped.
Small differences in the levels of an extracellular signaling molecule can specify cell fate during development. Threshold responses are often determined at the level of transcription. Cell-specific and spatially localized patterns of gene expression depend on combinations of sequence-specific activators and repressors that bind to extensive cis-regulatory regions. Different mechanisms for integrating this complex regulatory information are discussed, particularly the role of coregulatory proteins, which are recruited to the DNA template by sequence-specific transcription factors. Recent studies suggest that a growing set of coactivators and corepressors mediate communication between diverse upstream regulatory proteins and the core RNA polymerase II transcription complex.
The dissociation constants and standard free energies of complex formation determined with staphylococcal nuclease and a series of 5'-phosphoryloligothymidyl derivatives of increasing chain length suggest that maximum stability is reached with an oligonucleotide containing three nucleotide units. A proposed model of the active site that contains other knowledge of the specificity and the catalytic mechanism of this enzyme postulates the existence of three nonequivalent phosphate binding subsites and a closely related phosphodiester hydrolytic subsite.
In eukaryotic cells directional sensing is mediated by heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-linked signaling pathways. In Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae and mammalian leukocytes, the receptors and G-protein subunits are uniformly distributed around the cell perimeter. Chemoattractants induce the transient appearance of binding sites for several pleckstrin homology domain-containing proteins on the inner face of the membrane. In gradients of attractant these sites are persistently present on the side of the cell facing the higher concentration, even in the absence of a functional actin cytoskeleton or cell movement. Thus, the cell senses direction by spatially regulating the activity of the signal transduction pathway.
The SecA adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) mediates extrusion of the amino termini of secreted proteins from the eubacterial cytosol based on cycles of reversible binding to the SecYEG translocon. We have determined the crystal structure of SecA with and without magnesium-adenosine diphosphate bound to the high-affinity ATPase site at 3.0 and 2.7 angstrom resolution, respectively. Candidate sites for preprotein binding are located on a surface containing the SecA epitopes exposed to the periplasm upon binding to SecYEG and are thus positioned to deliver preprotein to SecYEG. Comparisons with structurally related ATPases, including superfamily I and II ATP-dependent helicases, suggest that the interaction geometry of the tandem motor domains in SecA is modulated by nucleotide binding, which is shown by fluorescence anisotropy experiments to reverse an endothermic domain-dissociation reaction hypothesized to gate binding to SecYEG.
Phosphorylation of the neurofilament proteins of high and medium relative molecular mass, as well as of the Alzheimer's tau protein, is thought to be catalysed by a protein kinase with Cdc2-like substrate specificity. We have purified a novel Cdc2-like kinase from bovine brain capable of phosphorylating both the neurofilament proteins and tau. The purified enzyme is a heterodimer of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) and a novel regulatory subunit, p25 (ref. 8). When overexpressed and purified from Escherichia coli, p25 can activate Cdk5 in vitro. Unlike Cdk5, which is ubiquitously expressed in human tissue, the p25 transcript is expressed only in brain. A full-length complementary DNA clone showed that p25 is a truncated form of a larger protein precursor, p35, which seems to be the predominant form of the protein in crude brain extract. Cdk5/p35 is the first example of a Cdc2-like kinase with neuronal function.
The anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) with sulphate, an area currently generating great interest in microbiology, is accomplished by consortia of methanotrophic archaea (ANME) and sulphate-reducing bacteria. The enzyme activating methane in methanotrophic archaea has tentatively been identified as a homologue of methyl-coenzyme M reductase (MCR) that catalyses the methane-forming step in methanogenic archaea. Here we report an X-ray structure of the 280 kDa heterohexameric ANME-1 MCR complex. It was crystallized uniquely from a protein ensemble purified from consortia of microorganisms collected with a submersible from a Black Sea mat catalysing AOM with sulphate. Crystals grown from the heterogeneous sample diffract to 2.1 A resolution and consist of a single ANME-1 MCR population, demonstrating the strong selective power of crystallization. The structure revealed ANME-1 MCR in complex with coenzyme M and coenzyme B, indicating the same substrates for MCR from methanotrophic and methanogenic archaea. Differences between the highly similar structures of ANME-1 MCR and methanogenic MCR include a F(430) modification, a cysteine-rich patch and an altered post-translational amino acid modification pattern, which may tune the enzymes for their functions in different biological contexts.
The Son of Sevenless (Sos) proteins control receptor-mediated activation of Ras by catalyzing the exchange of guanosine diphosphate for guanosine triphosphate on Ras. The NH2-terminal region of Sos contains a Dbl homology (DH) domain in tandem with a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain. In COS-1 cells, the DH domain of Sos stimulated guanine nucleotide exchange on Rac but not Cdc42 in vitro and in vivo. The tandem DH-PH domain of Sos (DH-PH-Sos) was defective in Rac activation but regained Rac stimulating activity when it was coexpressed with activated Ras. Ras-mediated activation of DH-PH-Sos did not require activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase but it was dependent on activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase. These results reveal a potential mechanism for coupling of Ras and Rac signaling pathways.
Many neoplasms seem to be heterogeneous in nature, producing metastases by pre-existing variant cells with inherent biochemical and biological properties. The survival and proliferation of metastatic cells depend on various biological properties, such as enzymes which degrade  basement membranes, resistance to various host defence systems, association with host cellular components, adhesiveness and expression of certain membrane glycoproteins. Recent studies have indicated that metastatic cells may differ from the local tumour cells in the expression of immune recognizable membrane-associated antigens. Such antigenic differences may result from an immunoselection of cells with distinct antigenic properties due to a specific immune response evoked against the local tumour. In view of the role of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) system in controlling and restricting the function of immune effector cells against modified self-components, one could assume that the modulation of the expression of MHC-encoded antigens on the membrane of tumour cells influenced the interclonal relationship within a local heterogeneous tumour cell population and the subsequent generation of metastasis. The modulation of the expression of H-2 antigens on several murine tumours is well documented; however, practically no attempts were made to relate H-2 modulation with invasiveness. We now describe principal differences in the expression of H-2 parental haplotypes between a local F1 methylcholanthrene-induced tumour and its descendant pulmonary metastases. These results suggest that both the expression and the immunogenicity of MHC products strongly influence the immune relationship between the tumour and the host's immune system, thus determining the generation and dissemination of metastases.
Proliferating cells, including cancer cells, require altered metabolism to efficiently incorporate nutrients such as glucose into biomass. The M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase (PKM2) promotes the metabolism of glucose by aerobic glycolysis and contributes to anabolic metabolism. Paradoxically, decreased pyruvate kinase enzyme activity accompanies the expression of PKM2 in rapidly dividing cancer cells and tissues. We demonstrate that phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), the substrate for pyruvate kinase in cells, can act as a phosphate donor in mammalian cells because PEP participates in the phosphorylation of the glycolytic enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase (PGAM1) in PKM2-expressing cells. We used mass spectrometry to show that the phosphate from PEP is transferred to the catalytic histidine (His11) on human PGAM1. This reaction occurred at physiological concentrations of PEP and produced pyruvate in the absence of PKM2 activity. The presence of histidine-phosphorylated PGAM1 correlated with the expression of PKM2 in cancer cell lines and tumor tissues. Thus, decreased pyruvate kinase activity in PKM2-expressing cells allows PEP-dependent histidine phosphorylation of PGAM1 and may provide an alternate glycolytic pathway that decouples adenosine triphosphate production from PEP-mediated phosphotransfer, allowing for the high rate of glycolysis to support the anabolic metabolism observed in many proliferating cells.
Many bacterial cells contain proteinaceous microcompartments that act as simple organelles by sequestering specific metabolic processes involving volatile or toxic metabolites. Here we report the three-dimensional (3D) crystal structures, with resolutions between 1.65 and 2.5 angstroms, of the four homologous proteins (EutS, EutL, EutK, and EutM) that are thought to be the major shell constituents of a functionally complex ethanolamine utilization (Eut) microcompartment. The Eut microcompartment is used to sequester the metabolism of ethanolamine in bacteria such as Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica. The four Eut shell proteins share an overall similar 3D fold, but they have distinguishing structural features that help explain the specific roles they play in the microcompartment. For example, EutL undergoes a conformational change that is probably involved in gating molecular transport through shell protein pores, whereas structural evidence suggests that EutK might bind a nucleic acid component. Together these structures give mechanistic insight into bacterial microcompartments.
The diapause factor which is responsible for the induction of embryonic diapause in the silkworm (Bombyx mori L.) was isolated from the heads of female moths. It was extracted with 80 percent ethanol or 80 percent methanol and was heat-stable and not dialyzable. Since the active material was precipitated with ammonium sulfate and lost when incubated with proteolytic enzymes, it is highly probable that the diapause factor is a protein or a complex molecule containing peptide bonds. Molecular sieve techniques revealed two species of the diapause factor. The molecular weight of the smaller species lies between 5,000 and 10,000.
The linear amplification of chemically sequenced DNA with DNA polymerase from Thermus aquaticus permits the direct detection of DNA methylation and protein-DNA interaction sites in vivo.
Very few of the enzymes required for eukaryotic precursor ribosomal RNA (pre-rRNA) processing have been identified. Ribonuclease (RNase) MRP was characterized as a nuclease that cleaves mitochondrial replication primers, but it is predominantly nucleolar. Previous genetic evidence revealed that this ribonucleoprotein is required, directly or indirectly, for cleavage of the yeast pre-rRNA in vivo at site A3. Here, an in vitro processing system that accurately reproduces this cleavage is described. Biochemical purification and the use of extracts depleted of the MRP RNA demonstrate that endonucleolytic cleavage of the pre-rRNA is directly mediated by RNase MRP. This establishes a role for RNase MRP in the nucleolus.
The A, B and C lamins are the major proteins of the nuclear envelope. The complete nucleotide sequence of the coding region of the A and C lamins shows that these proteins are identical except for their carboxy termini. The most prominent structural feature of both lamins is an alpha-helical region of repeating heptads of amino acids that shows striking homology with the entire family of cytoplasmic intermediate filament proteins. These features suggest that the nuclear envelope is made up of a network of coiled-coil polymers.
Chinese Meishan and Jiangquhai pigs are two of the most prolific pigs in the world, but their growth rate is lower than that of Duroc, Landrace and Pietrain pigs. It is suggested that growth rate is regulated by growth hormone. The objective of the current study was to analyze the porcine growth hormone (pGH) gene polymorphisms based on the polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment-length polymorphism method (PCR-RFLP) for three western meat-type breeds (Duroc, Landrace and Pietrain) and two local Chinese pigs (Meishan and Jiangquhai). Five polymorphic restriction sites were detected with the ApaI, MspI, BspI and HhaI restriction enzymes in two amplified fragments (605 bp, -119 to +486; 506 bp, +206 to +711). Breed difference was found only in the 506 bp fragment. There was no difference in allelic frequencies of BspI and HhaI restriction sites among the five breeds (P>0.05). Landrace and Meishan pigs lacked allele G3 of MspI site. The allele G3 frequency of restriction MspI site of the 506 bp fragment in Pietrain pigs was higher than that in Duroc and Jianquhai pigs (P<0.001). For ApaI site, the Meishan pigs lacked allele G1; no difference was found in allelic frequencies among Pietrain, Duroc, Landrace and Jiangquhai pigs (P>0.05). This new and rapid PCR-RFLP typing method is an attractive tool for analysis of porcine growth hormone gene restriction sites. The differences in MspI and ApaI restriction sites may explain the growth difference between the foreign meat-type breeds above mentioned and local Chinese pigs.
Transcription of eukaryotic transfer RNA genes involves, as a primary event, the stable binding of a protein factor to the intragenic promoter. The internal control region is composed of two non-contiguous conserved sequence elements, the A and B blocks. These are variably spaced depending on the genes. tau, a large transcription factor purified from yeast cells, interacts with these two control elements as shown by DNase I footprinting, exonuclease digestion, dimethyl sulphate protection experiments and by analysis of point mutations. Here we used a limited proteolysis treatment to obtain a smaller form of tau with drastically altered DNA binding properties. A protease-resistant domain interacts solely with the B block region of tRNA genes.
RNA interference (RNAi) is the process by which double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) directs sequence-specific degradation of messenger RNA in animal and plant cells. In mammalian cells, RNAi can be triggered by 21-nucleotide duplexes of small interfering RNA (siRNA). Here we describe inhibition of early and late steps of HIV-1 replication in human cell lines and primary lymphocytes by siRNAs targeted to various regions of the HIV-1 genome. We demonstrate that synthetic siRNA duplexes or plasmid-derived siRNAs inhibit HIV-1 infection by specifically degrading genomic HIV-1 RNA, thereby preventing formation of viral complementary-DNA intermediates. These results demonstrate the utility of RNAi for modulating the HIV replication cycle and provide evidence that genomic HIV-1 RNA, as it exists within a nucleoprotein reverse-transcription complex, is amenable to siRNA-mediated degradation.
Immunization with a 41-kilodalton blood stage antigen (p41) of Plasmodium falciparum induces immunity to malaria in monkeys. However, antigenic polymorphism and repetitive amino acids commonly found in protective antigens complicate vaccine development. The gene encoding p41 has now been cloned and analyzed. Sequencing and hybridization studies revealed that the gene structure is highly conserved in 14 parasite isolates from three continents. This finding and the lack of repetitive amino acids in the translated DNA sequence may indicate that p41 has an essential function. In this study the protein was found to be 60 percent homologous to the key glycolytic enzyme aldolase from vertebrates, and the affinity-purified p41 protein from parasites showed aldolase activity.
Messenger RNA regulation is a critical mode of controlling gene expression. Regulation of mRNA stability and translation is linked to controls of poly(A) tail length. Poly(A) lengthening can stabilize and translationally activate mRNAs, whereas poly(A) removal can trigger degradation and translational repression. Germline granules (for example, polar granules in flies, P granules in worms) are ribonucleoprotein particles implicated in translational control. Here we report that the Caenorhabditis elegans gene gld-2, a regulator of mitosis/meiosis decision and other germline events, encodes the catalytic moiety of a cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase (PAP) that is associated with P granules in early embryos. Importantly, the GLD-2 protein sequence has diverged substantially from that of conventional eukaryotic PAPs, and lacks a recognizable RRM (RNA recognition motif)-like domain. GLD-2 has little PAP activity on its own, but is stimulated in vitro by GLD-3. GLD-3 is also a developmental regulator, and belongs to the Bicaudal-C family of RNA binding proteins. We suggest that GLD-2 is the prototype for a class of regulatory cytoplasmic PAPs that are recruited to specific mRNAs by a binding partner, thereby targeting those mRNAs for polyadenylation and increased expression.
In higher organisms the formation of the steroid scaffold is catalysed exclusively by the membrane-bound oxidosqualene cyclase (OSC; lanosterol synthase). In a highly selective cyclization reaction OSC forms lanosterol with seven chiral centres starting from the linear substrate 2,3-oxidosqualene. Valuable data on the mechanism of the complex cyclization cascade have been collected during the past 50 years using suicide inhibitors, mutagenesis studies and homology modelling. Nevertheless it is still not fully understood how the enzyme catalyses the reaction. Because of the decisive role of OSC in cholesterol biosynthesis it represents a target for the discovery of novel anticholesteraemic drugs that could complement the widely used statins. Here we present two crystal structures of the human membrane protein OSC: the target protein with an inhibitor that showed cholesterol lowering in vivo opens the way for the structure-based design of new OSC inhibitors. The complex with the reaction product lanosterol gives a clear picture of the way in which the enzyme achieves product specificity in this highly exothermic cyclization reaction.
The Drosophila wingless gene (wg) encodes a protein of the Wnt family and is a critical regulator in many developmental processes. Biochemical studies have indicated that heparan sulphate proteoglycans, consisting of a protein core to which heparan sulphate glycosaminoglycans are attached, are important for Wg function. Here we show that, consistent with these findings, the Drosophila gene sulfateless (sfl), which encodes a homologue of vertebrate heparan sulphate N-deacetylase/N-sulphotransferase (an enzyme needed for the modification of heparan sulphate) is essential for Wg signalling. We have identified the product of division abnormally delayed (dally), a glycosyl-phosphatidyl inositol (GPI)-linked glypican, as a heparan sulphate proteoglycan molecule involved in Wg signalling. Our results indicate that Dally may act as a co-receptor for Wg, and that Dally, together with Drosophila Frizzled 2, modulates both short- and long-range activities of Wg.
NF-kappaB, a ubiquitous, inducible transcription factor involved in immune, inflammatory, stress and developmental processes, is retained in a latent form in the cytoplasm of non-stimulated cells by inhibitory molecules, IkappaBs. Its activation is a paradigm for a signal-transduction cascade that integrates an inducible kinase and the ubiquitin-proteasome system to eliminate inhibitory regulators. Here we isolate the pIkappaBalpha-ubiquitin ligase (pIkappaBalpha-E3) that attaches ubiquitin, a small protein which marks other proteins for degradation by the proteasome system, to the phosphorylated NF-kappaB inhibitor pIkappaBalpha. Taking advantage of its high affinity to pIkappaBalpha, we isolate this ligase from HeLa cells by single-step immunoaffinity purification. Using nanoelectrospray mass spectrometry, we identify the specific component of the ligase that recognizes the pIkappaBalpha degradation motif as an F-box/WD-domain protein belonging to a recently distinguished family of beta-TrCP/Slimb proteins. This component, which we denote E3RSIkappaB (pIkappaBalpha-E3 receptor subunit), binds specifically to pIkappaBalpha and promotes its in vitro ubiquitination in the presence of two other ubiquitin-system enzymes, E1 and UBC5C, one of many known E2 enzymes. An F-box-deletion mutant of E3RS(IkappaB), which tightly binds pIkappaBalpha but does not support its ubiquitination, acts in vivo as a dominant-negative molecule, inhibiting the degradation of pIkappaBalpha and consequently NF-kappaB activation. E3RS(IkappaB) represents a family of receptor proteins that are core components of a class of ubiquitin ligases. When these receptor components recognize their specific ligand, which is a conserved, phosphorylation-based sequence motif, they target regulatory proteins containing this motif for proteasomal degradation.
In the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), two specific oligonucleotide primers are used to amplify the sequences between them. However, this technique is not suitable for amplifying genes that encode molecules where the 5' portion of the sequences of interest is not known, such as the T cell receptor (TCR) or immunoglobulins. Because of this limitation, a novel technique, anchored polymerase chain reaction (A-PCR), was devised that requires sequence specificity only on the 3' end of the target fragment. It was used to analyze TCR delta chain mRNA's from human peripheral blood gamma delta T cells. Most of these cells had a V delta gene segment not previously described (V delta 3), and the delta chain junctional sequences formed a discrete subpopulation compared with those previously reported.
A set of restriction fragments cloned into phage lambda vectors has allowed us to locate a site necessary for full rpoBC expression. We find that these genes for the two large subunits of RNA polymerase and the genes, rplL and rplJ, for two ribosomal proteins, form a single operon.
Pectate lyases are secreted by pathogens and initiate soft-rot diseases in plants by cleaving polygalacturonate, a major component of the plant cell wall. The three-dimensional structure of pectate lyase C from Erwinia chrysanthemi has been solved and refined to a resolution of 2.2 angstroms. The enzyme folds into a unique motif of parallel beta strands coiled into a large helix. Within the core, the amino acids form linear stacks and include a novel asparagine ladder. The sequence similarities that pectate lyases share with pectin lyases, pollen and style proteins, and tubulins suggest that the parallel beta helix motif may occur in a broad spectrum of proteins.
Mycorrhizal symbioses--the union of roots and soil fungi--are universal in terrestrial ecosystems and may have been fundamental to land colonization by plants. Boreal, temperate and montane forests all depend on ectomycorrhizae. Identification of the primary factors that regulate symbiotic development and metabolic activity will therefore open the door to understanding the role of ectomycorrhizae in plant development and physiology, allowing the full ecological significance of this symbiosis to be explored. Here we report the genome sequence of the ectomycorrhizal basidiomycete Laccaria bicolor (Fig. 1) and highlight gene sets involved in rhizosphere colonization and symbiosis. This 65-megabase genome assembly contains approximately 20,000 predicted protein-encoding genes and a very large number of transposons and repeated sequences. We detected unexpected genomic features, most notably a battery of effector-type small secreted proteins (SSPs) with unknown function, several of which are only expressed in symbiotic tissues. The most highly expressed SSP accumulates in the proliferating hyphae colonizing the host root. The ectomycorrhizae-specific SSPs probably have a decisive role in the establishment of the symbiosis. The unexpected observation that the genome of L. bicolor lacks carbohydrate-active enzymes involved in degradation of plant cell walls, but maintains the ability to degrade non-plant cell wall polysaccharides, reveals the dual saprotrophic and biotrophic lifestyle of the mycorrhizal fungus that enables it to grow within both soil and living plant roots. The predicted gene inventory of the L. bicolor genome, therefore, points to previously unknown mechanisms of symbiosis operating in biotrophic mycorrhizal fungi. The availability of this genome provides an unparalleled opportunity to develop a deeper understanding of the processes by which symbionts interact with plants within their ecosystem to perform vital functions in the carbon and nitrogen cycles that are fundamental to sustainable plant productivity.
A hybrid polymerase which catalyzes the synthesis only of helical polynucleotides with one DNA-like strand and one RNA-like strand can be altered by certain treatments so that it will then synthesize DNA and RNA. There is evidence that the alteration involves a separation or rearrangement of polymerase subunits of several kinds. Two types of RNA polymerase activity have been found: one produces single chains, and the other, two complementary chains simultaneously. The latter type of RNA polymerase, the hybrid polymerase, and the DNA polymerase behave as though they were bifunctional, and each may be composed of two monofunctional subunits.
Nitric oxide (NO) produced by the endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) is a fundamental determinant of cardiovascular homesotasis: it regulates systemic blood pressure, vascular remodelling and angiogenesis. Physiologically, the most important stimulus for the continuous formation of NO is the viscous drag (shear stress) generated by the streaming blood on the endothelial layer. Although shear-stress-mediated phosphorylation of eNOS is thought to regulate enzyme activity, the mechanism of activation of eNOS is not yet known. Here we demonstrate that the serine/threonine protein kinase Akt/PKB mediates the activation of eNOS, leading to increased NO production. Inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase/Akt pathway or mutation of the Akt site on eNOS protein (at serine 1177) attenuates the serine phosphorylation and prevents the activation of eNOS. Mimicking the phosphorylation of Ser 1177 directly enhances enzyme activity and alters the sensitivity of the enzyme to Ca2+, rendering its activity maximal at sub-physiological concentrations of Ca2+. Thus, phosphorylation of eNOS by Akt represents a novel Ca2+-independent regulatory mechanism for activation of eNOS.
All members of the diverse myosin superfamily have a highly conserved globular motor domain that contains the actin- and nucleotide-binding sites and produces force and movement. The light-chain-binding domain connects the motor domain to a variety of functionally specialized tail domains and amplifies small structural changes in the motor domain through rotation of a lever arm. Myosins move on polarized actin filaments either forwards to the barbed (+) or backwards to the pointed (-) end. Here, we describe the engineering of an artificial backwards-moving myosin from three pre-existing molecular building blocks. These blocks are: a forward-moving class I myosin motor domain, a directional inverter formed by a four-helix bundle segment of human guanylate-binding protein-1 and an artificial lever arm formed by two alpha-actinin repeats. Our results prove that reverse-direction movement of myosins can be achieved simply by rotating the direction of the lever arm 180 degrees.
Synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) do not produce altered coding sequences, and therefore they are not expected to change the function of the protein in which they occur. We report that a synonymous SNP in the Multidrug Resistance 1 (MDR1) gene, part of a haplotype previously linked to altered function of the MDR1 gene product P-glycoprotein (P-gp), nonetheless results in P-gp with altered drug and inhibitor interactions. Similar mRNA and protein levels, but altered conformations, were found for wild-type and polymorphic P-gp. We hypothesize that the presence of a rare codon, marked by the synonymous polymorphism, affects the timing of cotranslational folding and insertion of P-gp into the membrane, thereby altering the structure of substrate and inhibitor interaction sites.
Arsenic, an ancient drug used in traditional Chinese medicine, has attracted worldwide interest because it shows substantial anticancer activity in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) exerts its therapeutic effect by promoting degradation of an oncogenic protein that drives the growth of APL cells, PML-RARalpha (a fusion protein containing sequences from the PML zinc finger protein and retinoic acid receptor alpha). PML and PML-RARalpha degradation is triggered by their SUMOylation, but the mechanism by which As2O3 induces this posttranslational modification is unclear. Here we show that arsenic binds directly to cysteine residues in zinc fingers located within the RBCC domain of PML-RARalpha and PML. Arsenic binding induces PML oligomerization, which increases its interaction with the small ubiquitin-like protein modifier (SUMO)-conjugating enzyme UBC9, resulting in enhanced SUMOylation and degradation. The identification of PML as a direct target of As2O3 provides new insights into the drug's mechanism of action and its specificity for APL.
A sponge extract that produced specific aggregation of dissociated cells was treated with various enzyme preparations to determine which enzymes would destroy its aggregating properties. The results indicate that proteins play a key role in the aggregating effect of the extract on dissociated, glutaraldehyde-fixed sponge cells. Further studies confirm the necessity of calcium for the aggregation and indicate the necessity of intact disulfide groups.
Cellular genes containing nucleotide sequences homologous to retroviral oncogenes (v-onc) have been identified in the genomes of a variety of species of both the vertebrate and invertebrate phyla. Expression of such genes, termed c-onc genes, has been shown to be tissue-specific in chickens and mice and to be modulated during murine development and differentiation of human haematopoietic cells. We report here that the level of the c-fos gene transcripts is 100-fold greater in human term fetal membranes than in other normal human tissues and cells. These levels of c-fos expression in human amniotic and chorionic cells are close to the level of v-fos expression that results in the induction of osteosarcomas in mice and transformation of fibroblasts in vitro. This observation suggests that the induction of neoplastic transformation by the FBJ murine osteosarcoma virus may require the expression of the fos gene product at high levels in an inappropriate cell type. In contrast, the human c-fms gene is expressed at high levels specifically in term placenta and trophoblastic cells. The tissue and cell type-specific patterns of c-fos and c-fms expression suggest that the physiological function of the c-fos and c-fms encoded proteins may be associated with those embryo-derived cells whose primary functions are protection and nourishment of the human fetus.
The axonal chemoattractant netrin-1 guides spinal commissural axons by activating its receptor DCC (Deleted in Colorectal Cancer). We have found that chemical inhibitors of metalloproteases potentiate netrin-mediated axon outgrowth in vitro. We have also found that DCC is a substrate for metalloprotease-dependent ectodomain shedding, and that the inhibitors block proteolytic processing of DCC and cause an increase in DCC protein levels on axons within spinal cord explants. Thus, potentiation of netrin activity by inhibitors may result from stabilization of DCC on the axons, and proteolytic activity may regulate axon migration by controlling the number of functional extracellular axon guidance receptors.
Interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme (ICE) is a mammalian homolog of CED-3, a protein required for programmed cell death in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. The activity of ICE can be specifically inhibited by the product of crmA, a cytokine response modifier gene encoded by cowpox virus. Microinjection of the crmA gene into chicken dorsal root ganglion neurons was found to prevent cell death induced by deprivation of nerve growth factor. Thus, ICE is likely to participate in neuronal death in vertebrates.
In biological systems, enzymes catalyse the efficient synthesis of complex molecules under benign conditions, but widespread industrial use of these biocatalysts depends crucially on the development of new enzymes with useful catalytic functions. The evolution of enzymes in biological systems often involves the acquisition of new catalytic or binding properties by an existing protein scaffold. Here we mimic this strategy using the most common fold in enzymes, the alpha/beta-barrel, as the scaffold. By combining an existing binding site for structural elements of phosphoribosylanthranilate with a catalytic template required for isomerase activity, we are able to evolve phosphoribosylanthranilate isomerase activity from the scaffold of indole-3-glycerol-phosphate synthase. We find that targeting the catalytic template for in vitro mutagenesis and recombination, followed by in vivo selection, results in a new phosphoribosylanthranilate isomerase that has catalytic properties similar to those of the natural enzyme, with an even higher specificity constant. Our demonstration of divergent evolution and the widespread occurrence of the alpha/beta-barrel suggest that this scaffold may be a fold of choice for the directed evolution of new biocatalysts.
Glucose flux through the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway leads to the post-translational modification of cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins by O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc). This tandem system serves as a nutrient sensor to couple systemic metabolic status to cellular regulation of signal transduction, transcription, and protein degradation. Here we show that O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) harbours a previously unrecognized type of phosphoinositide-binding domain. After induction with insulin, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate recruits OGT from the nucleus to the plasma membrane, where the enzyme catalyses dynamic modification of the insulin signalling pathway by O-GlcNAc. This results in the alteration in phosphorylation of key signalling molecules and the attenuation of insulin signal transduction. Hepatic overexpression of OGT impairs the expression of insulin-responsive genes and causes insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia. These findings identify a molecular mechanism by which nutritional cues regulate insulin signalling through O-GlcNAc, and underscore the contribution of this modification to the aetiology of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.
Adipsin is a serine protease homolog whose primary structure was predicted from the nucleotide sequence of a differentiation-dependent adipocyte messenger RNA. Immunoblots probed with antisera to synthetic peptides identify two forms of adipsin that are synthesized and secreted by 3T3 adipocytes. These proteins of 44 and 37 kilodaltons are converted to 25.5 kilodaltons by enzymatic deglycosylation. Although adipsin is principally synthesized in adipose tissue, it is also produced by sciatic nerve and is found in the bloodstream. Because of the apparent restriction of adipsin synthesis to tissues highly active in lipid metabolism, its presence in serum, and its modulation in altered metabolic states, this molecule may play a previously unrecognized role in systemic lipid metabolism or energy balance.
Cellular ras genes encode a family of membrane-associated proteins (p21ras) that bind guanine nucleotide and possess a low intrinsic GTPase activity. The p21ras proteins are ubiquitously expressed in mammalian cells and are thought to be involved in a growth-promoting signal transduction pathway; their mode of action, however, remains unknown. The ligand-induced movement of cell-surface receptors seems to be a primary event in the transduction of several extracellular signals that control cell growth and differentiation. In B lymphocytes, surface immunoglobulin receptors crosslinked by antibody or other multivalent ligands form aggregates called patches, which then collect into a single assembly, a cap, at one pole of the cell. This process constitutes the initial signal for the activation of a B cell. Here we show by immunofluorescence microscopy that p21ras co-caps with surface immunoglobulin molecules in mouse splenic B lymphocytes. In contrast, no apparent change in the distribution of p21ras occurs during the capping of concanavalin A receptors. The redistribution of p21ras is apparent at the early stages (patching) of immunoglobulin capping and is inhibited by metabolic inhibitors and the cytoskeleton-disrupting agents colchicine and cytochalasin D. The distribution of another membrane-associated guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory protein, the Gi alpha subunit, is not affected by surface immunoglobulin capping. These findings demonstrate that p21ras can migrate in a directed manner along the plasma membrane and suggest that p21ras may be a component of the signalling pathway initiated by the capping of surface immunoglobulin in B lymphocytes.
A cloned DNA transcript of ovalbumin mRNA was cut a few nucleotides away from the initiator codon, and fused in phase to the beginning of the Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase gene. The hybrid gene has been cloned in E. coli where it produces large amounts of an ovalbumin-like protein.
Rab geranylgeranyl transferase (GG transferase) is a two-component enzyme that attaches 20-carbon isoprenoid groups to cysteine residues in Rab proteins, a family of guanosine triphosphate-binding proteins that regulate vesicular traffic. The mutant gene in human choroideremia, an X-linked form of retinal degeneration, encodes a protein that resembles component A of rat Rab GG transferase. Lymphoblasts from choroideremia subjects showed a marked deficiency in the activity of component A, but not component B, of Rab GG transferase. The deficiency was more pronounced when the substrate was Rab3A, a synaptic vesicle protein, than it was when the substrate was Rab1A, a protein of the endoplasmic reticulum. The data imply the existence of multiple component A proteins, one of which is missing in choroideremia.
Type I interferons (IFN-I) are important cytokines linking innate and adaptive immunity. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells make high levels of IFN-I in response to viral infection and are thought to be the major source of the cytokines in vivo. Here, we show that conventional non-plasmacytoid dendritic cells taken from mice infected with a dendritic-cell-tropic strain of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus make similarly high levels of IFN-I on subsequent culture. Similarly, non-plasmacytoid dendritic cells secrete high levels of IFN-I in response to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), a major viral signature, when the latter is introduced into the cytoplasm to mimic direct viral infection. This response is partially dependent on the cytosolic dsRNA-binding enzyme protein kinase R and does not require signalling through toll-like receptor (TLR) 3, a surface receptor for dsRNA. Furthermore, we show that sequestration of dsRNA by viral NS1 (refs 6, 7) explains the inability of conventional dendritic cells to produce IFN-I on infection with influenza. Our results suggest that multiple dendritic cell types, not just plasmacytoid cells, can act as specialized interferon-producing cells in certain viral infections, and reveal the existence of a TLR-independent pathway for dendritic cell activation that can be the target of viral interference.
ATP, the principal energy currency of the cell, fuels most biosynthetic reactions in the cytoplasm by its hydrolysis into ADP and inorganic phosphate. Because resynthesis of ATP occurs in the mitochondrial matrix, ATP is exported into the cytoplasm while ADP is imported into the matrix. The exchange is accomplished by a single protein, the ADP/ATP carrier. Here we have solved the bovine carrier structure at a resolution of 2.2 A by X-ray crystallography in complex with an inhibitor, carboxyatractyloside. Six alpha-helices form a compact transmembrane domain, which, at the surface towards the space between inner and outer mitochondrial membranes, reveals a deep depression. At its bottom, a hexapeptide carrying the signature of nucleotide carriers (RRRMMM) is located. Our structure, together with earlier biochemical results, suggests that transport substrates bind to the bottom of the cavity and that translocation results from a transient transition from a 'pit' to a 'channel' conformation.
Most eukaryotes produce small RNA (sRNA) mediators of gene silencing that bind to Argonaute proteins and guide them, by base pairing, to an RNA target. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) that normally target messenger RNAs for degradation or translational arrest are the best-understood class of sRNAs. However, in Arabidopsis thaliana flowers, miRNAs account for only 5% of the sRNA mass and less than 0.1% of the sequence complexity. The remaining sRNAs form a complex population of more than 100,000 different small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) transcribed from thousands of loci. The biogenesis of most of the siRNAs in Arabidopsis are dependent on RNA polymerase IV (PolIV), a homologue of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II. A subset of these PolIV-dependent (p4)-siRNAs are involved in stress responses, and others are associated with epigenetic modifications to DNA or chromatin; however, the biological role is not known for most of them. Here we show that the predominant phase of p4-siRNA accumulation is initiated in the maternal gametophyte and continues during seed development. Expression of p4-siRNAs in developing endosperm is specifically from maternal chromosomes. Our results provide the first evidence for a link between genomic imprinting and RNA silencing in plants.
Both the alpha and betagamma subunits of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) communicate signals from receptors to effectors. Gbetagamma subunits can regulate a diverse array of effectors, including ion channels and enzymes. Galpha subunits bound to guanine diphosphate (Galpha-GDP) inhibit signal transduction through Gbetagamma subunits, suggesting a common interface on Gbetagamma subunits for Galpha binding and effector interaction. The molecular basis for interaction of Gbetagamma with effectors was characterized by mutational analysis of Gbeta residues that make contact with Galpha-GDP. Analysis of the ability of these mutants to regulate the activity of calcium and potassium channels, adenylyl cyclase 2, phospholipase C-beta2, and beta-adrenergic receptor kinase revealed the Gbeta residues required for activation of each effector and provides evidence for partially overlapping domains on Gbeta for regulation of these effectors. This organization of interaction regions on Gbeta for different effectors and Galpha explains why subunit dissociation is crucial for signal transmission through Gbetagamma subunits.
Multidrug transporters of the ABC family facilitate the export of diverse cytotoxic drugs across cell membranes. This is clinically relevant, as tumour cells may become resistant to agents used in chemotherapy. To understand the molecular basis of this process, we have determined the 3.0 A crystal structure of a bacterial ABC transporter (Sav1866) from Staphylococcus aureus. The homodimeric protein consists of 12 transmembrane helices in an arrangement that is consistent with cross-linking studies and electron microscopic imaging of the human multidrug resistance protein MDR1, but critically different from that reported for the bacterial lipid flippase MsbA. The observed, outward-facing conformation reflects the ATP-bound state, with the two nucleotide-binding domains in close contact and the two transmembrane domains forming a central cavity--presumably the drug translocation pathway--that is shielded from the inner leaflet of the lipid bilayer and from the cytoplasm, but exposed to the outer leaflet and the extracellular space.
Calcium is essential for the maintenance of contraction in the heart, and it has been suggested that the glycoprotein matrix on the external surface of cardiac cells is a critical factor in the supply of 'activator' calcium to the beating heart. Sialic acid residues are important calcium-binding sites in the matrix and treatment with neuraminidase, an enzyme which cleaves sialic acid from oligosaccharide chains, has been reported to abolish spontaneous contraction in cultured heart cells, without causing general breakdown in the plasma membrane. However, we report here that in intact, electrically stimulated guinea pig atrial preparations, neuraminidase treatment produces no significant changes in resting tension or force of contraction. It is also without effect on the response to calcium removal and replacement, and inotropic or toxic concentrations of cardiac glycosides. In these experiments, up to 79% of the total tissue sialic acid was removed, and electron microscopy studies showed that this removal was accompanied by marked reduction of lanthanum binding to the sarcolemma. We therefore conclude that the calcium-binding sialic acid residues in the external matrix of the cardiac cells are of little importance in the maintenance of contractile function in these intact atrial preparations.
Point mutations are generally assumed to involve changes of single nucleotides. Nevertheless, the nature and known mechanisms of mutation do not exclude the possibility that several adjacent nucleotides may change simultaneously in a single mutational event. Two independent approaches are used here to estimate the frequency of simultaneous double-nucleotide substitutions. The first examines switches between TCN and AGY (where N is any nucleotide and Y is a pyrimidine) codons encoding absolutely conserved serine residues in a number of proteins from diverse organisms. The second reveals double-nucleotide substitutions in primate noncoding sequences. These two complementary approaches provide similar high estimates for the rate of doublet substitutions, on the order of 0.1 per site per billion years.
Light absorption by photoreceptor rod outer segments (ROS) leads not only to spectral and structural changes in the rhodopsin molecule but also to the activation of several enzymatic activities including GTPase. The mechanism of this effect is not known; however, in all cases where the action spectrum of light-induced enzyme activation has been measured (see, for example, refs 4, 8), it matched the absorption spectrum of rhodopsin. This suggests that bleaching of rhodopsin is the primary step in enzyme activation, and that some light-induced changes in the molecular interaction of the enzymes with rhodopsin, the major intrinsic ROS membrane protein, should be involved. I have indeed found that light induces profound changes in the interation of rhodopsin kinase, GTPase (reported here), and other proteins with the photoreceptor membrane. These changes are reversible in the dark, are strongly influenced by GTP, and are thought to be involved in the regulation of enzyme activity by light. The light-induced binding of the GTPase and its subsequent elution with GTP was used to purify this enzyme.
Transgenic mice expressing the simian virus-40 large T-antigen (Tag) under the control of the insulin gene regulatory region offer a useful model for tumorigenesis. All the islets of Langerhans express Tag, although there is at first no aberrant proliferation. Over half of the islets become hyperplastic, however, and neovascularization of a further subset (about 10%)3 leads eventually to formation of highly vascularized solid tumours in 1-2% of islets by about 14 weeks of age. Here we show that the initial proliferative switch is correlated with focal activation of insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II). Transfection with an antisense oligonucleotide to the IGF-II messenger RNA interferes with tumour cell proliferation in vitro, and transgenic mice homozygous for a disruption of the IGF-II gene develop tumours with reduced malignancy and a higher incidence of apoptosis. Several signals, in this case including an oncoprotein and a growth/survival factor, thus appear to be needed to elicit hyperproliferation.
Synthesis of proteins containing errors (mistranslation) is prevented by aminoacyl transfer RNA synthetases through their accurate aminoacylation of cognate tRNAs and their ability to correct occasional errors of aminoacylation by editing reactions. A principal source of mistranslation comes from mistaking glycine or serine for alanine, which can lead to serious cell and animal pathologies, including neurodegeneration. A single specific G.U base pair (G3.U70) marks a tRNA for aminoacylation by alanyl-tRNA synthetase. Mistranslation occurs when glycine or serine is joined to the G3.U70-containing tRNAs, and is prevented by the editing activity that clears the mischarged amino acid. Previously it was assumed that the specificity for recognition of tRNA(Ala) for editing was provided by the same structural determinants as used for aminoacylation. Here we show that the editing site of alanyl-tRNA synthetase, as an artificial recombinant fragment, targets mischarged tRNA(Ala) using a structural motif unrelated to that for aminoacylation so that, remarkably, two motifs (one for aminoacylation and one for editing) in the same enzyme independently can provide determinants for tRNA(Ala) recognition. The structural motif for editing is also found naturally in genome-encoded protein fragments that are widely distributed in evolution. These also recognize mischarged tRNA(Ala). Thus, through evolution, three different complexes with the same tRNA can guard against mistaking glycine or serine for alanine.
p53 is a cellular phosphoprotein that is present at elevated concentrations in cells transformed by different agents. p53 complementary DNA expression-constructs immortalize primary cells in vitro and co-operate with an activated ras oncogene in malignant transformation. Several reports have implicated p53 in mammalian cell cycle control and specifically with events occurring at the G0-G1 boundary. p53 forms specific complexes with simian virus 40 (SV40) large-T antigen, and such complexes are found associated with both replicating and mature SV40 DNA in lytically infected cells. In an accompanying paper Gannon and Lane report that in in vitro plate-binding assays, mouse p53 can displace polymerase alpha from complex with T-antigen. We have examined the in vivo consequences of expressing wild-type and mutant p53 proteins from other species in SV40-transformed monkey cells. We report here that expression of mouse p53 results in a substantial and selective inhibition of SV40 origin-dependent DNA replication. In addition to any function in the G0-G1 transition, the data presented suggest that p53 may affect directly the initiation or maintenance of replicative DNA synthesis.
The genome of adenoviruses is a double-stranded linear DNA molecule with inverted terminal repeats about 100 base pairs (bp) in length and a terminal protein covalently linked to the 5' nucleotide of each strand. Both of these features permit the formation of DNA circles, the inverted repeats allowing the circularization of single-stranded DNA and the terminal protein the joining of one or more molecules to yield double-stranded circles or concatemers. However, although the existence of covalently closed circles has been postulated, double-stranded viral DNA purified from virions or infected cells by conventional methods (that is, using proteases and phenol or chloroform) has always been obtained in a linear form. Here, we present evidence for the existence in adenovirus 5 (Ad5) infected cells of novel structures resulting from covalent head-to-tail joining of viral DNA molecules and show that these structures are due at least in part to the formation of covalently closed circles.
Analysis of cellular components at multiple levels of biological information can provide valuable functional insights. We performed multiple high-throughput measurements to study the response of Escherichia coli cells to genetic and environmental perturbations. Analysis of metabolic enzyme gene disruptants revealed unexpectedly small changes in messenger RNA and proteins for most disruptants. Overall, metabolite levels were also stable, reflecting the rerouting of fluxes in the metabolic network. In contrast, E. coli actively regulated enzyme levels to maintain a stable metabolic state in response to changes in growth rate. E. coli thus seems to use complementary strategies that result in a metabolic network robust against perturbations.
Insulin corrects the disturbances in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism in rats made diabetic with alloxan. However, the concomitant administration of actinomycin D with insulin prevents the repair of enzymatic defects in the syntheses of total fatty acids by adipose tissue, of monounsaturated fatty acids by liver microsomes, and of hepatic glycogen. The hypoglycemic action of insulin in diabetes is not modified by actinomycin injections. These findings indicate that a fundamental mechanism of action of insulin is the induction of enzyme synthesis through stimulating the renewal of cellular RNA.
The Rab GTPases are key regulators of vesicular transport. A fraction of Rab proteins is present in the cytosol, bound with GDP, complexed to a protein termed GDI. Rab9 is localized primarily to late endosomes, where it aids the transport of mannose 6-phosphate receptors to the trans-Golgi network. It has been proposed that Rab proteins are delivered to specific membranes by GDI, and that this process is accompanied by the exchange of bound GDP for GTP. In addition, Rab localization requires carboxy-terminal prenylation and specific structural determinants. Here we describe the reconstitution of the selective targeting of prenylated Rab9 protein onto late endosome membranes and show that this process is accompanied by endosome-triggered nucleotide exchange.
Transcription of protein-encoding genes by human RNA polymerase II requires multiple ancillary proteins (transcription factors). Interactions between these proteins and the promoter DNA of a viral class II gene (the major late transcription unit of adenovirus) were investigated by enzymatic and chemical footprinting. The experiments indicated that the assembly of functionally active RNA polymerase II-containing transcription preinitiation complexes requires a complete set of transcription factors, and that both specific protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions are involved. This allows individual steps along the transcription reaction pathway to be tested directly, thus providing a basis for understanding basic transcription initiation mechanisms as well as the regulatory processes that act on them.
Nuclear pre-messenger RNA splicing requires the action of five small nuclear (sn) RNAs, U1, U2, U4, U5 and U6, and more than 50 proteins. The mechanistic similarity of nuclear pre-mRNA splicing and group II self-splicing suggests that many of the central processes of nuclear pre-mRNA splicing are based on RNA-RNA interaction. To understand the mechanism of pre-mRNA splicing, the interactions, and their temporal relationships, that occur between the snRNAs and the pre-mRNA during splicing must be identified. Several snRNA-snRNA and snRNA-intron interactions have been demonstrated but the putative RNA-based interactions that recognize the AG dinucleotide at the 3' splice site during 3' cleavage and exon ligation are unknown. We report here the reciprocal suppression between 5' and 3' splice site mutations in the yeast actin intron, and propose that the 3' splice site is positioned for 3' cleavage and exon ligation, at least in part, through a non-Watson-Crick interaction between the guanosines at the 5' and 3' splice sites.
A multitude of heptahelical receptors use heterotrimeric G proteins to transduce signals to specific effector target molecules. The G protein transducin, Gt, couples photon-activated rhodopsin with the effector cyclic GMP phosophodiesterase (PDE) in the vertebrate phototransduction cascade. The interactions of the Gt alpha-subunit (alpha(t)) with the inhibitory PDE gamma-subunit (PDEgamma) are central to effector activation, and also enhance visual recovery in cooperation with the GTPase-activating protein regulator of G-protein signalling (RGS)-9 (refs 1-3). Here we describe the crystal structure at 2.0 A of rod transducin alpha x GDP x AlF4- in complex with the effector molecule PDEgamma and the GTPase-activating protein RGS9. In addition, we present the independently solved crystal structures of the RGS9 RGS domain both alone and in complex with alpha(t/i1) x GDP x AlF4-. These structures reveal insights into effector activation, synergistic GTPase acceleration, RGS9 specificity and RGS activity. Effector binding to a nucleotide-dependent site on alpha(t) sequesters PDEgamma residues implicated in PDE inhibition, and potentiates recruitment of RGS9 for hydrolytic transition state stabilization and concomitant signal termination.
RNA editing is a process of RNA maturation involved in the insertion, deletion or modification of nucleotides. In organellar transcripts of higher plants, specific cytidine residues are converted into uridine residues. In many cases, editing results in the restoration of conserved amino acid residues, a process that is essential for protein function in plastids. Despite the technical breakthrough in establishing systems in vivo and in vitro for analysing RNA editing, its machinery still remains to be identified in higher plants. Here we introduce a genetic approach and report the discovery of a gene responsible for the specific RNA editing event in the chloroplast.
Efficient electron transfer of redox proteins to and from their environment is essential for the use of such proteins in biotechnological applications such as amperometric biosensors and photosynthetic biocatalysts. But most redox enzymes lack pathways that can transport an electron from their embedded redox site to an electrode or a diffusing photoexcited species. Electrical communication between redox proteins and electrode surfaces has been improved by aligning proteins on chemically modified electrodes, by attaching electron-transporting groups and by immobilizing proteins in polymer matrices tethered by redox groups. Generally these methods involve contacting the enzymes at random with electron relay units. Here we report an approach that allows site-specific positioning of electron-mediating units in redox proteins. We strip glucose oxidase of its flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactors, modify the latter with redox-active ferrocene-containing groups, and then reconstitute the apoprotein with these modified cofactors. In this way, electrical contact between an electrode and the resulting enzyme in solution is greatly enhanced in a controlled and reproducible way.
Rice is the principal food for over half of the population of the world. With its genome size of 430 megabase pairs (Mb), the cultivated rice species Oryza sativa is a model plant for genome research. Here we report the sequence analysis of chromosome 4 of O. sativa, one of the first two rice chromosomes to be sequenced completely. The finished sequence spans 34.6 Mb and represents 97.3% of the chromosome. In addition, we report the longest known sequence for a plant centromere, a completely sequenced contig of 1.16 Mb corresponding to the centromeric region of chromosome 4. We predict 4,658 protein coding genes and 70 transfer RNA genes. A total of 1,681 predicted genes match available unique rice expressed sequence tags. Transposable elements have a pronounced bias towards the euchromatic regions, indicating a close correlation of their distributions to genes along the chromosome. Comparative genome analysis between cultivated rice subspecies shows that there is an overall syntenic relationship between the chromosomes and divergence at the level of single-nucleotide polymorphisms and insertions and deletions. By contrast, there is little conservation in gene order between rice and Arabidopsis.
In the absence of a combined nitrogen source, such as ammonia, approximately every tenth vegetative cell along filaments of the cyanobacterium Anabaena develops into a heterocyst, a terminally differentiated cell that is morphologically and biochemically specialized for nitrogen fixation. At least two specific DNA rearrangements involving the nitrogen-fixation (nif) genes occur during heterocyst differentiation, one within the nifD gene and the other near the nifS gene. The two rearrangements have several properties in common. Both occur quantitatively in all heterocyst genomes, both occur at approximately the same developmental time, late in the process of heterocyst differentiation, and both result from site-specific recombination between short repeated DNA sequences. We report here the nucleotide sequences found at the site of recombination near the nifS gene. These sequences differ from those found previously for the nifD rearrangement, suggesting that the two rearrangements are catalysed by different enzymes and may be regulated independently. We also show that the nifS gene is transcribed only from rearranged genomes.
Mutations in the gene encoding the amyloid protein precursor (APP) cause autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease. Cleavage of APP by unidentified proteases, referred to as beta- and gamma-secretases, generates the amyloid beta-peptide, the main component of the amyloid plaques found in Alzheimer's disease patients. The disease-causing mutations flank the protease cleavage sites in APP and facilitate its cleavage. Here we identify a new membrane-bound aspartyl protease (Asp2) with beta-secretase activity. The Asp2 gene is expressed widely in brain and other tissues. Decreasing the expression of Asp2 in cells reduces amyloid beta-peptide production and blocks the accumulation of the carboxy-terminal APP fragment that is created by beta-secretase cleavage. Solubilized Asp2 protein cleaves a synthetic APP peptide substrate at the beta-secretase site, and the rate of cleavage is increased tenfold by a mutation associated with early-onset Alzheimer's disease in Sweden. Thus, Asp2 is a new protein target for drugs that are designed to block the production of amyloid beta-peptide peptide and the consequent formation of amyloid plaque in Alzheimer's disease.
The transition from the expression of alpha, the first set of five herpes simplex virus genes expressed after infection, to beta and gamma genes, expressed later in infection, requires the participation of infected cell protein 4 (alpha 4), the major viral regulatory protein. The alpha 4 protein is present in complexes formed by proteins extracted from infected cells and viral DNA fragments derived from promoter domains. This report shows that the alpha 4 protein forms specific complexes with DNA fragments derived from 5' transcribed noncoding domains of late (gamma 2) genes whose expression requires viral DNA synthesis as well as functional alpha 4 protein. Some of the DNA fragments to which alpha 4 binds do not contain homologs of the previously reported DNA binding site consensus sequence, suggesting that alpha 4 may recognize and interact with more than one type of DNA binding site. The alpha 4 proteins can bind to DNA directly. A posttranslationally modified form of the alpha 4 protein designated alpha 4c differs from the alpha 4a and alpha 4b forms with respect to its affinity for DNA fragments differing in the nucleotide sequences of the binding sites.
The plant hormone auxin has a central role in many aspects of plant growth and development. By screening for mutants of Arabidopsis that are resistant to exogenous auxin, we have identified several genes that are required for normal auxin response. One of these genes, AXR1, is defined by recessive mutations that confer auxin resistance to the roots, rosettes and inflorescences of mutant plants. In addition, axr1 mutants display a variety of morphological defects that are consistent with a reduction in auxin sensitivity. Here we isolate the AXR1 gene using a map-based approach and report that AXR1 encodes a new protein with significant sequence similarity to the ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1. The AXR1 protein is highly diverged from previously characterized E1 enzymes, however, and lacks a key cysteine residue that is essential for E1 activity. AXR1 may therefore define a new class of enzymes in the ubiquitin pathway or it may have a novel function in cellular regulation which is unrelated to ubiquitin conjugation.
The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae differentiates into filamentous invasively growing forms under conditions of nutrient limitation. This response is dependent on the transcription factor Ste12 and on the mating pheromone-response mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade, but a mechanism for regulation of Ste12 by nutrient limitation has not been defined. Here we show that Ste12 function in filamentous growth is regulated by the cyclin-dependent kinase Srb10 (also known as Cdk8), which is associated with the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme. Srb10 inhibits filamentous growth in cells growing in rich medium by phosphorylating Ste12 and decreasing its stability. Under conditions of limiting nitrogen, loss of Srb10 protein and kinase activity occurs, with a corresponding loss of Ste12 phosphorylation. Mutation of the Srb10-dependent phosphorylation sites increases pseudohyphal development but has no effect on the pheromone response of haploid yeast. Srb10 kinase activity is also regulated independently of the mating pheromone-response pathway. This indicates that Srb10 controls Ste12 activity for filamentous growth in response to nitrogen limitation and is consistent with the hypothesis that Srb10 regulates gene-specific activators in response to physiological signals to coordinate gene expression with growth potential.
Membrane-enclosed organelles, a defining characteristic of eukaryotic cells, are lost during differentiation of specific cell types such as reticulocytes (an intermediate in differentiation of erythrocytes), central fibre cells of the eye lens, and keratinocytes. The degradation of these organelles must be tightly regulated with respect to both the time of activation and the specificity of membrane degradation. The expression of 15-lipoxygenase (15-LOX) peaks in reticulocytes immediately before organelle degradation. Here we show that 15-LOX integrates into the membranes of various organelles, allowing release of proteins from the organelle lumen and access of proteases to both lumenal and integral membrane proteins. In addition, by sparing the plasma membrane, 15-LOX shows the required specificity for organellar membranes. Thus, the action of 15-LOX provides a mechanism by which the natural degradation process can be explained. This conclusion is supported by our finding that lipoxygenase expression in the eye lens is restricted to the region at which organelle degradation occurs.
Cytoplasmic polyadenylation-induced translation controls germ cell development, neuronal synaptic plasticity and cellular senescence, a tumour-suppressor mechanism that limits the replicative lifespan of cells. The cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB) promotes polyadenylation by nucleating a group of factors including defective in germline development 2 (Gld2), a non-canonical poly(A) polymerase, on specific messenger RNA (mRNA) 3' untranslated regions (UTRs). Because CPEB regulation of p53 mRNA polyadenylation/translation is necessary for cellular senescence in primary human diploid fibroblasts, we surmised that Gld2 would be the enzyme responsible for poly(A) addition. Here we show that depletion of Gld2 surprisingly promotes rather than inhibits p53 mRNA polyadenylation/translation, induces premature senescence and enhances the stability of CPEB mRNA. The CPEB 3' UTR contains two miR-122 binding sites, which when deleted, elevate mRNA translation, as does an antagomir of miR-122. Although miR-122 is thought to be liver specific, it is present in primary fibroblasts and destabilized by Gld2 depletion. Gld4, a second non-canonical poly(A) polymerase, was found to regulate p53 mRNA polyadenylation/translation in a CPEB-dependent manner. Thus, translational regulation of p53 mRNA and cellular senescence is coordinated by Gld2/miR-122/CPEB/Gld4.
Human neutrophilic leukocytes release neutral protease and beta-glucuronidase during cell contact with, and phagocytosis of, zymosan particles treated with rheumatoid arthritic serum. Release of lysosomal enzymes is inhibited by epinephrine and adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP), but not by phenylephrine or adenosine 5'-monophosphate. Inhibition of enzyme release by epinephrine may be mediated by cyclic AMP because the cyclic AMP in the neutrophils is increased by epinephrine treatment at the time when enzyme release is reduced.
In recent years, members of the protein kinase family have been discovered at an accelerated pace. Most were first described, not through the traditional biochemical approach of protein purification and enzyme assay, but as putative protein kinase amino acid sequences deduced from the nucleotide sequences of molecularly cloned genes or complementary DNAs. Phylogenetic mapping of the conserved protein kinase catalytic domains can serve as a useful first step in the functional characterization of these newly identified family members.
Hepatitis C virus is a major global health problem affecting an estimated 170 million people worldwide. Chronic infection is common and can lead to cirrhosis and liver cancer. There is no vaccine available and current therapies have met with limited success. The viral RNA genome encodes a polyprotein that includes two proteases essential for virus replication. The NS2-3 protease mediates a single cleavage at the NS2/NS3 junction, whereas the NS3-4A protease cleaves at four downstream sites in the polyprotein. NS3-4A is characterized as a serine protease with a chymotrypsin-like fold, but the enzymatic mechanism of the NS2-3 protease remains unresolved. Here we report the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of the NS2-3 protease at 2.3 A resolution. The structure reveals a dimeric cysteine protease with two composite active sites. For each active site, the catalytic histidine and glutamate residues are contributed by one monomer, and the nucleophilic cysteine by the other. The carboxy-terminal residues remain coordinated in the two active sites, predicting an inactive post-cleavage form. Proteolysis through formation of a composite active site occurs in the context of the viral polyprotein expressed in mammalian cells. These features offer unexpected insights into polyprotein processing by hepatitis C virus and new opportunities for antiviral drug design.
A common hallmark of human cancers is the overexpression of telomerase, a ribonucleoprotein complex that is responsible for maintaining the length and integrity of chromosome ends. Telomere length deregulation and telomerase activation is an early, and perhaps necessary, step in cancer cell evolution. Here we present the high-resolution structure of the Tribolium castaneum catalytic subunit of telomerase, TERT. The protein consists of three highly conserved domains, organized into a ring-like structure that shares common features with retroviral reverse transcriptases, viral RNA polymerases and B-family DNA polymerases. Domain organization places motifs implicated in substrate binding and catalysis in the interior of the ring, which can accommodate seven to eight bases of double-stranded nucleic acid. Modelling of an RNA-DNA heteroduplex in the interior of this ring demonstrates a perfect fit between the protein and the nucleic acid substrate, and positions the 3'-end of the DNA primer at the active site of the enzyme, providing evidence for the formation of an active telomerase elongation complex.
It is now possible to paint a detailed picture of how cytoplasmic proteins are handled by the immune system. They are apparently degraded in the cytoplasm into peptides. These are then transported into the endoplasmic reticulum where they encounter class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Once loaded with peptide, the HLA molecules move through the Golgi apparatus to the cell membrane. Until recently, it had not been established how peptides without signal sequences cross the ER membrane. However, a number of papers have now described a pair of membrane transporter genes of the ABC (ATP-binding cassette) super-family which are attractive candidates for this function. Both transporter genes, which may encode two halves of a heterodimer, are situated in the class II region of the MHC. There is evidence that other putative components of the processing machinery, the LMPs (low molecular mass polypeptides), are also encoded in the MHC. Similarities between the properties of the LMPs and a large intracellular protease complex, called proteasome, have led to the suggestion that LMPs are involved in processing antigens. We have now identified a human gene with sequence homology to proteasome components. Remarkably, this gene maps between the two putative peptide transporter genes.
Efficient phagocytosis of apoptotic cells is crucial for tissue homeostasis and the immune response. Rab5 is known as a key regulator of the early endocytic pathway and we have recently shown that Rab5 is also implicated in apoptotic cell engulfment; however, the precise spatio-temporal dynamics of Rab5 activity remain unknown. Here, using a newly developed fluorescence resonance energy transfer biosensor, we describe a change in Rab5 activity during the engulfment of apoptotic thymocytes. Rab5 activity on phagosome membranes began to increase on disassembly of the actin coat encapsulating phagosomes. Rab5 activation was either continuous or repetitive for up to 10 min, but it ended before the collapse of engulfed apoptotic cells. Expression of a dominant-negative mutant of Rab5 delayed this collapse of apoptotic thymocytes, showing a role for Rab5 in phagosome maturation. Disruption of microtubules with nocodazole inhibited Rab5 activation on the phagosome membrane without perturbing the engulfment of apoptotic cells. Furthermore, we found that Gapex-5 is the guanine nucleotide exchange factor essential for Rab5 activation during the engulfment of apoptotic cells. Gapex-5 was bound to a microtubule-tip-associating protein, EB1, whose depletion inhibited Rab5 activation during phagocytosis. We therefore propose a mechanistic model in which the recruitment of Gapex-5 to phagosomes through the microtubule network induces the transient Rab5 activation.
Cellular communication in the nervous system is mediated by chemical messengers that include amino acids, monoamines, peptide hormones, and lipids. An interesting question is how neurons regulate signals that are transmitted by membrane-embedded lipids. Here, we report the 2.8 angstrom crystal structure of the integral membrane protein fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), an enzyme that degrades members of the endocannabinoid class of signaling lipids and terminates their activity. The structure of FAAH complexed with an arachidonyl inhibitor reveals how a set of discrete structural alterations allows this enzyme, in contrast to soluble hydrolases of the same family, to integrate into cell membranes and establish direct access to the bilayer from its active site.
Rust growth in the bean leaf was accompanied by the appearance of one new malate dehydrogenase isozyme and continuation of one otherwise lost during the development of the healthy leaf. The new isozyme was contributed by the fungus, the other by the leaf. Both enzymes were cytoplasmic proteins. Rusting caused the loss of a mitochondrial isozyme.
SCF complexes are the largest family of E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases and mediate the ubiquitination of diverse regulatory and signalling proteins. Here we present the crystal structure of the Cul1-Rbx1-Skp1-F boxSkp2 SCF complex, which shows that Cul1 is an elongated protein that consists of a long stalk and a globular domain. The globular domain binds the RING finger protein Rbx1 through an intermolecular beta-sheet, forming a two-subunit catalytic core that recruits the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. The long stalk, which consists of three repeats of a novel five-helix motif, binds the Skp1-F boxSkp2 protein substrate-recognition complex at its tip. Cul1 serves as a rigid scaffold that organizes the Skp1-F boxSkp2 and Rbx1 subunits, holding them over 100 A apart. The structure suggests that Cul1 may contribute to catalysis through the positioning of the substrate and the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, and this model is supported by Cul1 mutations designed to eliminate the rigidity of the scaffold.
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) increase the rate of GTP hydrolysis on guanine nucleotide-binding proteins by many orders of magnitude. Studies with Ras and Rho have elucidated the mechanism of GAP action by showing that their catalytic machinery is both stabilized by GAP binding and complemented by the insertion of a so-called 'arginine finger' into the phosphate-binding pocket. This has been proposed as a universal mechanism for GAP-mediated GTP hydrolysis. Ran is a nuclear Ras-related protein that regulates both transport between the nucleus and cytoplasm during interphase, and formation of the mitotic spindle and/or nuclear envelope in dividing cells. Ran-GTP is hydrolysed by the combined action of Ran-binding proteins (RanBPs) and RanGAP. Here we present the three-dimensional structure of a Ran-RanBP1-RanGAP ternary complex in the ground state and in a transition-state mimic. The structure and biochemical experiments show that RanGAP does not act through an arginine finger, that the basic machinery for fast GTP hydrolysis is provided exclusively by Ran and that correct positioning of the catalytic glutamine is essential for catalysis.
The human pathogen Trypanosoma cruzi (Y strain) contains a neuraminidase activity that varies widely in the different developmental stages of the parasite. The specific neuraminidase activity of infective trypomastigotes obtained from tissue culture and from the bloodstream of infected mice is 7 to 15 times higher than that of the acellular culture forms. Amastigotes were devoid of enzyme activity. The enzyme has a pH optimum of 6.0 to 6.5. Live trypanosomes released sialic acid from human erythrocytes and plasma glycoproteins. Several sialyl compounds were hydrolyzed by the parasite, but the best substrate was the protein orosomucoid. Erythrocytes from infected mice with T. cruzi parasitemia were agglutinated by peanut lectin and the hemagglutination titer was correlated with the degree of parasitemia.
Klenow fragment of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I, which was cocrystallized with duplex DNA, positioned 11 base pairs of DNA in a groove that lies at right angles to the cleft that contains the polymerase active site and is adjacent to the 3' to 5' exonuclease domain. When the fragment bound DNA, a region previously referred to as the "disordered domain" became more ordered and moved along with two helices toward the 3' to 5' exonuclease domain to form the binding groove. A single-stranded, 3' extension of three nucleotides bound to the 3' to 5' exonuclease active site. Although this cocrystal structure appears to be an editing complex, it suggests that the primer strand approaches the catalytic site of the polymerase from the direction of the 3' to 5' exonuclease domain and that the duplex DNA product may bend to enter the cleft that contains the polymerase catalytic site.
Sp1 is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein that activates RNA polymerase II transcription from promoters that contain properly positioned GC boxes. A series of deletion mutants of Sp1 were expressed in Escherichia coli and used to identify separate regions of the protein that are important for three different biochemical activities. The sequence-specificity of DNA binding was conferred by Zn(II) fingers, whereas a different region of Sp1 appeared to regulate the affinity of DNA binding. The E. coli-synthesized Sp1 was able to stimulate initiation of RNA synthesis in vitro, and at least two distinct segments of the protein contributed to its transcriptional activity.
Crystallins, the principal components of the lens, have been regarded simply as soluble, structural proteins. It now appears that the major taxon-specific crystallins of vertebrates and invertebrates are either enzymes or closely related to enzymes. In terms of sequence similarity, size, and other physical characteristics delta-crystallin is closely related to argininosuccinate lyase, tau-crystallin to enolase, and SIII-crystallin to glutathione S-transferase; moreover, it has recently been demonstrated that epsilon-crystallin is an active lactate dehydrogenase. Enzymes may have been recruited several times as lens proteins, perhaps because of the developmental history of the tissue or simply because of evolutionary pragmatism (the selection of existing stable structures for a new structural role).
Initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II from a promoter region on DNA requires the assembly of several initiation factors to form a preinitiation complex. Assembly of this complex is initiated by the binding of the transcription factor TFIID, composed of the TATA-box binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAF[II]s), to the promoter. We have now characterized an immunopurified TFIID complex which we unexpectedly find contains the cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF), one of the factors required for formation of the 3' end of messenger RNA. CPSF is brought to the preinitiation complex by TFIID, but after transcription starts, CPSF dissociates from TFIID and becomes associated with the elongating polymerase. We also show that overexpression of recombinant TBP in HeLa cells decreases polyadenylation without affecting the correct initiation of transcription of the reporter gene. This indicates that, owing to incomplete assembly of TFIID on recombinant TBP, CPSF is not brought to the promoter and therefore polyadenylation becomes less efficient. Our observations have thus revealed a link between transcription initiation and elongation by RNA polymerase II and processing of the 3' end of mRNA.
Yeast phosphatidylinositol transfer protein (Sec14p) is required for the production of secretory vesicles from the Golgi. This requirement can be relieved by inactivation of the cytosine 5'-diphosphate (CDP)-choline pathway for phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis, indicating that Sec14p is an essential component of a regulatory pathway linking phospholipid metabolism with vesicle trafficking (the Sec14p pathway). Sac1p (refs 7 and 8) is an integral membrane protein related to inositol-5-phosphatases such as synaptojanin, a protein found in rat brain. Here we show that defects in Sac1p also relieve the requirement for Sec14p by altering phospholipid metabolism so as to expand the pool of diacylglycerol (DAG) in the Golgi. Moreover, although short-chain DAG improves secretory function in strains with a temperature-sensitive Sec14p, expression of diacylglycerol kinase from Escherichia coli further impairs it. The essential function of Sec14p may therefore be to maintain a sufficient pool of DAG in the Golgi to support the production of secretory vesicles.
The nucleotides immediately surrounding intron/exon junctions of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase B can be derived from 'consensus' sequences for donor and acceptor splice sites by only a few base changes. Studies in vivo have underlined the importance of these junction nucleotides for splicing. In higher eukaryotes, no evidence has been found for specific internal intron sequences involved in splicing. However, the recent discovery that, in vitro, introns are excised in a lariat form where the 5' end of the intron is joined via a 2'-5'-phosphodiester linkage to an A residue (branchpoint acceptor) close to the 3' end of the intron, suggests that internal intron sequences may nonetheless be important for splicing. Indeed, in yeast nuclear genes, the internal sequence 5'-TACTAAC-3' (or close homologue) is essential for splicing in vivo. A proposed consensus sequence for branchpoints in mammalian introns is 5'-CT(A/G)A(C/T)-3'. This sequence resembles the essential yeast internal sequence. Are branchpoints involved in the splicing of introns of higher eukaryotes in vivo? We show here that a branchpoint sequence from a human globin gene (5'-CTGACTCTCTCTG-3') greatly enhances the efficiency of splicing of a 'synthetic' intron in HeLa cells. A mutated branchpoint sequence, 5'-CTCCTCTCTCTG-3', in which the branchpoint acceptor nucleotide A has been deleted and the neighbouring purine G mutated to a C, does not exhibit this enhancing capability. We conclude that branchpoints have an important function in the splicing process in vivo.
Many metabolic and physiological processes display circadian oscillations. We have shown that the core circadian regulator, CLOCK, is a histone acetyltransferase whose activity is counterbalanced by the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+)-dependent histone deacetylase SIRT1. Here we show that intracellular NAD+ levels cycle with a 24-hour rhythm, an oscillation driven by the circadian clock. CLOCK:BMAL1 regulates the circadian expression of NAMPT (nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase), an enzyme that provides a rate-limiting step in the NAD+ salvage pathway. SIRT1 is recruited to the Nampt promoter and contributes to the circadian synthesis of its own coenzyme. Using the specific inhibitor FK866, we demonstrated that NAMPT is required to modulate circadian gene expression. Our findings in mouse embryo fibroblasts reveal an interlocked transcriptional-enzymatic feedback loop that governs the molecular interplay between cellular metabolism and circadian rhythms.
TRPML1 (mucolipin 1, also known as MCOLN1) is predicted to be an intracellular late endosomal and lysosomal ion channel protein that belongs to the mucolipin subfamily of transient receptor potential (TRP) proteins. Mutations in the human TRPML1 gene cause mucolipidosis type IV disease (ML4). ML4 patients have motor impairment, mental retardation, retinal degeneration and iron-deficiency anaemia. Because aberrant iron metabolism may cause neural and retinal degeneration, it may be a primary cause of ML4 phenotypes. In most mammalian cells, release of iron from endosomes and lysosomes after iron uptake by endocytosis of Fe(3+)-bound transferrin receptors, or after lysosomal degradation of ferritin-iron complexes and autophagic ingestion of iron-containing macromolecules, is the chief source of cellular iron. The divalent metal transporter protein DMT1 (also known as SLC11A2) is the only endosomal Fe(2+) transporter known at present and it is highly expressed in erythroid precursors. Genetic studies, however, suggest the existence of a DMT1-independent endosomal and lysosomal Fe(2+) transport protein. By measuring radiolabelled iron uptake, by monitoring the levels of cytosolic and intralysosomal iron and by directly patch-clamping the late endosomal and lysosomal membrane, here we show that TRPML1 functions as a Fe(2+) permeable channel in late endosomes and lysosomes. ML4 mutations are shown to impair the ability of TRPML1 to permeate Fe(2+) at varying degrees, which correlate well with the disease severity. A comparison of TRPML1(-/- )ML4 and control human skin fibroblasts showed a reduction in cytosolic Fe(2+) levels, an increase in intralysosomal Fe(2+) levels and an accumulation of lipofuscin-like molecules in TRPML1(-/-) cells. We propose that TRPML1 mediates a mechanism by which Fe(2+) is released from late endosomes and lysosomes. Our results indicate that impaired iron transport may contribute to both haematological and degenerative symptoms of ML4 patients.
Protein modification by ubiquitin is emerging as a signal for various biological processes in eukaryotes, including regulated proteolysis, but also for non-degradative functions such as protein localization, DNA repair and regulation of chromatin structure. A small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) uses a similar conjugation system that sometimes counteracts the effects of ubiquitination. Ubiquitin and SUMO compete for modification of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), an essential processivity factor for DNA replication and repair. Whereas multi-ubiquitination is mediated by components of the RAD6 pathway and promotes error-free repair, SUMO modification is associated with replication. Here we show that RAD6-mediated mono-ubiquitination of PCNA activates translesion DNA synthesis by the damage-tolerant polymerases eta and zeta in yeast. Moreover, polymerase zeta is differentially affected by mono-ubiquitin and SUMO modification of PCNA. Whereas ubiquitination is required for damage-induced mutagenesis, both SUMO and mono-ubiquitin contribute to spontaneous mutagenesis in the absence of DNA damage. Our findings assign a function to SUMO during S phase and demonstrate how ubiquitin and SUMO, by regulating the accuracy of replication and repair, contribute to overall genomic stability.
One surprising outcome of applying the techniques of protein engineering to the enzyme tyrosyl-transfer RNA synthetase was that the enzyme's activity could actually be increased by a specific sequence change. In particular, altering residue threonine 51 to a proline (mutant TP51) increased the enzyme's affinity for tyrosyl adenylate complexes. The non-additive effect of combining the TP51 mutation with a second sequence alteration (histidine 48 to a glycine) suggested that the effect of the TP51 change might be mediated by a structural change involving the peptide backbone. To address the question of the mechanism by which the TP51 change increases the activity of tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase we have determined the structure of the mutant enzyme. We find the change has a purely local effect on the structure of the enzyme, and conclude that the increased activity of the TP51 mutant probably results from the replacement of the polar threonine residue by a non-polar group: in the wild-type enzyme substrate binding is disfavoured by the displacement of solvent from the vicinity of threonine 51. This unfavourable effect is absent in the TP51 mutant.
A large-scale effort to measure, detect and analyse protein-protein interactions using experimental methods is under way. These include biochemistry such as co-immunoprecipitation or crosslinking, molecular biology such as the two-hybrid system or phage display, and genetics such as unlinked noncomplementing mutant detection. Using the two-hybrid system, an international effort to analyse the complete yeast genome is in progress. Evidently, all these approaches are tedious, labour intensive and inaccurate. From a computational perspective, the question is how can we predict that two proteins interact from structure or sequence alone. Here we present a method that identifies gene-fusion events in complete genomes, solely based on sequence comparison. Because there must be selective pressure for certain genes to be fused over the course of evolution, we are able to predict functional associations of proteins. We show that 215 genes or proteins in the complete genomes of Escherichia coli, Haemophilus influenzae and Methanococcus jannaschii are involved in 64 unique fusion events. The approach is general, and can be applied even to genes of unknown function.
The metabolic basis of the autosomal recessive disease cystic fibrosis (CF) remains unidentified. Elevated levels of a serum protein in CF homozygotes and obligate heterozygotes have been described. As heterozygotes are clinically unaffected, any consistently observed abnormality in these individuals is a likely pointer to the aetiology of the disease. The gene for this serum protein, called cystic fibrosis (CF) antigen, has been mapped to chromosome 1. It is not the gene that is mutant in CF because this has since been assigned to chromosome 7 by cosegregation of the disease with closely linked DNA markers in CF families. CF antigen is a product of normal and leukaemic granulocytes and is inducible in the promyelocytic cell line HL60 (M.N., J.D., C. Hayward, F. Northrop, D.J.H.B., J. Walker, V. van H. and D.S.S., manuscript in preparation). We have isolated cDNA clones for this protein from a library constructed with messenger RNA from chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) cells. The complete nucleotide sequence was obtained from the cDNA clone and by primer extension of mRNA. We have confirmed that the gene encoding CF antigen is on chromosome 1 and have localized it to a particular region. RNA blot analysis shows a 550-bp major transcript in CML cells and in induced HL60. The amino-acid sequence predicted from the nucleotide sequence shows significant homology with intestinal and brain calcium-binding proteins. Abnormal accumulation of such a protein in CF is a clue which must be pursued now that evidence is gathering that the basic defect in CF is in pathways controlling chloride channel activity.
The enzyme, 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG) aldolase, catalyzes several reactions, the natural ones being (i) the exchange of hydrogen atoms of the methyl groups of pyruvate with protons of the solvent (C-H synthesis) and (ii) the reversible condensation of pyruvate with D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (C-C synthesis). Previous work has provided chemical evidence for the occurrence of a protein-bound carboxylate group adjacent to the Schiff's base-forming lysine in the active site geometry. This carboxylate could provide the basic group postulated to participate in proton activation catalyzed by aldolases. With the use of three-dimensional models, it is shown that simple rotation about a carbon-carbon bond of the side chain will allow the base to assume the two positions necessary for proton activation in either the C-H synthesis or the C-C synthesis catalyzed by KDPG aldolase. This single base hypothesis provides a model wherein all reagents can approach a single face of the active site and is consistent with the stereochemistry thought to occur in the aldolase reaction.
Membrane-bound G proteins carry information from receptors on the outside of cells to effector proteins inside cells. The alpha subunits of these heterotrimeric proteins bind and hydrolyse GTP and control the specificity of interactions with receptor and effector elements. Signalling by G proteins involves a cycle in which the inactive alpha beta gamma-GDP complex dissociates to produce alpha*-GTP, which is capable of activating the effector enzyme or ion channel; the alpha*-GTP complex hydrolyses bound GTP and reassociates with beta gamma to form the inactive complex. We have characterized a mutation that interrupts this GTP-driven cycle in alpha s, the alpha-chain of Gs, the G protein that stimulates adenylyl cyclase. The mutation converts a glycine to an alanine residue in the presumed GDP-binding domain of alpha s. The location and biochemical consequences of this mutation suggest a common mechanism by which binding of GTP or ATP may induce changes in the conformation of a number of nucleoside triphosphate binding proteins.
The recombination of DNA molecules has been reconstituted in vitro using two purified enzymes from Escherichia coli. RecA protein catalyses homologous pairing and strand exchange reactions to form intermediate DNA structures that are acted upon by RuvC. The newly identified RuvC protein resolves the intermediates by specific endonucleolytic cleavage to produce recombinant DNA molecules.
beta-1,3-Glucanase is a latent enzyme found in large and small particles in unfertilized eggs. At fertilization, the enzyme in the large particles is released into the surrounding perivitelline space. The enzyme may be involved in transformations of extracellular glycoproteins.
Pig pancreatic kallikrein liberates kallidin from kininogen, whereas trypsin releases bradykinin. Recently, both kallikrein and trypsin have been reported to convert inactive plasma renin to active renin. However, we found that at pH 6.0, trypsin generated an angiotensin II-like pressor substance from human plasma protein in the absence of converting enzyme. This has been isolated and found to have the same amino acid composition as angiotensin II. Thus, in vitro trypsin can directly liberate both the depressor, bradykinin, in weak alkaline conditions, and the pressor, angiotensin II, at weakly acidic pH, from the appropriate substrates. We have now investigated whether kallikrein--a serine protease like trypsin--also generates a pressor substance at weakly acidic pH. Our results demonstrate that it does. We therefore suggest that kallikrein may be involved in a direct link between the pressor and depressor systems and we propose the term 'kinin-tensin system' for this sort of one-enzyme system capable of generating both depressor and pressor substances.
A major pathway of messenger RNA degradation in eukaryotic cells is initiated by shortening of the poly(A) tail, which, at least in yeast, triggers a decapping reaction, thereby exposing the mRNA to 5' --> 3' degradation. Decapping is the key step in this decay pathway because the transcript body is rapidly degraded following decapping. Accordingly, decapping is the site of numerous controls, including inhibition of decapping by the poly(A) tail and modulation of mRNA decapping rate by specific sequences. Moreover, a specialized decay pathway that degrades aberrant transcripts triggers rapid mRNA decapping independently of poly(A)-tail shortening. We have identified a yeast gene, termed DCP1, that encodes the decapping enzyme, or an essential component of a decapping complex. The protein Dcp1 is required for the normal decay of many unstable and stable yeast mRNAs, as well as mRNAs that are decapped independently of deadenylation. These results indicate that mRNA-specific rates of decapping, and thus decay, will result from differences in the interaction of the DCP1 decapping enzyme with individual transcripts.
Telomeres, specialized protein-DNA complexes that cap the ends of linear chromosomes, are essential for protecting chromosomes from degradation and end-to-end fusions. The Pot1 (protection of telomeres 1) protein is a widely distributed eukaryotic end-capping protein, having been identified in fission yeast, microsporidia, plants and animals. Schizosaccharomyces pombe Pot1p is essential for telomere maintenance, and human POT1 has been implicated in telomerase regulation. Pot1 binds telomeric single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) with exceptionally high sequence specificity, the molecular basis of which has been unknown. Here we describe the 1.9-A-resolution crystal structure of the amino-terminal DNA-binding domain of S. pombe Pot1p complexed with ssDNA. The protein adopts an oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding (OB) fold with two loops that protrude to form a clamp for ssDNA binding. The structure explains the sequence specificity of binding: in the context of the Pot1 protein, DNA self-recognition involving base-stacking and unusual G-T base pairs compacts the DNA. Any sequence change disrupts the ability of the DNA to form this structure, preventing it from contacting the array of protein hydrogen-bonding groups. The structure also explains how Pot1p avoids binding the vast excess of RNA in the nucleus.
Nucleic acid damage by environmental and endogenous alkylation reagents creates lesions that are both mutagenic and cytotoxic, with the latter effect accounting for their widespread use in clinical cancer chemotherapy. Escherichia coli AlkB and the homologous human proteins ABH2 and ABH3 (refs 5, 7) promiscuously repair DNA and RNA bases damaged by S(N)2 alkylation reagents, which attach hydrocarbons to endocyclic ring nitrogen atoms (N1 of adenine and guanine and N3 of thymine and cytosine). Although the role of AlkB in DNA repair has long been established based on phenotypic studies, its exact biochemical activity was only elucidated recently after sequence profile analysis revealed it to be a member of the Fe-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase superfamily. These enzymes use an Fe(II) cofactor and 2-oxoglutarate co-substrate to oxidize organic substrates. AlkB hydroxylates an alkylated nucleotide base to produce an unstable product that releases an aldehyde to regenerate the unmodified base. Here we have determined crystal structures of substrate and product complexes of E. coli AlkB at resolutions from 1.8 to 2.3 A. Whereas the Fe-2-oxoglutarate dioxygenase core matches that in other superfamily members, a unique subdomain holds a methylated trinucleotide substrate into the active site through contacts to the polynucleotide backbone. Amide hydrogen exchange studies and crystallographic analyses suggest that this substrate-binding 'lid' is conformationally flexible, which may enable docking of diverse alkylated nucleotide substrates in optimal catalytic geometry. Different crystal structures show open and closed states of a tunnel putatively gating O2 diffusion into the active site. Exposing crystals of the anaerobic Michaelis complex to air yields slow but substantial oxidation of 2-oxoglutarate that is inefficiently coupled to nucleotide oxidation. These observations suggest that protein dynamics modulate redox chemistry and that a hypothesized migration of the reactive oxy-ferryl ligand on the catalytic Fe ion may be impeded when the protein is constrained in the crystal lattice.
Mobile group II intron RNAs insert directly into DNA target sites and are then reverse-transcribed into genomic DNA by the associated intron-encoded protein. Target site recognition involves modifiable base-pairing interactions between the intron RNA and a >14-nucleotide region of the DNA target site, as well as fixed interactions between the protein and flanking regions. Here, we developed a highly efficient Escherichia coli genetic assay to determine detailed target site recognition rules for the Lactococcus lactis group II intron Ll.LtrB and to select introns that insert into desired target sites. Using human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) proviral DNA and the human CCR5 gene as examples, we show that group II introns can be retargeted to insert efficiently into virtually any target DNA and that the retargeted introns retain activity in human cells. This work provides the practical basis for potential applications of targeted group II introns in genetic engineering, functional genomics, and gene therapy.
The intracellular localization of isocitrate dehydrogenase was determined by immunochemical techniques with ultrathin sections of Escherichia coli. The thin sections, which were obtained by ultracryomicrotomy, were incubated first with antiserum specific for the enzyme and then with a protein A-gold complex. Transmission electron microscopy showed that the gold label was dispersed mainly in the cytoplasm.
Measurements of changes in structure and stability caused by 13 different substitutions for threonine 157 in phage T4 lysozyme show that the most stable lysozyme variants contain hydrogen bonds analogous to those in the wild-type enzyme and that structural adjustments allow the protein to be surprisingly tolerant of amino-acid substitutions.
Quantifying the number of deleterious mutations per diploid human genome is of crucial concern to both evolutionary and medical geneticists. Here we combine genome-wide polymorphism data from PCR-based exon resequencing, comparative genomic data across mammalian species, and protein structure predictions to estimate the number of functionally consequential single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) carried by each of 15 African American (AA) and 20 European American (EA) individuals. We find that AAs show significantly higher levels of nucleotide heterozygosity than do EAs for all categories of functional SNPs considered, including synonymous, non-synonymous, predicted 'benign', predicted 'possibly damaging' and predicted 'probably damaging' SNPs. This result is wholly consistent with previous work showing higher overall levels of nucleotide variation in African populations than in Europeans. EA individuals, in contrast, have significantly more genotypes homozygous for the derived allele at synonymous and non-synonymous SNPs and for the damaging allele at 'probably damaging' SNPs than AAs do. For SNPs segregating only in one population or the other, the proportion of non-synonymous SNPs is significantly higher in the EA sample (55.4%) than in the AA sample (47.0%; P < 2.3 x 10(-37)). We observe a similar proportional excess of SNPs that are inferred to be 'probably damaging' (15.9% in EA; 12.1% in AA; P < 3.3 x 10(-11)). Using extensive simulations, we show that this excess proportion of segregating damaging alleles in Europeans is probably a consequence of a bottleneck that Europeans experienced at about the time of the migration out of Africa.
Initiation of T-lymphocyte proliferation by mitogen or antigen involves a cascade of gene activation events. Thus, by the time mitogen-activated T cells have reached the G1/S interface, many genes that are transcriptionally silent in G0, like the c-myc, IL-2, IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) and transferrin receptor (TfR) genes, have been transcriptionally activated. To understand the role of the individual genes in the activation process, one must be able to interfere specifically with the expression or function of each particular gene product. In this way, by blocking the IL-2R with an antibody, it has been demonstrated that IL-2/IL-2R interaction is required to induce TfR expression in activated T cells. When the function or expression of intracellular proteins is to be blocked, however, the need to introduce antibodies into the cytoplasm of viable cells, although possible, is a limiting factor. We have taken another approach, namely the exogenous addition to bulk cell cultures of small antisense oligomers. Sequence-specific antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotides have been reported to inhibit intracellular viral replication without interfering with cellular protein synthesis. Similarly, rabbit globin mRNA translation in a cell-free system and in rabbit reticulocytes has been inhibited by oligomers complementary to the globin mRNA initiation codon region. Recently, a pentadecadeoxyribonucleotide complementary to the initiation codon and four downstream codons of human c-myc mRNA was reported to inhibit the proliferation of the human leukaemic cell line HL-60 specifically. We report here that the same c-myc complementary oligonucleotide inhibits mitogen-induced c-myc protein expression in human T lymphocytes and prevents S phase entry. Interestingly, c-myc antisense treatment did not inhibit G0 to G1 traversal as assessed by morphologic blast transformation, transcriptional activation of the IL-2R and TfR genes, or induction of 3H-uridine incorporation.
Eight of twenty armadillos (Dasypus novemcinctus L.) developed severe lepromatous leprosy 3 to 3.5 years after inoculation with viable Mycobacterium leprae. A total of 988 grams of lepromas containing an estimated 15 to 20 grams of leprosy bacilli has been harvested from these animals. The large amounts of material now available will permit in-depth studies of the biochemistry and metabolism of the leprosy bacillus, and the animal model should make possible definitive studies on the immunology, chemotherapy, and epidemiology of the disease.
Vesicular stomatitis virus is a negative-stranded RNA virus. Its nucleoprotein (N) binds the viral genomic RNA and is involved in multiple functions including transcription, replication, and assembly. We have determined a 2.9 angstrom structure of a complex containing 10 molecules of the N protein and 90 bases of RNA. The RNA is tightly sequestered in a cavity at the interface between two lobes of the N protein. This serves to protect the RNA in the absence of polynucleotide synthesis. For the RNA to be accessed, some conformational change in the N protein should be necessary.
Wnts control the specification of cell fate, cell adhesion, migration, polarity, and proliferation. Their roles in development have been probed in fruit flies, nematodes, zebrafish, frogs, and mice. Some Wnts inhibit the degradation of beta-catenin, which can regulate transcription of specific genes. Other Wnts exert their influences in other ways, such as increasing intracellular concentrations of Ca2+ and decreasing intracellular concentrations of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and RGS proteins have been implicated in Wnt signaling. Wnt regulation of intracellular Ca2+ and cGMP levels requires the G protein transducin and a cGMP-specific phosphodiesterase, which are major elements in signaling of the visual pathway.
Ebola virus (EboV) is a highly pathogenic enveloped virus that causes outbreaks of zoonotic infection in Africa. The clinical symptoms are manifestations of the massive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to infection and in many outbreaks, mortality exceeds 75%. The unpredictable onset, ease of transmission, rapid progression of disease, high mortality and lack of effective vaccine or therapy have created a high level of public concern about EboV. Here we report the identification of a novel benzylpiperazine adamantane diamide-derived compound that inhibits EboV infection. Using mutant cell lines and informative derivatives of the lead compound, we show that the target of the inhibitor is the endosomal membrane protein Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1). We find that NPC1 is essential for infection, that it binds to the virus glycoprotein (GP), and that antiviral compounds interfere with GP binding to NPC1. Combined with the results of previous studies of GP structure and function, our findings support a model of EboV infection in which cleavage of the GP1 subunit by endosomal cathepsin proteases removes heavily glycosylated domains to expose the amino-terminal domain, which is a ligand for NPC1 and regulates membrane fusion by the GP2 subunit. Thus, NPC1 is essential for EboV entry and a target for antiviral therapy.
Epidemiological studies have identified elevated low density lipoprotein (LDL) and diminished high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels as risk factors for coronary artery disease. The major protein component of HDL is apoprotein A-I (apo A-I), a polypeptide of 243 amino acids of known primary amino acid sequence. This apoprotein serves as a cofactor for the plasma lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) enzyme responsible for the formation of most cholesteryl esters in plasma, and also promotes cholesterol efflux from cells. The primary translation product of apo A-I contains both a pre and a pro segment, and post-translational processing of apo A-I may be involved in the formation of the functional plasma apo A-I isoproteins. Defective apo A-I processing may be the underlying problem in Tangier disease, in which patients have low plasma HDL and apo A-I levels despite normal apo A-I synthesis. Patients have been reported with conditions distinct from Tangier disease in whom severe deficiency or absence of apo A-I has been associated with very low HDL levels and severe coronary artery disease. We have now examined the apo A-I gene in two such patients and their first degree relatives. These patients have been reported to have skin and tendon xanthomas, corneal clouding and severe premature coronary atherosclerosis associated with very low HDL levels and deficiencies of two apoproteins, apo A-I and apo C-III. We show that both probands are homozygous for a defect in the apo A-I gene locus.
During transcription initiation in vitro, prokaryotic and eukaryotic RNA polymerase (RNAP) can engage in abortive initiation-the synthesis and release of short (2 to 15 nucleotides) RNA transcripts-before productive initiation. It has not been known whether abortive initiation occurs in vivo. Using hybridization with locked nucleic acid probes, we directly detected abortive transcripts in bacteria. In addition, we show that in vivo abortive initiation shows characteristics of in vitro abortive initiation: Abortive initiation increases upon stabilizing interactions between RNAP and either promoter DNA or sigma factor, and also upon deleting elongation factor GreA. Abortive transcripts may have functional roles in regulating gene expression in vivo.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) allows the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to recover from the accumulation of misfolded proteins, in part by increasing its folding capacity. Inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1) promotes this remodeling by detecting misfolded ER proteins and activating a transcription factor, X-box-binding protein 1, through endonucleolytic cleavage of its messenger RNA (mRNA). Here, we report that IRE1 independently mediates the rapid degradation of a specific subset of mRNAs, based both on their localization to the ER membrane and on the amino acid sequence they encode. This response is well suited to complement other UPR mechanisms because it could selectively halt production of proteins that challenge the ER and clear the translocation and folding machinery for the subsequent remodeling process.
It is now widely accepted that tumour-promoting phorbol esters activate a Ca2+- and phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase C) both in vitro and in intact cells, and that the kinase represents a major cellular phorbol ester-binding protein. The phorbol esters act as analogues of diacylglycerol, a natural regulator of protein kinase C, and stabilize the membrane-association of the kinase. Although other molecular targets may exist, protein kinase C activation is probably important in mediating the diverse responses of cultured cells to phorbol esters and in promoting in vivo tumours. The enzyme comprises a family of closely related proteins and has been detected in extracts from mouse epidermal cells, the likely targets for two-stage carcinogenesis in mouse skin. In this report we show that application of a single dose of TPA (12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate) to mouse skin results in a rapid and complete loss of protein kinase C activity which is maintained for 3-4 days. This is associated with a loss of immunologically detectable protein kinase C and the accumulation of a smaller protein detectable by antibodies recognizing the regulatory domain of protein kinase C.
In eukaryotes, the DNA of the genome is packaged with histone proteins to form nucleosomal filaments, which are, in turn, folded into a series of less well understood chromatin structures. Post-translational modifications of histone tail domains modulate chromatin structure and gene expression. Of these, histone ubiquitination is poorly understood. Here we show that the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Rad6 (Ubc2) mediates methylation of histone H3 at lysine 4 (Lys 4) through ubiquitination of H2B at Lys 123 in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Moreover, H3 (Lys 4) methylation is abolished in the H2B-K123R mutant, whereas H3-K4R retains H2B (Lys 123) ubiquitination. These data indicate a unidirectional regulatory pathway in which ubiquitination of H2B (Lys 123) is a prerequisite for H3 (Lys 4) methylation. We also show that an H2B-K123R mutation perturbs silencing at the telomere, providing functional links between Rad6-mediated H2B (Lys 123) ubiquitination, Set1-mediated H3 (Lys 4) methylation, and transcriptional silencing. Thus, these data reveal a pathway leading to gene regulation through concerted histone modifications on distinct histone tails. We refer to this as 'trans-tail' regulation of histone modification, a stated prediction of the histone code hypothesis.
The efflux of chemically diverse drugs by multidrug transporters that span the membrane is one mechanism of multidrug resistance in bacteria. The concentrations of many of these transporters are controlled by transcription regulators, such as BmrR in Bacillus subtilis, EmrR in Escherichia coli and QacR in Staphylococcus aureus. These proteins promote transporter gene expression when they bind toxic compounds. BmrR activates transcription of the multidrug transporter gene, bmr, in response to cellular invasion by certain lipophilic cationic compounds (drugs). BmrR belongs to the MerR family, which regulates response to stress such as exposure to toxic compounds or oxygen radicals in bacteria. MerR proteins have homologous amino-terminal DNA-binding domains but different carboxy-terminal domains, which enable them to bind specific 'coactivator' molecules. When bound to coactivator, MerR proteins upregulate transcription by reconfiguring the 19-base-pair spacer found between the -35 and -10 promoter elements to allow productive interaction with RNA polymerase. Here we report the 3.0 A resolution structure of BmrR in complex with the drug tetraphenylphosphonium (TPP) and a 22-base-pair oligodeoxynucleotide encompassing the bmr promoter. The structure reveals an unexpected mechanism for transcription activation that involves localized base-pair breaking, and base sliding and realignment of the -35 and -10 operator elements.
Inhibiting protein synthesis by incubating C6-2B rat astrocytoma cells with cycloheximide or emetine for periods up to 24 hours caused a progressive decrease in the accumulation of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP) when the cells were challenged for 30 minutes with 100 microM forskolin. In contrast, cholera toxin-stimulated (6 nM, 3 hours) cyclic AMP accumulation was not diminished in cycloheximide-treated cells, and cyclic AMP was only minimally diminished in response to a 30-minute challenge with 10 microM (-)-isoproterenol. These experiments suggest the presence of a previously unrecognized cyclase component, which is essential for forskolin-stimulated cyclic AMP accumulation and has a shorter half-life than the beta-adrenergic receptor, the guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins, or the cyclase catalytic component.
The 2.9 A resolution crystal structure of Escherichia coli catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) complexed with cyclic AMP reveals two distinct structural domains separated by a cleft. The smaller carboxy-terminal domain is presumed to bind DNA while the amino-terminal domain is seen to bind cyclic AMP. Model building studies suggest that CAP binds to left-handed B-type DNA, contracting its major groove via two alpha-helices. It is possible that the CAP conversion of right- to left-handed DNA in a closed supercoil, is what activates transcription by RNA polymerase.
Microtubules are hollow polymers of alphabeta-tubulin that show GTP-dependent assembly dynamics and comprise a critical part of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton. Initiation of new microtubules in vivo requires gamma-tubulin, organized as an oligomer within the 2.2-MDa gamma-tubulin ring complex (gamma-TuRC) of higher eukaryotes. Structural insight is lacking regarding gamma-tubulin, its oligomerization and how it promotes microtubule assembly. Here we report the 2.7-A crystal structure of human gamma-tubulin bound to GTP-gammaS (a non-hydrolysable GTP analogue). We observe a 'curved' conformation for gamma-tubulin-GTPgammaS, similar to that seen for GDP-bound, unpolymerized alphabeta-tubulin. Tubulins are thought to represent a distinct class of GTP-binding proteins, and conformational switching in gamma-tubulin might differ from the nucleotide-dependent switching of signalling GTPases. A crystal packing interaction replicates the lateral contacts between alpha- and beta-tubulins in the microtubule, and this association probably forms the basis for gamma-tubulin oligomerization within the gamma-TuRC. Laterally associated gamma-tubulins in the gamma-TuRC might promote microtubule nucleation by providing a template that enhances the intrinsically weak lateral interaction between alphabeta-tubulin heterodimers. Because they are dimeric, alphabeta-tubulins cannot form microtubule-like lateral associations in the curved conformation. The lateral array of gamma-tubulins we observe in the crystal reveals a unique functional property of a monomeric tubulin.
Cancer is both a genetic and an epigenetic disease. Inactivation of tumour-suppressor genes by epigenetic changes is frequently observed in human cancers, particularly as a result of the modifications of histones and DNA methylation. It is therefore important to understand how these damaging changes might come about. By studying tumorigenesis in the Drosophila eye, here we identify two Polycomb group epigenetic silencers, Pipsqueak and Lola, that participate in this process. When coupled with overexpression of Delta, deregulation of the expression of Pipsqueak and Lola induces the formation of metastatic tumours. This phenotype depends on the histone-modifying enzymes Rpd3 (a histone deacetylase), Su(var)3-9 and E(z), as well as on the chromodomain protein Polycomb. Expression of the gene Retinoblastoma-family protein (Rbf) is downregulated in these tumours and, indeed, this downregulation is associated with DNA hypermethylation. Together, these results establish a mechanism that links the Notch-Delta pathway, epigenetic silencing pathways and cell-cycle control in the process of tumorigenesis.
Biological formation of methane is the terminal process of biomass degradation in aquatic habitats where oxygen, nitrate, ferric iron and sulphate have been depleted as electron acceptors. The pathway leading from dead biomass to methane through the metabolism of anaerobic bacteria and archaea is well understood for easily degradable biomolecules such as carbohydrates, proteins and lipids. However, little is known about the organic compounds that lead to methane in old anoxic sediments where easily degradable biomolecules are no longer available. One class of naturally formed long-lived compounds in such sediments is the saturated hydrocarbons (alkanes). Alkanes are usually considered to be inert in the absence of oxygen, nitrate or sulphate, and the analysis of alkane patterns is often used for biogeochemical characterization of sediments. However, alkanes might be consumed in anoxic sediments below the zone of sulphate reduction, but the underlying process has not been elucidated. Here we used enrichment cultures to show that the biological conversion of long-chain alkanes to the simplest hydrocarbon, methane, is possible under strictly anoxic conditions.
A group of membrane-associated guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G-proteins) are essential for transducing signals generated at cell-surface receptors into changes in cellular function and metabolism. These proteins are a complex of three subunits designated alpha, beta and gamma. The alpha-subunit is responsible for binding guanine nucleotides and seems to be characteristic of each protein. Transducin, a member of this protein family, mediates visual transduction by coupling the signal of photolysed rhodopsin with activation of a cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase. We have now cloned and sequenced the complementary DNA encoding the alpha-subunit of bovine retinal transducin and from this we have deduced the complete amino-acid sequence. The transducin alpha-subunit shares several homologous amino-acid sequences with ras gene products. The homologous segments correspond mostly to the regions thought to be involved in the guanine nucleotide binding and GTPase activity of ras proteins and to the ADP-ribosylation sites of the transducin alpha-subunit.
Members of the Rho family of small G proteins transduce signals from plasma-membrane receptors and control cell adhesion, motility and shape by actin cytoskeleton formation. They also activate other kinase cascades. Like all other GTPases, Rho proteins act as molecular switches, with an active GTP-bound form and an inactive GDP-bound form. The active conformation is promoted by guanine-nucleotide exchange factors, and the inactive state by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) which stimulate the intrinsic GTPase activity of small G proteins. Rho-specific GAP domains are found in a wide variety of large, multi-functional proteins. Here we report the crystal structure of an active 242-residue C-terminal fragment of human p50rhoGAP. The structure is an unusual arrangement of nine alpha-helices, the core of which includes a four-helix bundle. Residues conserved across the rhoGAP family are largely confined to one face of this bundle, which may be an interaction site for target G proteins. In particular, we propose that Arg 85 and Asn 194 are involved in binding G proteins and enhancing GTPase activity.
Several nuclear hormone receptors involved in lipid metabolism form obligate heterodimers with retinoid X receptors (RXRs) and are activated by RXR agonists such as rexinoids. Animals treated with rexinoids exhibited marked changes in cholesterol balance, including inhibition of cholesterol absorption and repressed bile acid synthesis. Studies with receptor-selective agonists revealed that oxysterol receptors (LXRs) and the bile acid receptor (FXR) are the RXR heterodimeric partners that mediate these effects by regulating expression of the reverse cholesterol transporter, ABC1, and the rate-limiting enzyme of bile acid synthesis, CYP7A1, respectively. Thus, these RXR heterodimers serve as key regulators of cholesterol homeostasis by governing reverse cholesterol transport from peripheral tissues, bile acid synthesis in liver, and cholesterol absorption in intestine.
Rats were fed ethanol for 2 weeks along with diets either adequate or deficient in protein and choline, the latter intake being similar to that of many alcoholics. Hepatic lipids, smooth endoplasmic reticulum, and the activities of drug-metabolizing enzymes (aniline hydroxylase and nitroreductase) were increased with the adequate diet but more so with the deficient one. These results may explain the increased tolerance by alcoholics of drugs such as sedatives.
There is considerable evidence that cyclic AMP can modulate the electrical activity of excitable cells and that protein phosphorylation by the catalytic subunit (CS) of cAMP-dependent protein kinase is a necessary step in these modulatory effects. In analogy to alterations in enzyme activities following phosphorylation, it seems possible that direct phosphorylation of ion-channel proteins may alter their gating properties, giving rise to the observe changes in electrical activity. However, the results obtained so far do not indicate whether it is ion channels themselves that are phosphorylated, or whether phosphorylation is simply an early step in some cascade of events which leads ultimately to modulation of channel activity. The development of single-channel recording techniques has provided a way to investigate this question. Here we describe effects of CS on the activity of individual CA2+-dependent K+ channels from the nervous system of the land snail Helix measured in isolated membrane patches and in artificial phospholipid bilayers. The results demonstrate that cAMP-dependent protein phosphorylation produces long-lasting changes in the activity of individual channels, and indicate that the relevant phosphorylation site is closely associated with the channel.
The sodium/potassium-dependent ATPase [(Na+ + K+)ATPase], which establishes and maintains the Na+ and K+ gradients across the plasma membrane of animal cells, consists of two subunits, alpha and beta. Complementary DNA clones encoding the catalytic (alpha) subunit of sheep kidney and Torpedo californica electroplax enzymes have previously been isolated and characterized. However, there is little information concerning the primary structure of the beta-subunit, a glycoprotein of unknown function and relative molecular mass (Mr) approximately 55,000 (ref. 3). Here we describe the isolation and characterization of a cDNA clone containing the entire coding region of the beta-subunit of the sheep kidney (Na+ + K+)ATPase. We also discuss structural aspects of the protein and present evidence for a possible evolutionary relationship with the KdpC subunit of the Escherichia coli K+-ATPase.
Fundamental chemical transformations for biogeochemical cycling of sulfur and nitrogen are catalyzed by sulfite and nitrite reductases. The crystallographic structure of Escherichia coli sulfite reductase hemoprotein (SiRHP), which catalyzes the concerted six-electron reductions of sulfite to sulfide and nitrite to ammonia, was solved with multiwavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD) of the native siroheme and Fe4S4 cluster cofactors, multiple isomorphous replacement, and selenomethionine sequence markers. Twofold symmetry within the 64-kilodalton polypeptide generates a distinctive three-domain alpha/beta fold that controls cofactor assembly and reactivity. Homology regions conserved between the symmetry-related halves of SiRHP and among other sulfite and nitrite reductases revealed key residues for stability and function, and identified a sulfite or nitrite reductase repeat (SNiRR) common to a redox-enzyme superfamily. The saddle-shaped siroheme shares a cysteine thiolate ligand with the Fe4S4 cluster and ligates an unexpected phosphate anion. In the substrate complex, sulfite displaces phosphate and binds to siroheme iron through sulfur. An extensive hydrogen-bonding network of positive side chains, water molecules, and siroheme carboxylates activates S-O bonds for reductive cleavage.
The mitotic spindle is typically thought of as an array of microtubules, microtubule-associated proteins and motors that self-organizes to align and segregate chromosomes. The major spindle components consist of proteins and DNA, the primary structural elements of the spindle. Other macromolecules including RNA and lipids also associate with spindles, but their spindle function, if any, is unknown. Poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) is a large, branched, negatively charged polymeric macromolecule whose polymerization onto acceptor proteins is catalysed by a family of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs). Several PARPs localize to the spindle in vertebrate cells, suggesting that PARPs and/or PAR have a role in spindle function. Here we show that PAR is enriched in the spindle and is required for spindle function--PAR hydrolysis or perturbation leads to rapid disruption of spindle structure, and hydrolysis during spindle assembly blocks the formation of bipolar spindles. PAR exhibits localization dynamics that differ from known spindle proteins and are consistent with a low rate of turnover in the spindle. Thus, PAR is a non-proteinaceous, non-chromosomal component of the spindle required for bipolar spindle assembly and function.
High-resolution carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of enzyme-inhibitor and enzyme-substrate complexes provide detailed structural and stereochemical information on the mechanism of enzyme action. The proteases trypsin and papain are shown to form tetrahedrally coordinated complexes and acyl derivatives with a variety of compounds artificially enriched at the site or sites of interest. These results are compared with the structural information derived from x-ray diffraction. Detailed NMR studies have provided a clearer picture of the ionization state of the residues participating in enzyme-catalyzed processes than other more classical techniques. The dynamics of enzymic catalysis can be observed at sub-zero temperatures by a combination of cryoenzymology and carbon-13 NMR spectroscopy. With these powerful techniques, transient, covalently bound intermediates in enzyme-catalyzed reactions can be detected and their structures rigorously assigned.
Amino acid incorporation into protein, promoted by synthetic polynucleotides, was studied in a cell-free extract of Alcaligenes faecalis (combined guanine and cytosine content of DNA, 66 percent). In the limited survey, 18 code triplets were found to specify the amino acids as in Escherichia coli (combined guanine and-cytosine content of DNA, 52 percent). At least six of the eight possible triplets containing adenine and uracil were meaningful. No exceptions to the universality of the amino acid code were found.
The molecular architecture of-and biochemical processes within--cell membranes play important roles in all living organisms, with many drugs and infectious disease agents targeting membranes. Experimental studies of biochemical reactions on membrane surfaces are challenging, as they require a membrane environment that is fluid (like cell membranes) but nevertheless allows for the efficient detection and characterization of molecular interactions. One approach uses lipid membranes supported on solid substrates such as silica or polymers: although the membrane is trapped near the solid interface, it retains natural fluidity and biological functionality and can be implanted with membrane proteins for functional studies. But the detection of molecular interactions involving membrane-bound species generally requires elaborate techniques, such as surface plasmon resonance or total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy. Here we demonstrate that colloidal phase transitions of membrane-coated silica beads provide a simple and label-free method for monitoring molecular interactions on lipid membrane surfaces. By adjusting the lipid membrane composition and hence the pair interaction potential between the membrane-supporting silica beads, we poise our system near a phase transition so that small perturbations on the membrane surface induce dramatic changes in the macroscopic organization of the colloid. We expect that this approach, used here to probe with high sensitivity protein binding events at membrane surfaces, can be applied to study a broad range of cell membrane processes.
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) stimulates phospholipase C (PLC) activity and the phosphorylation of the gamma isozyme of PLC (PLC-gamma) in vitro and in living cells. The role of PLC-gamma in the phosphoinositide signaling pathway was addressed by examining the effect of overexpression of PLC-gamma on cellular responses to PDGF. Overexpression of PLC-gamma correlated with PDGF-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of PLC-gamma and with PDGF-induced breakdown of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). However, neither bradykinin- nor lysophosphatidic acid-induced phosphoinositide metabolism was enhanced in the transfected cells, suggesting that the G protein-coupled phosphoinositide responses to these ligands are mediated by other PLC isozymes. The enhanced PDGF-induced generation of inositol trisphosphate (IP3) did not enhance intracellular calcium signaling or influence PDGF-induced DNA synthesis. Thus, enzymes other than PLC-gamma may limit PDGF-induced calcium signaling and DNA synthesis. Alternatively, PDGF-induced calcium signaling and DNA synthesis may use biochemical pathways other than phosphoinositide metabolism for signal transduction.
Enzymes are the subset of proteins that catalyse the chemistry of life, transforming both macromolecular substrates and small molecules. The precise three-dimensional architecture of enzymes permits almost unerring selectivity in physical and chemical steps to impose remarkable rate accelerations and specificity in product-determining reactions. Many enzymes are members of families that carry out related chemical transformations and offer opportunities for directed in vitro evolution, to tailor catalytic properties to particular functions.
The relatively nonspecific single-stranded deoxyribonuclease, staphylococcal nuclease, was selectively fused to an oligonucleotide binding site of defined sequence to generate a hybrid enzyme. A cysteine was substituted for Lys116 in the enzyme by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis and coupled to an oligonucleotide that contained a 3'-thiol. The resulting hybrid enzyme cleaved single-stranded DNA at sites adjacent to the oligonucleotide binding site.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are responsible for the majority of cellular responses to hormones and neurotransmitters as well as the senses of sight, olfaction and taste. The paradigm of GPCR signalling is the activation of a heterotrimeric GTP binding protein (G protein) by an agonist-occupied receptor. The b(2) adrenergic receptor (b(2)AR) activation of Gs, the stimulatory G protein for adenylyl cyclase, has long been a model system for GPCR signalling. Here we present the crystal structure of the active state ternary complex composed of agonist-occupied monomeric b(2)AR and nucleotide-free Gs heterotrimer. The principal interactions between the b(2)AR and Gs involve the amino- and carboxy-terminal a-helices of Gs, with conformational changes propagating to the nucleotide-binding pocket. The largest conformational changes in the b(2)AR include a 14 A outward movement at the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane segment 6 (TM6) and an a-helical extension of the cytoplasmic end of TM5. The most surprising observation is a major displacement of the a-helical domain of Gas relative to the Ras-like GTPase domain. This crystal structure represents the first high-resolution view of transmembrane signalling by a GPCR.
Few and limited amino acid sequence homologies have been found among eight bacterial aminoacyl transfer RNA (tRNA) synthetases whose primary structures are known. The entire 939-amino acid primary structure of Escherichia coli isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase is now reported. In a sequence of 11 consecutive amino acids matching a sequence in E. coli methionyl-tRNA synthetase, there are ten identical residues and one conservative change. This is the strongest homology recorded between any two aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. This part of the methionine enzyme's three-dimensional structure has been determined, and it occurs in a mononucleotide binding fold; a close three-dimensional structural homology of this part of the enzyme with Bacillus stearothermophilus tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase has also been reported. The three synthetases probably fold identically in this region.
Growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) links tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins to a guanine nucleotide releasing factor of the son of sevenless (Sos) class by attaching to the former by its Src homology 2 (SH2) moiety and to the latter by its SH3 domains. An isoform of grb2 complementary DNA (cDNA) was cloned that has a deletion in the SH2 domain. The protein encoded by this cDNA, Grb3-3, did not bind to phosphorylated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) but retained functional SH3 domains and inhibited EGF-induced transactivation of a Ras-responsive element. The messenger RNA encoding Grb3-3 was expressed in high amounts in the thymus of rats at an age when massive negative selection of thymocytes occurs. Microinjection of Grb3-3 into Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts induced apoptosis. These findings indicate that Grb3-3, by acting as a dominant negative protein over Grb2 and by suppressing proliferative signals, may trigger active programmed cell death.
In prion and Alzheimer's diseases, the roles played by amyloid versus nonamyloid deposits in brain damage remain unresolved. In scrapie-infected transgenic mice expressing prion protein (PrP) lacking the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) membrane anchor, abnormal protease-resistant PrPres was deposited as amyloid plaques, rather than the usual nonamyloid form of PrPres. Although PrPres amyloid plaques induced brain damage reminiscent of Alzheimer's disease, clinical manifestations were minimal. In contrast, combined expression of anchorless and wild-type PrP produced accelerated clinical scrapie. Thus, the PrP GPI anchor may play a role in the pathogenesis of prion diseases.
Duodenal calcium absorption and a vitamin D-dependent duodenal calcium-binding protein are depressed in rats with alloxan- or streptozotocin-induced diabetes. To test for possible abnormal vitamin D metabolism in diabetes we measured serum concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in control, streptozotocin diabetic, and insulin-treated diabetic rats. The serum concentration of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D was depressed in untreated diabetic rats to one-eighth of the level in controls and was restored to control levels by insulin treatment. The serum concentration of 25-hydroxyvitamin D was the same in all three groups. Hence, effects of diabetes on duodenal calcium transport can be explained by reduced concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D resulting either from failure of renal 1alpha-hydroxylation of 25-hydroxyvitamin D or increased catabolism of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.
Human ribosomal RNA synthesis by RNA polymerase I requires the activator UBF and the promoter selectivity factor SL1, which consists of the TATA binding protein (TBP) and three associated subunits, TAFI110, TAFI63, and TAFI48. Here it is shown that both TAFI110 and TAFI63 contact the promoter, whereas TAFI48 serves as a target for interaction with UBF and is required to form a transcriptionally active SL1 complex responsive to UBF in vitro. TAFI48 also alters the ability of TBP to interact with TATA box elements, and the resulting complex fails to support transcription by RNA polymerase II. Thus, TAFI48 may function both as a target to mediate UBF activation and as a class-specific promoter selectivity factor.
A method is described here for identifying good protease substrates among approximately 10(7) possible sequences. A library of fusion proteins was constructed containing an amino-terminal domain used to bind to an affinity support, followed by a randomized protease substrate sequence and the carboxyl-terminal domain of M13 gene III. Each fusion protein was displayed as a single copy on filamentous phagemid particles (substrate phage). Phage were then bound to an affinity support and treated with the protease of interest. Phage with good protease substrates were released, whereas phage with substrates that resisted proteolysis remained bound. After several rounds of binding, proteolysis, and phagemid propagation, sensitive and resistant substrate sequences were identified for two different proteases, a variant of subtilisin and factor Xa. The technique may also be useful for studying the sequence specificity of a variety of posttranslational modifications.
Rho, a Ras-like small guanosine triphosphatase, has been implicated in cytoskeletal responses to extracellular signals such as lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) to form stress fibers and focal contacts. The form of RhoA bound to guanosine triphosphate directly bound to and activated a serine-threonine kinase, protein kinase N (PKN). Activated RhoA formed a complex with PKN and activated it in COS-7 cells. PKN was phosphorylated in Swiss 3T3 cells stimulated with LPA, and this phosphorylation was blocked by treatment of cells with botulinum C3 exoenzyme. Activation of Rho may be linked directly to a serine-threonine kinase pathway.
Single-stranded DNA, whether homologous or not, stimulates purified Escherichia coli recA protein to unwind duplex DNA. This helps to explain how recA promotes a search for homology in genetic recombination. As oligodeoxynucleotide also stimulate unwinding, a common mechanism may relate the function of recA protein in recombination to other functions (SOS) induced by oligonucleotides.
Hormones inhibit synthesis of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) in most cells via receptors coupled to pertussis toxin (PTX)-sensitive guanine nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Mutationally activated alpha subunits of Gi2 (alpha i2) constitutively inhibit cAMP accumulation when transfected into cells. Cells have now been transfected with mutant alpha subunits of four other G proteins--Gz, a PTX-insensitive G protein of unknown function, and Gi1, Gi3, and G(o), which are PTX-sensitive. Mutant alpha z, alpha i1, and alpha i3 inhibited cAMP accumulation but alpha o did not. Moreover, expression of wild-type alpha z produced cells in which PTX did not block hormonal inhibition of cAMP accumulation. Thus, Gz can trigger an effector pathway in response to hormone receptors that ordinarily interact with PTX-sensitive Gi proteins.
In modern organisms, protein enzymes are solely responsible for the aminoacylation of transfer RNA. However, the evolution of protein synthesis in the RNA world required RNAs capable of catalysing this reaction. Ribozymes that aminoacylate RNA by using activated amino acids have been discovered through selection in vitro. Flexizyme is a 45-nucleotide ribozyme capable of charging tRNA in trans with various activated l-phenylalanine derivatives. In addition to a more than 10(5) rate enhancement and more than 10(4)-fold discrimination against some non-cognate amino acids, this ribozyme achieves good regioselectivity: of all the hydroxyl groups of a tRNA, it exclusively aminoacylates the terminal 3'-OH. Here we report the 2.8-A resolution structure of flexizyme fused to a substrate RNA. Together with randomization of ribozyme core residues and reselection, this structure shows that very few nucleotides are needed for the aminoacylation of specific tRNAs. Although it primarily recognizes tRNA through base-pairing with the CCA terminus of the tRNA molecule, flexizyme makes numerous local interactions to position the acceptor end of tRNA precisely. A comparison of two crystallographically independent flexizyme conformations, only one of which appears capable of binding activated phenylalanine, suggests that this ribozyme may achieve enhanced specificity by coupling active-site folding to tRNA docking. Such a mechanism would be reminiscent of the mutually induced fit of tRNA and protein employed by some aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases to increase specificity.
Phosphorylated derivatives of phosphatidylinositol, collectively referred to as phosphoinositides, occur in the cytoplasmic leaflet of cellular membranes and regulate activities such as vesicle transport, cytoskeletal reorganization and signal transduction. Recent studies have indicated an important role for phosphoinositide metabolism in the aetiology of diseases such as cancer, diabetes, myopathy and inflammation. Although the biological functions of the phosphatases that regulate phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P(3)) have been well characterized, little is known about the functions of the phosphatases regulating the closely related molecule phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4)P(2)). Here we show that inositol polyphosphate phosphatase 4A (INPP4A), a PtdIns(3,4)P(2) phosphatase, is a suppressor of glutamate excitotoxicity in the central nervous system. Targeted disruption of the Inpp4a gene in mice leads to neurodegeneration in the striatum, the input nucleus of the basal ganglia that has a central role in motor and cognitive behaviours. Notably, Inpp4a(-/-) mice show severe involuntary movement disorders. In vitro, Inpp4a gene silencing via short hairpin RNA renders cultured primary striatal neurons vulnerable to cell death mediated by N-methyl-d-aspartate-type glutamate receptors (NMDARs). Mechanistically, INPP4A is found at the postsynaptic density and regulates synaptic NMDAR localization and NMDAR-mediated excitatory postsynaptic current. Thus, INPP4A protects neurons from excitotoxic cell death and thereby maintains the functional integrity of the brain. Our study demonstrates that PtdIns(3,4)P(2), PtdIns(3,4,5)P(3) and the phosphatases acting on them can have distinct regulatory roles, and provides insight into the unique aspects and physiological significance of PtdIns(3,4)P(2) metabolism. INPP4A represents, to our knowledge, the first signalling protein with a function in neurons to suppress excitotoxic cell death. The discovery of a direct link between PtdIns(3,4)P(2) metabolism and the regulation of neurodegeneration and involuntary movements may aid the development of new approaches for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is the aetiologic agent of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) in most countries and probably originated in Central Africa like the AIDS epidemic itself. Evidence for a second major group of human immunodeficiency-associated retroviruses came from a report that West African human populations like wild-caught African green monkeys had serum antibodies that reacted more strongly with a simian immunodeficiency virus (STLV-3Mac) (ref.6) than with HIV-1. Novel T-lymphotropic retroviruses were reported to have been isolated from healthy Senegalese West Africans (HTLV-4) (ref. 4) and from African green monkeys (STLV-3AGM) (ref. 7), and a different retrovirus (HIV-2) was identified in other West African AIDS patients. Genomic analysis of HIV-2 clearly distinguished it from STLV-3 (ref. 9), but restriction enzyme site-mapping of three different HTLV-4 isolates and six different STLV-3AGM isolates showed them to be essentially indistinguishable. In this report we clone, restriction map, and partially sequence three isolates of HTLV-4 (PK82, PK289, PK190) (ref. 4). We find that these viruses differ in nucleotide sequence from each other and from three isolates of STLV-3AGM (K78, K6W, K1) (ref. 7) by 1% or less. We also report the isolation of a T-lymphotropic retrovirus from the peripheral blood of a healthy Senegalese woman which hybridizes preferentially to HIV-2 specific DNA probes. We conclude that HTLV-4 (ref. 4) and STLV-3AGM (ref. 7) are not independent virus isolates and that HIV-2 is present in Senegal as it is in other West African countries.
The chaperonin GroEL, a tetradecameric cylinder consisting of subunits of M(r) approximately 60,000 (60K), and its cofactor GroES, a heptameric ring of 10K subunits, mediate protein folding in the cytosol of Escherichia coli. In the presence of nucleotide, GroES forms a 1:1 complex with GroEL which binds unfolded protein in its central cavity and releases it to allow folding upon ATP hydrolysis. Using labelling with azido-ATP, we have identified a protease-stable nucleotide-binding domain of M(r) 40K in the GroEL subunits (residues 153-531). Azido-ATP is crosslinked to the highly conserved Tyr 477, indicating that this residue is close to the purine ring of the bound nucleotide. Surprisingly, GroES also binds ATP cooperatively and with an affinity comparable to that of GroEL. Azido-nucleotide labelling of GroES subunits occurs at the conserved Tyr 71 in a protease-stable 6.5K domain (starting at residue 33). Proteinase K cleavage at residue 32 is prevented when GroES is bound to GroEL. ATP binding to GroES may be important in charging the seven subunits of the interacting GroEL ring with ATP to facilitate cooperative ATP binding and hydrolysis for substrate protein release.
DNA mismatch correction is a strand-specific process involving recognition of noncomplementary Watson-Crick nucleotide pairs and participation of widely separated DNA sites. The Escherichia coli methyl-directed reaction has been reconstituted in a purified system consisting of MutH, MutL, and MutS proteins, DNA helicase II, single-strand DNA binding protein, DNA polymerase III holoenzyme, exonuclease I, DNA ligase, along with ATP (adenosine triphosphate), and the four deoxynucleoside triphosphates. This set of proteins can process seven of the eight base-base mismatches in a strand-specific reaction that is directed by the state of methylation of a single d(GATC) sequence located 1 kilobase from the mispair.
DNA replication in bacteria is carried out by a multiprotein complex, which is thought to contain only one essential DNA polymerase, specified by the dnaE gene in Escherichia coli and the polC gene in Bacillus subtilis. Bacillus subtilis genome analysis has revealed another DNA polymerase gene, dnaE(BS), which is homologous to dnaE. We show that, in B. subtilis, dnaE(BS) is essential for cell viability and for the elongation step of DNA replication, as is polC, and we conclude that there are two different essential DNA polymerases at the replication fork of B. subtilis, as was previously observed in eukaryotes. dnaE(BS) appears to be involved in the synthesis of the lagging DNA strand and to be associated with the replication factory, which suggests that two different polymerases carry out synthesis of the two DNA strands in B. subtilis and in many other bacteria that contain both polC and dnaE genes.
The mutation rates of viroids, plant pathogens with minimal non-protein-coding RNA genomes, are unknown. Their replication is mediated by host RNA polymerases and, in some cases, by hammerhead ribozymes, small self-cleaving motifs embedded in the viroid. By using the principle that the population frequency of nonviable genotypes equals the mutation rate, we screened for changes that inactivated the hammerheads of Chrysanthemum chlorotic mottle viroid. We obtained a mutation rate of 1/400 per site, the highest reported for any biological entity. Such error-prone replication can only be tolerated by extremely simple genomes such as those of viroids and, presumably, the primitive replicons of the RNA world. Our results suggest that the emergence of replication fidelity was critical for the evolution of complexity in the early history of life.
The major components of mammalian lenses are tissue-specific, soluble proteins, the alpha-, beta- and gamma-crystallins. The lenses of other vertebrate classes often contain other major proteins, notably delta-crystallin in birds and reptiles. A fourth distinct type, described as epsilon-crystallin, is prominent in many bird and crocodile lenses. Here we show that epsilon-crystallin is an active glycolytic enzyme, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (EC 1.1.1.27) and that duck epsilon-crystallin appears to be identical to duck LDH-B4. LDH is a normal metabolic component in other lenses, but in duck is present in amounts far exceeding the requirements of any likely catalytic role. It appears that an active enzyme has been recruited, unchanged, to an extra role as a structural protein in the lens without gene duplication and sequence divergence. This surprising discovery raises the possibility that other crystallins may similarly be enzymes expressed at high levels in lens as structural proteins.
Cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR) is a newly identified nucleotide which can release calcium from a variety of cells, suggesting it is a messenger for mobilizing internal Ca2+ stores. Its cyclic structure has now been confirmed by X-ray crystallography. Available results are consistent with it being a modulator of Ca(2+)-induced Ca2+ release. Here we report that sea urchin egg microsomes purified by Percoll gradients lose sensitivity to cADPR, but the response can be restored by a soluble protein in the supernatant. Purification and characterization of the protein indicate that it is calmodulin. It appears to be sensitizing the Ca2+ release mechanism because caffeine and strontium, agonists of Ca(2+)-induced Ca2+ release, can also mimic calmodulin in conferring cADPR-sensitivity. Although evidence indicates that cADPR may be an activator of the ryanodine receptor, present results point to the importance of accessory proteins such as calmodulin in modulating its activity.
Phosphorylation of the 20,000 molecular weight (MW) light chain of platelet myosin is associated with the activation of platelets and subsequent release of platelet granules, and the protein kinase catalysing this phosphorylation has been identified as the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent enzyme, myosin light chain kinase. Tumour-promoting phorbol esters such as 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), which activate Ca2+-activated, phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase C), can also cause platelet aggregation and phosphorylation of a 20,000-MW peptide in blood platelets. It was therefore of interest to ascertain whether the 20,000-MW peptide phosphorylated in platelets was the light chain of myosin and whether TPA-induced phosphorylation of the 20,000-MW peptide could be differentiated from thrombin-induced phosphorylation. We now report that TPA-induced activation of platelets is associated with the phosphorylation of the 20,000-MW light chain of myosin, that it appears to be mediated mainly through protein kinase C and that the site phosphorylated in the myosin light chain is distinct from that phosphorylated by myosin light chain kinase.
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a rare inherited disorder associated with a profound predisposition to infection due to the lack of a microbicidal oxidase system in the phagocytes of these patients. This syndrome is most commonly inherited through a defect on the X chromosome and the only clearly defined component of the oxidase system, the very unusual cytochrome b (b-245), has been shown to be missing from the cells of these patients. This cytochrome is a heterodimer composed of an alpha-chain of relative molecular mass (Mr) 23,000 (23K) and a 76-92K beta-chain; neither are detectable in neutrophils from X-linked CGD subjects. The defective X-CGD gene has recently been cloned by 'reverse genetics' but the protein predicted from the proposed complementary DNA sequence was not identified. We have purified the beta-chain of the cytochrome and sequenced 43 amino acids from the N terminus. Almost complete homology was obtained between this sequence and that of the complementary nucleotides 19-147 of the sequence of the X-CGD gene, originally designated as a non-coding region.
The oxyR gene positively regulates genes induced by oxidative stress in Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli. Purification of the OxyR protein showed that oxidized but not reduced OxyR activates transcription of oxidative stress-inducible genes in vitro. Conversion between the two forms of OxyR is rapid and reversible. Both the oxidized and the reduced forms of the OxyR protein are capable of binding to three diverse sequences upstream of OxyR-regulated promoters, but the interactions of the two forms of OxyR with the promoter regions are different. The results suggest that direct oxidation of the OxyR protein brings about a conformational change by which OxyR transduces an oxidative stress signal to RNA polymerase.
The bacterial endosymbiont of the deep-sea tube worm Riftia pachyptila has never been successfully cultivated outside its host. In the absence of cultivation data, we have taken a proteomic approach based on the metagenome sequence to study the metabolism of this peculiar microorganism in detail. As one result, we found that three major sulfide oxidation proteins constitute approximately 12% of the total cytosolic proteome, which highlights the essential role of these enzymes for the symbiont's energy metabolism. Unexpectedly, the symbiont uses the reductive tricarboxylic acid cycle in addition to the previously identified Calvin cycle for CO2 fixation.
The 3.3-A resolution crystal structure of the large proteolytic fragment of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I complexed with deoxythymidine monophosphate consists of two domains, the smaller of which binds zinc-deoxythymidine monophosphate. The most striking feature of the larger domain is a deep crevice of the appropriate size and shape for binding double-stranded B-DNA. A flexible subdomain may allow the enzyme to surround completely the DNA substrate, thereby allowing processive nucleotide polymerization without enzyme dissociation.
Many tumour cells have elevated rates of glucose uptake but reduced rates of oxidative phosphorylation. This persistence of high lactate production by tumours in the presence of oxygen, known as aerobic glycolysis, was first noted by Otto Warburg more than 75 yr ago. How tumour cells establish this altered metabolic phenotype and whether it is essential for tumorigenesis is as yet unknown. Here we show that a single switch in a splice isoform of the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase is necessary for the shift in cellular metabolism to aerobic glycolysis and that this promotes tumorigenesis. Tumour cells have been shown to express exclusively the embryonic M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase. Here we use short hairpin RNA to knockdown pyruvate kinase M2 expression in human cancer cell lines and replace it with pyruvate kinase M1. Switching pyruvate kinase expression to the M1 (adult) isoform leads to reversal of the Warburg effect, as judged by reduced lactate production and increased oxygen consumption, and this correlates with a reduced ability to form tumours in nude mouse xenografts. These results demonstrate that M2 expression is necessary for aerobic glycolysis and that this metabolic phenotype provides a selective growth advantage for tumour cells in vivo.
Molecular regulation of embryonic stem cell (ESC) fate involves a coordinated interaction between epigenetic, transcriptional and translational mechanisms. It is unclear how these different molecular regulatory mechanisms interact to regulate changes in stem cell fate. Here we present a dynamic systems-level study of cell fate change in murine ESCs following a well-defined perturbation. Global changes in histone acetylation, chromatin-bound RNA polymerase II, messenger RNA (mRNA), and nuclear protein levels were measured over 5 days after downregulation of Nanog, a key pluripotency regulator. Our data demonstrate how a single genetic perturbation leads to progressive widespread changes in several molecular regulatory layers, and provide a dynamic view of information flow in the epigenome, transcriptome and proteome. We observe that a large proportion of changes in nuclear protein levels are not accompanied by concordant changes in the expression of corresponding mRNAs, indicating important roles for translational and post-translational regulation of ESC fate. Gene-ontology analysis across different molecular layers indicates that although chromatin reconfiguration is important for altering cell fate, it is preceded by transcription-factor-mediated regulatory events. The temporal order of gene expression alterations shows the order of the regulatory network reconfiguration and offers further insight into the gene regulatory network. Our studies extend the conventional systems biology approach to include many molecular species, regulatory layers and temporal series, and underscore the complexity of the multilayer regulatory mechanisms responsible for changes in protein expression that determine stem cell fate.
The metabolism of beta(1C)-globulin labeled with iodine-131 was studied in six normal individuals and in three individuals with glomerulonephritis who exhibited markedly reduced serum concentrations of this protein. Fractional of serum beta(1C)-globulin in glomerulonephritis appears to be chiefly secondary to decreased synthesis.
Terminal events in protein synthesis were studied with trinucleotide codons. Initiator and terminator trinucleotides sequentially stimulate N-formyl-methionyl-tRNA binding to ribosomes and the release of free N-formyl-methionine from the ribosomal intermediate. The release factor discovered by Capecchi is also required. The trinucleotides UGA, UAA, and UAG were found to be terminator codons. This pattern of codon degeneracy has not been observed with other trinucleotides and transfer RNA.
Primordial organisms of the putative RNA world would have required polymerase ribozymes able to replicate RNA. Known ribozymes with polymerase activity best approximating that needed for RNA replication contain at their catalytic core the class I RNA ligase, an artificial ribozyme with a catalytic rate among the fastest of known ribozymes. Here we present the 3.0 angstrom crystal structure of this ligase. The architecture resembles a tripod, its three legs converging near the ligation junction. Interacting with this tripod scaffold through a series of 10 minor-groove interactions (including two A-minor triads) is the unpaired segment that contributes to and organizes the active site. A cytosine nucleobase and two backbone phosphates abut the ligation junction; their location suggests a model for catalysis resembling that of proteinaceous polymerases.
The shc oncogene product is tyrosine-phosphorylated by Src family kinases and after its phosphorylation interacts with the adapter protein Grb2 (growth factor receptor-bound protein 2). In turn, Grb2 interacts with the guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Ras, mSOS. Because several Src family kinases participate in T cell activation and Shc functions upstream of Ras, the role of Shc in T cell signaling was examined. Shc was phosphorylated on tyrosine after activation through the T cell receptor (TCR), and subsequently interacted with Grb2 and mSOS. The Src homology region 2 (SH2) domain of Shc directly interacted with the tyrosine-phosphorylated zeta chain of the TCR. Thus, Shc may couple TCR activation to the Ras signaling pathway.
Proton-pumping respiratory complex I is one of the largest and most complicated membrane protein complexes. Its function is critical for efficient energy supply in aerobic cells, and malfunctions are implicated in many neurodegenerative disorders. Here, we report an x-ray crystallographic analysis of mitochondrial complex I. The positions of all iron-sulfur clusters relative to the membrane arm were determined in the complete enzyme complex. The ubiquinone reduction site resides close to 30 angstroms above the membrane domain. The arrangement of functional modules suggests conformational coupling of redox chemistry with proton pumping and essentially excludes direct mechanisms. We suggest that a approximately 60-angstrom-long helical transmission element is critical for transducing conformational energy to proton-pumping elements in the distal module of the membrane arm.
Evidence is presented that a small protein (VPg) is covalently attached to the 5'-terminal oligonucleotide VPg-pU-U-A-A-A-A-C-A-Gp of the polio genome, to nascent strands of the polio replicative intermediate and to poly(U) of minus strands. A model of polio RNA replication is proposed implicating VPg in initiation of RNA symthesis, possibly as primer.
A [3H]etorphine-macromolecular complex has been solubilized from rat brain synaptosomal fraction by extraction with the nonionic detergent Brij 36T. Stereospecificity of binding to this solubilized complex was demonstrated by the finding that radioactivity in the complex was virtually eliminated when binding had occurred in the presence of excess levorphanol, an active narcotic analgesic, while it was unaffected by its inactive enantiomorph dextrorphan. Bound radioactivity was dissociated by proteolytic enzymes, sulfhydryl reagents, and heat, suggesting the presence of protein. The bound solubilized macromolecular moiety may be the opiate receptor.
Clostridial neurotoxins, including tetanus toxin and the seven serotypes of botulinum toxin (A-G), are produced as single chains and cleaved to generate toxins with two chains joined by a single disulphide bond (Fig. 1). The heavy chain (M(r) 100,000 (100K)) is responsible for specific binding to neuronal cells and cell penetration of the light chain (50K), which blocks neurotransmitter release. Several lines of evidence have recently suggested that clostridial neurotoxins could be zinc endopeptidases. Here we show that tetanus and botulinum toxins serotype B are zinc endopeptidases, the activation of which requires reduction of the interchain disulphide bond. The protease activity is localized on the light chain and is specific for synaptobrevin, an integral membrane protein of small synaptic vesicles. The rat synaptobrevin-2 isoform is cleaved by both neurotoxins at the same single site, the peptide bond Gln 76-Phe 77, but the isoform synaptobrevin-1, which has a valine at the corresponding position, is not cleaved. The blocking of neurotransmitter release of Aplysia neurons injected with tetanus toxin or botulinum toxins serotype B is substantially delayed by peptides containing the synaptobrevin-2 cleavage site. These results indicate that tetanus and botulinum B neurotoxins block neurotransmitter release by cleaving synaptobrevin-2, a protein that, on the basis of our results, seems to play a key part in neurotransmitter release.
During infection, pathogenic bacteria manipulate the host cell in various ways to allow their own replication, propagation and escape from host immune responses. Post-translational modifications are unique mechanisms that allow cells to rapidly, locally and specifically modify activity or interactions of key proteins. Some of these modifications, including phosphorylation and ubiquitylation, can be induced by pathogens. However, the effects of pathogenic bacteria on SUMOylation, an essential post-translational modification in eukaryotic cells, remain largely unknown. Here we show that infection with Listeria monocytogenes leads to a decrease in the levels of cellular SUMO-conjugated proteins. This event is triggered by the bacterial virulence factor listeriolysin O (LLO), which induces a proteasome-independent degradation of Ubc9, an essential enzyme of the SUMOylation machinery, and a proteasome-dependent degradation of some SUMOylated proteins. The effect of LLO on Ubc9 is dependent on the pore-forming capacity of the toxin and is shared by other bacterial pore-forming toxins like perfringolysin O (PFO) and pneumolysin (PLY). Ubc9 degradation was also observed in vivo in infected mice. Furthermore, we show that SUMO overexpression impairs bacterial infection. Together, our results reveal that Listeria, and probably other pathogens, dampen the host response by decreasing the SUMOylation level of proteins critical for infection.
Ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes function in selective proteolysis pathways and catalyse the covalent attachment of ubiquitin to proteolytic substrates. Here we report the identification of an integral membrane ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. This enzyme, UBC6, localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), with the catalytic domain facing the cytosol. ubc6 loss-of-function mutants suppress the protein translocation defect caused by a mutation in SEC61, which encodes a key component of a multisubunit protein translocation apparatus of the ER. The expression of the sec61 mutant phenotype requires both the activity of UBC6 and its localization at the ER membrane. This suggests that UBC6 may mediate selective degradation of ER membrane proteins and that the protein translocation defect of sec61 may be caused by proteolysis of components of a structurally distorted mutant translocation apparatus.
The links between the cell cycle machinery and the cytoskeletal proteins controlling cytokinesis are poorly understood. The small guanine nucleotide triphosphate (GTP)-binding protein RhoA stimulates type II myosin contractility and formin-dependent assembly of the cytokinetic actin contractile ring. We found that budding yeast Polo-like kinase Cdc5 controls the targeting and activation of Rho1 (RhoA) at the division site via Rho1 guanine nucleotide exchange factors. This role of Cdc5 (Polo-like kinase) in regulating Rho1 is likely to be relevant to cytokinesis and asymmetric cell division in other organisms.
alpha-Lytic protease, an extracellular serine protease of Lysobacter enzymogenes 495, is synthesized as a pre-pro-protein. Previously it has been shown that when expressed in Escherichia coli, the protein is autocatalytically processed in the periplasmic space, and that the functional protease domain accumulates extracellularly. Engineered proteins lacking the 166 amino-acid pro-region were enzymatically inactive and remained cell-associated. By independently expressing the pro- and protease domains in vivo, evidence is provided here that direct covalent linkage is not required for production of active protease. We postulate that the pro-region acts as a template to promote the folding of the protease domain into an active configuration. Our results, combined with recent experiments on the evolutionarily unrelated subtilisin E (ref. 3), suggest that the ability of the pro-region of these bacterial proteases to facilitate folding of their protease domains is not a curiosity of a single system, but may reflect a general property of extracellular bacterial serine proteases.
The protein transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA) is involved in the synthesis of 5S RNA in vitro by RNA polymerase III. It can be isolated from Xenopus laevis oocytes as a 7S particle in which the protein is associated with 5S RNA. Recently it has been shown that the native particle contains 7-11 zinc atoms. Analysis of the amino-acid sequence of TFIIIA revealed nine similar domains of approximately 30 amino acids, each containing two invariant pairs of histidines and cysteines, which have been implicated as possible binding sites for the zinc atoms. Other regulatory proteins with sequence homology to the zinc-binding domains of TFIIIA have now been reported. Here, we report the results of an EXAFS (extended X-ray absorption fine structure) study of TFIIIA which shows that the coordination sphere of the zinc sites consists of two cysteine and two histidine residues.
Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme complex that adds 5'-TTAGGG-3' repeats onto the ends of human chromosomes, providing a telomere maintenance mechanism for approximately 90% of human cancers. We have purified human telomerase approximately 10(8)-fold, with the final elution dependent on the enzyme's ability to catalyze nucleotide addition onto a DNA oligonucleotide of telomeric sequence, thereby providing specificity for catalytically active telomerase. Mass spectrometric sequencing of the protein components and molecular size determination indicated an enzyme composition of two molecules each of telomerase reverse transcriptase, telomerase RNA, and dyskerin.
Transcriptional activation of RNA polymerase II in eukaryotic organisms ranging from yeasts to mammals has many common features such as enhancer elements, TATA elements, and activator proteins that bind specifically to promoter DNA. The JUN oncoprotein, which causes sarcomas in chickens, shows significant homology to the DNA-binding domain of GCN4, a yeast protein that stimulates transcription of the amino acid biosynthetic genes. The GCN4 and JUN proteins bind the same DNA sequences, consensus ATGA(C/G)TCAT, even though the DNA-binding domains are only 45% identical in amino acid sequence. The JUN protein almost certainly represents the oncogenic version of the normal AP-1 transcription factor, suggesting an evolutionary relationship between yeast and vertebrate activator proteins. Here, I demonstrate that JUN efficiently activates transcription in yeast either through its own or a heterologous DNA-binding domain. As is the case for yeast activator proteins, transcriptional stimulation by JUN requires an acidic activation region distinct from the DNA-binding domain. The functional interchangeability between yeast and vertebrate transcription factors strongly suggests a basic similarity in the molecular mechanism of eukaryotic transcriptional activation.
The c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK) is activated by various heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors, inflammatory cytokines, and stress signals. Yet, upstream mediators that link extracellular signals with the JNK signaling pathway are currently unknown. The tyrosine kinase Pyk2 was activated by tumor necrosis factor alpha, by ultraviolet irradiation, and by changes in osmolarity. Overexpression of Pyk2 led to activation of JNK, and a dominant-negative mutant of Pyk2 interfered with ultraviolet light- or osmotic shock-induced activation of JNK. Pyk2 represents a cell type-specific, stress-sensitive mediator of the JNK signaling pathway.
Lipid metabolism is essential for growth and generates much of the energy needed during periods of starvation. In Drosophila, fasting larvae release large quantities of lipid from the fat body but it is unclear how and where this is processed. Here we identify the oenocyte as the principal cell type accumulating lipid droplets during starvation. Tissue-specific manipulations of the Slimfast amino-acid channel, the Lsd2 fat-storage regulator and the Brummer lipase indicate that oenocytes act downstream of the fat body. In turn, oenocytes are required for depleting stored lipid from the fat body during fasting. Hence, lipid-metabolic coupling between the fat body and oenocytes is bidirectional. When food is plentiful, oenocytes have critical roles in regulating growth, development and feeding behaviour. In addition, they specifically express many different lipid-metabolizing proteins, including Cyp4g1, an omega-hydroxylase regulating triacylglycerol composition. These findings provide evidence that some lipid-processing functions of the mammalian liver are performed in insects by oenocytes.
Synaptojanin is a nerve terminal protein of relative molecular mass 145,000 which appears to participate with dynamin in synaptic vesicle recycling. The central region of synaptojanin defines it as a member of the inositol-5-phosphatase family, which includes the product of the gene that is defective in the oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe. Synaptojanin has 5-phosphatase activity and its amino-terminal domain is homologous with the yeast protein Sac1 (Rsd1), which is genetically implicated in phospholipid metabolism and in the function of the actin cytoskeleton. The carboxy terminus, which is of different lengths in adult and developing neurons owing to the alternative use of two termination sites, is proline-rich, consistent with the reported interaction of synaptojanin with the SH3 domains of Grb2 (refs 1, 2). Synaptojanin is the only other major brain protein besides dynamin that binds the SH3 domain of amphiphysin, a presynaptic protein with a putative function in endocytosis. Our results suggest a link between phosphoinositide metabolism and synaptic vesicle recycling.
The acrosomal proteinase of human spermatozoa was characterized and differs from other human proteinases. The enzyme has optimal activity at pH 8.0, is inactive below pH 5.0 or above pH 10.5, requires calcium for maximum activity, hydrolyzes fibrinogen, gelatin, and benzoylarginine ethyl ester, and is inhibited by various synthetic and natural proteinase inhibitors. The molecular weight was estimated to be 30,000. Human spermatozoa also possess a proteinase inhibitor that is similar to one of the proteinase inhibitors from human seminal plasma.
Formation of the pineal gland hormone melatonin increases markedly at night in response to light-dark environmental alterations. Melatonin is synthesized from serotonin by an initial N-acetylation followed by methylation of the 5-hydroxy moiety by hydroxyindole-O-methyltransferase. Serotonin N-acetyltransferase (NAT; EC2.3.1.87), which catalyses the first reaction, is the rate-limiting enzyme in this process, and its activity increases dramatically with the onset of darkness. Because melatonin may play important biological roles in reproduction, ageing and sleep, understanding the molecular factors that regulate NAT is of particular importance. To identify proteins that regulate light-dark variations in pineal function, we used a subtractive hybridization technique based on the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to isolate rat pineal gland messages that are differentially expressed by day and night. Here we report the molecular cloning of NAT and dramatic diurnal variations in its transcription. Independently, Klein and associates have cloned NAT from sheep pineal glands.
Although the single-polypeptide-chain RNA polymerase from bacteriophage T7 (T7RNAP), like other RNA polymerases, uses the same mechanism of polymerization as the DNA polymerases, it can also recognize a specific promoter sequence, initiate new RNA chains from a single nucleotide, abortively cycle the synthesis of short transcripts, be regulated by a transcription inhibitor, and terminate transcription. As T7RNAP is homologous to the Pol I family of DNA polymerases, the differences between the structure of T7RNAP complexed to substrates and that of the corresponding DNA polymerase complex provides a structural basis for understanding many of these functional differences. T7RNAP initiates RNA synthesis at promoter sequences that are conserved from positions -17 to +6 relative to the start site of transcription. The crystal structure at 2.4 A resolution of T7RNAP complexed with a 17-base-pair promoter shows that the four base pairs closest to the catalytic active site have melted to form a transcription bubble. The T7 promoter sequence is recognized by interactions in the major groove between an antiparallel beta-loop and bases. The amino-terminal domain is involved in promoter recognition and DNA melting. We have also used homology modelling of the priming and incoming nucleoside triphosphates from the T7 DNA-polymerase ternary complex structure to explain the specificity of T7RNAP for ribonucleotides, its ability to initiate from a single nucleotide, and the abortive cycling at the initiation of transcription.
HutP regulates the expression of the hut structural genes of Bacillus subtilis by an anti-termination mechanism and requires two components, Mg2+ ions and L-histidine. HutP recognizes three UAG triplet units, separated by four non-conserved nucleotides on the terminator region. Here we report the 1.60-A resolution crystal structure of the quaternary complex (HutP-L-histidine-Mg2+-21-base single-stranded RNA). In the complex, the RNA adopts a novel triangular fold on the hexameric surface of HutP, without any base-pairing, and binds to the protein mostly by specific protein-base interactions. The structure explains how the HutP and RNA interactions are regulated critically by the l-histidine and Mg2+ ion through the structural rearrangement. To gain insights into these structural rearrangements, we solved two additional crystal structures (uncomplexed HutP and HutP-L-histidine-Mg2+) that revealed the intermediate structures of HutP (before forming an active structure) and the importance of the Mg2+ ion interactions in the complexes.
Multi-wavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD) has been used to determine the structure of the regulatory enzyme of de novo synthesis of purine nucleotides, glutamine 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) amidotransferase, from Bacillus subtilis. This allosteric enzyme, a 200-kilodalton tetramer, is subject to end product regulation by purine nucleotides. The metalloenzyme from B. subtilis is a paradigm for the higher eukaryotic enzymes, which have been refractory to isolation in stable form. The two folding domains of the polypeptide are correlated with functional domains for glutamine binding and for transfer of ammonia to the substrate PRPP. Eight molecules of the feedback inhibitor adenosine monophosphate (AMP) are bound to the tetrameric enzyme in two types of binding sites: the PRPP catalytic site of each subunit and an unusual regulatory site that is immediately adjacent to each active site but is between subunits. An oxygen-sensitive [4Fe-4S] cluster in each subunit is proposed to regulate protein turnover in vivo and is distant from the catalytic site. Oxygen sensitivity of the cluster is diminished by AMP, which blocks a channel through the protein to the cluster. The structure is representative of both glutamine amidotransferases and phosphoribosyltransferases.
Guanine nucleotide binding (G) proteins (subunit composition alpha beta gamma) dissociate on activation with guanosine triphosphate (GTP) analogs and magnesium to give alpha-guanine nucleotide complexes and free beta gamma subunits. Whether the opening of potassium channels by the recently described Gk in isolated membrane patches from mammalian atrial myocytes was mediated by the alpha k subunit or beta gamma dimer was tested. The alpha k subunit was found to be active, while the beta gamma dimer was inactive in stimulating potassium channel activity. Thus, Gk resembles Gs, the stimulatory regulatory component of adenylyl cyclase, and transducin, the regulatory component of the visual system, in that it regulates its effector function--the activity of the ligand-gated potassium channel--through its guanine nucleotide binding subunit.
Fumarate hydratase (FH) is an enzyme of the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) that catalyses the hydration of fumarate into malate. Germline mutations of FH are responsible for hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal-cell cancer (HLRCC). It has previously been demonstrated that the absence of FH leads to the accumulation of fumarate, which activates hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) at normal oxygen tensions. However, so far no mechanism that explains the ability of cells to survive without a functional TCA cycle has been provided. Here we use newly characterized genetically modified kidney mouse cells in which Fh1 has been deleted, and apply a newly developed computer model of the metabolism of these cells to predict and experimentally validate a linear metabolic pathway beginning with glutamine uptake and ending with bilirubin excretion from Fh1-deficient cells. This pathway, which involves the biosynthesis and degradation of haem, enables Fh1-deficient cells to use the accumulated TCA cycle metabolites and permits partial mitochondrial NADH production. We predicted and confirmed that targeting this pathway would render Fh1-deficient cells non-viable, while sparing wild-type Fh1-containing cells. This work goes beyond identifying a metabolic pathway that is induced in Fh1-deficient cells to demonstrate that inhibition of haem oxygenation is synthetically lethal when combined with Fh1 deficiency, providing a new potential target for treating HLRCC patients.
Trypsin (Tr) and chymotrypsin (Ch) have similar tertiary structures, yet Tr cleaves peptides at arginine and lysine residues and Ch prefers large hydrophobic residues. Although replacement of the S1 binding site of Tr with the analogous residues of Ch is sufficient to transfer Ch specificity for ester hydrolysis, specificity for amide hydrolysis is not transferred. Trypsin is converted to a Ch-like protease when the binding pocket alterations are further modified by exchange of the Ch surface loops 185 through 188 and 221 through 225 for the analogous Tr loops. These loops are not structural components of either the S1 binding site or the extended substrate binding sites. This mutant enzyme is equivalent to Ch in its catalytic rate, but its substrate binding is impaired. Like Ch, this mutant utilizes extended substrate binding to accelerate catalysis, and substrate discrimination occurs during the acylation step rather than in substrate binding.
Chromosome condensation and the global repression of gene transcription are features of mitosis in most eukaryotes. The logic behind this phenomenon is that chromosome condensation prevents the activity of RNA polymerases. In budding yeast, however, transcription was proposed to be continuous during mitosis. Here we show that Cdc14, a protein phosphatase required for nucleolar segregation and mitotic exit, inhibits transcription of yeast ribosomal genes (rDNA) during anaphase. The phosphatase activity of Cdc14 is required for RNA polymerase I (Pol I) inhibition in vitro and in vivo. Moreover Cdc14-dependent inhibition involves nucleolar exclusion of Pol I subunits. We demonstrate that transcription inhibition is necessary for complete chromosome disjunction, because ribosomal RNA (rRNA) transcripts block condensin binding to rDNA, and show that bypassing the role of Cdc14 in nucleolar segregation requires in vivo degradation of nascent transcripts. Our results show that transcription interferes with chromosome condensation, not the reverse. We conclude that budding yeast, like most eukaryotes, inhibit Pol I transcription before segregation as a prerequisite for chromosome condensation and faithful genome separation.
Although the genetic code for protein was established in the 1960's, the basis for amino acid identity of transfer RNA (tRNA) has remained unknown. To investigate the identity of a tRNA, the nucleotides at three computer-identified positions in tRNAPhe (phenylalanine tRNA) were replaced with the corresponding nucleotides from tRNAAla (alanine tRNA). The identity of the resulting tRNA, when examined as an amber suppressor in Escherichia coli, was that of tRNAAla.
The stone-like otoliths from the ears of teleost fishes are involved in balance and hearing and consist of calcium carbonate crystallites embedded in a protein framework. We report that a previously unknown gene, starmaker, is required in zebrafish for otolith morphogenesis. Reduction of starmaker activity by injection of modified antisense oligonucleotides causes a change in the crystal lattice structure and thus a change in otolith morphology. The expression pattern of starmaker, along with the presence of the protein on the growing otolith, suggest that the expression levels of starmaker control the shape of the otoliths.
The diverse physiological actions of dopamine are mediated by its interaction with two basic types of G protein-coupled receptor, D1 and D2, which stimulate and inhibit, respectively, the enzyme adenylyl cyclase. Alterations in the number or activity of these receptors may be a contributory factor in diseases such as Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. Here we describe the isolation and characterization of the gene encoding a human D1 dopamine receptor. The coding region of this gene is intronless, unlike the gene encoding the D2 dopamine receptor. The D1 receptor gene encodes a protein of 446 amino acids having a predicted relative molecular mass of 49,300 and a transmembrane topology similar to that of other G protein-coupled receptors. Transient or stable expression of the cloned gene in host cells established specific ligand binding and functional activity characteristic of a D1 dopamine receptor coupled to stimulation of adenylyl cyclase. Northern blot analysis and in situ hybridization revealed that the messenger RNA for this receptor is most abundant in caudate, nucleus accumbens and olfactory tubercle, with little or no mRNA detectable in substantia nigra, liver, kidney, or heart. Several observations from this work in conjunction with results from other studies are consistent with the idea that other D1 dopamine receptor subtypes may exist.
RNA polymerase (RNAP) moves along DNA while carrying out transcription, acting as a molecular motor. Transcriptional velocities for single molecules of Escherichia coli RNAP were measured as progressively larger forces were applied by a feedback-controlled optical trap. The shapes of RNAP force-velocity curves are distinct from those of the motor enzymes myosin or kinesin, and indicate that biochemical steps limiting transcription rates at low loads do not generate movement. Modeling the data suggests that high loads may halt RNAP by promoting a structural change which moves all or part of the enzyme backwards through a comparatively large distance, corresponding to 5 to 10 base pairs. This contrasts with previous models that assumed force acts directly upon a single-base translocation step.
The spike glycoproteins of the lipid-enveloped orthomyxoviruses and paramyxoviruses have three functions: to recognize the receptor on the cell surface, to mediate viral fusion with the cell membrane, and to destroy the receptor. In influenza C virus, a single glycoprotein, the haemagglutinin-esterase-fusion (HEF) protein, possesses all three functions. In influenza A and B, the first two activities are mediated by haemagglutinin and the third by a second glycoprotein, neuraminidase. Here we report the crystal structure of the HEF envelope glycoprotein of influenza C virus. We have identified the receptor-binding site and the receptor-destroying enzyme (9-O-acetylesterase) sites, by using receptor analogues. The receptor-binding domain is structurally similar to the sialic acid-binding domain of influenza A haemagglutinin, but binds 9-O-acetylsialic acid. The esterase domain has a structure similar to the esterase from Streptomyces scabies and a brain acetylhydrolase. The receptor domain is inserted into a surface loop of the esterase domain and the esterase domain is inserted into a surface loop of the stem. The stem domain is similar to that of influenza A haemagglutinin, except that the triple-stranded, alpha-helical bundle diverges at both of its ends, and the amino terminus of HEF2, the fusion peptide, is partially exposed. The segregation of HEF's three functions into structurally distinct domains suggests that the entire stem region, including sequences at the amino and carboxy termini of HEF1 which precede the post-translational cleavage site between HEF1 and HEF2, forms an independent fusion domain which is probably derived from an ancestral membrane fusion protein.
Oxidized lipoproteins have been identified in atherosclerotic plaques and in early lesions in humans as well as in animals. There is accumulating evidence that such oxidized lipoproteins have an important role in atherosclerosis. Treatment of endothelial cells with altered lipoproteins stimulates monocyte binding as well as the production of chemotactic factors for monocytes. Both these findings could be relevant to the accumulation of monocytes-macrophages in the arterial wall during the early stages of lesion development. We now report that treatment of endothelial cells (EC) with modified low-density lipoproteins obtained by mild iron oxidation or by prolonged storage, results in a rapid and large induction of the expression of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), macrophage CSF (M-CSF) and granulocyte CSF (G-CSF). These growth factors affect the differentiation, survival, proliferation, migration and metabolism of macrophages/granulocytes, and G-CSF and GM-CSF also affect the migration and proliferation of EC. Because EC and macrophages are important in the development of atherosclerosis, the expression of the CSFs by these cells could contribute to the disease.
Rho and Rac, two members of the Ras superfamily of guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins, regulate a variety of signal transduction pathways in eukaryotic cells. Upon stimulation of phagocytic cells, Rac enhances the activity of the enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (reduced) (NADPH) oxidase, resulting in the production of superoxide radicals. Activation of the NADPH oxidase requires the assembly of a multimolecular complex at the plasma membrane consisting of two integral membrane proteins, gp91phox and p21phox, and two cytosolic proteins, p67phox and p47phox. Rac1 interacted directly with p67phox in a GTP-dependent manner. Modified forms of Rac with mutations in the effector site did not stimulate oxidase activity or bind to p67phox. Thus, p67phox appears to be the Rac effector protein in the NADPH oxidase complex.
The eukaryotic upstream binding factor (UBF), recognizes the ribosomal RNA gene promoter and activates transcription mediated by RNA polymerase I through cooperative interactions with the species-specific factor, SL1. Isolation of complementary DNA clones and sequence analysis reveals similarities between DNA binding domains of human UBF (hUBF) and high mobility group (HMG) protein 1. Expression, cellular localization and in vitro transcription studies establish that cloned hUBF encodes a nucleolar factor that binds specifically to the upstream control element and core of the rRNA gene promoter to activate transcription in a binding site-dependent manner.
The 19S proteasome regulatory particle plays a critical role in cellular proteolysis. However, recent reports have demonstrated that 19S proteins play a nonproteolytic role in nucleotide excision repair and transcription elongation. We show by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays that proteins comprising the 19S complex are recruited to the GAL1-10 promoter by the Gal4 transactivator upon induction with galactose. This recruited complex does not contain proteins from the 20S proteolytic particle and includes a subset of the 19S proteins. This subset is also specifically retained from an extract by the Gal4 activation domain. These data indicate that in vivo, the base of the 19S complex functions independently of the larger complex and plays a direct, nonproteolytic role in RNA polymerase II transcription.
Histone modification marks have an important role in many chromatin processes. During DNA replication, both heterochromatin and euchromatin are disrupted ahead of the replication fork and are then reassembled into their original epigenetic states behind the fork. How histone marks are accurately inherited from generation to generation is still poorly understood. In fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe), RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated histone methylation is cell cycle regulated. Centromeric repeats are transiently transcribed in the S phase of the cell cycle and are processed into short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) by the complexes RITS (RNA-induced initiation of transcriptional gene silencing) and RDRC (RNA-directed RNA polymerase complex). The small RNAs together with silencing factors-including Dos1 (also known as Clr8 and Raf1), Dos2 (also known as Clr7 and Raf2), Rik1 and Lid2-promote heterochromatic methylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9) by a histone methyltransferase, Clr4 (refs 8-13). The methylation of H3K9 provides a binding site for Swi6, a structural and functional homologue of metazoan heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1). Here we characterize a silencing complex in fission yeast that contains Dos2, Rik1, Mms19 and Cdc20 (the catalytic subunit of DNA polymerase-e). This complex regulates RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) activity in heterochromatin and is required for DNA replication and heterochromatin assembly. Our findings provide a molecular link between DNA replication and histone methylation, shedding light on how epigenetic marks are transmitted during each cell cycle.
Three mutants at three different phosphatase loci produce inactive enzymes at 35 degrees C but partially or fully active enzynmes at 25 degrees C. Furthermore, a suppressor mutant (su5palA1) which restores alkaline phosphatase activity in the palA1 mtutant is an allele of palcC4, a mzutant with a simultaneous reduction in alkaline and acid phosphatase activity. These data suggest that the phosphataseproteins may be made up of two or more different polypeptide chains, and that some of the polypeptide chains are common to two or more of these enzymes.
Lactate dehydrogenases at physiological concentrations are inhibited by high concentrations of pyruvate when the enzyme and the pyruvate are incubated in the presence of oxidized nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide before assay. The inhibition is much more pronounced with the H-type than with the M-type lactate dehydrogenase. These results suggest that substrate inhibition may be operative in vivo.
Ribonuclease footprinting of nascent messenger RNA within ternary complexes of vaccinia RNA polymerase revealed an RNA binding site that encompasses an 18-nucleotide RNA segment. The dimensions of the binding site did not change as the polymerase moved along the template. Capping of the 5' end of the RNA was cotranscriptional and was confined to nascent chains 31 nucleotides or greater in length. Purified capping enzyme formed a binary complex with RNA polymerase in solution in the absence of nucleic acid. These findings suggest a mechanism for cotranscriptional establishment of messenger RNA identity in eukaryotes.
Knowledge of how genes are regulated during the cell cycle is essential for understanding the process of cell growth on a molecular level. Numerous studies have established that, as mammalian cells go through the cell cycle, histone mRNA levels change, the largest amount being produced in the S phase. Both transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms are responsible for this regulation and it has recently been demonstrated that nucleotide sequences in both the 5' and 3' termini of the histone gene are involved. From deletion analysis of a hamster H3.2 fusion gene, we report here that the crucial control signals for both cell-cycle regulation and high level expression in vivo are contained in a 32-nucleotide (nt) region about 150 nt upstream of the TATA sequence and do not require any histone protein coding sequence. By comparison, the promoter of the herpes simplex virus (HSV) thymidine kinase gene is serum-stimulated but not cell-cycle regulated. The cell-cycle control exerted by the histone DNA regulatory element acts at the transcriptional level, as the rate of transcription is stimulated during the DNA synthetic phase of the cell cycle. Using DNA-protein mobility shift experiments, we demonstrate the existence of high affinity cellular factors interacting with the histone H3.2 promoter sequence. The concentration of the protein-DNA complexes shows cell-cycle variation, particularly during the transition from late G1 to the DNA synthesis phase. These data provide evidence for in vivo interactions between the cell-cycle transcriptional regulatory factors and the cis-acting DNA domain.
Recent earth science studies have pointed out that massive acceleration of the global nitrogen cycle by anthropogenic addition of bio-available nitrogen has led to a host of environmental problems. Nitrous oxide (N(2)O) is a greenhouse gas that is an intermediate during the biological process known as denitrification. Copper-containing nitrite reductase (CuNIR) is a key enzyme in the process; it produces a precursor for N(2)O by catalysing the one-electron reduction of nitrite (NO2-) to nitric oxide (NO). The reduction step is performed by an efficient electron-transfer reaction with a redox-partner protein. However, details of the mechanism during the electron-transfer reaction are still unknown. Here we show the high-resolution crystal structure of the electron-transfer complex for CuNIR with its cognate cytochrome c as the electron donor. The hydrophobic electron-transfer path is formed at the docking interface by desolvation owing to close contact between the two proteins. Structural analysis of the interface highlights an essential role for the loop region with a hydrophobic patch for protein-protein recognition; it also shows how interface construction allows the variation in atomic components to achieve diverse biological electron transfers.
Cerebral deposition of the beta-amyloid peptide (A beta) is an invariant feature of Alzheimer's disease. Since the original isolation and characterization of A beta (ref. 1) and the subsequent cloning of its precursor protein, no direct evidence for the actual production of discrete A beta has been reported. Here we investigate whether A beta is present in human biological fluids using antibodies specific for an epitope within A beta that spans the site of normal constitutive cleavage. These antibodies were used to construct a sandwich-type enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay that detects A beta in cerebrospinal fluid, plasma and conditioned medium of human mixed-brain cells grown in vitro (see also ref. 14). By affinity chromatography, we have purified and sequenced A beta and a novel A beta fragment from human cerebrospinal fluid and conditioned medium of human mixed-brain cell cultures. These findings demonstrate that A beta is produced and released both in vivo and in vitro. These observations offer new opportunities for developing diagnostic tests for Alzheimer's disease and therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing the cerebral deposition of A beta.
A surprising recent finding is that thyroxine binding globulin (TBG) and cortisol binding globulin (CBG), are members of the serine protease inhibitor (serpin) superfamily. Apparently evolution has completely adapted the serpin structure for its new role in these proteins as a transport agent, as there is no evidence of any retained protease inhibitory activity. This drastic change in function raises the question as to why such a complex molecular framework has been selected for the relatively simple task of hormone transport? To function as inhibitors the serpins have a native stressed (S) conformation that makes them vulnerable to proteolytic cleavage, the cleavage being accompanied by an irreversible transition to a stable relaxed (R) form. We demonstrate here that TBG and CBG have retained the stressed native structure typical of the inhibitor members of the family and we provide evidence that the S-R transition has been adapted to allow altered hormone delivery at inflammatory sites.
The enzyme RNase E (ref. 1) cuts RNA at specific sites within single-stranded segments. The role of adjacent regions of secondary structure in such cleavages is controversial. Here we report that 10-13-nucleotide oligomers lacking any stem-loop but containing the RNase E-cleaved sequence of RNA I, the antisense repressor of replication of ColE1-type plasmids, are cut at the same phosphodiester bond as, and 20 times more efficiently than, RNA I. These findings indicate that, contrary to previous proposals, stem-loops do not serve as entry sites for RNase E, but instead limit cleavage at potentially susceptible sites. Cleavage was reduced further by mutations in a non-adjacent stem-loop, suggesting that distant conformational changes can also affect enzyme access. Modulation of RNase E cleavages by stem-loop regions and to a lesser extent by higher-order structure may explain why this enzyme, which does not have stringent sequence specificity, cleaves complex RNAs at a limited number of sites.
The beta-galactosidase from Escherichia coli was instrumental in the development of the operon model, and today is one of the most commonly used enzymes in molecular biology. Here we report the structure of this protein and show that it is a tetramer with 222-point symmetry. The 1,023-amino-acid polypeptide chain folds into five sequential domains, with an extended segment at the amino terminus. The participation of this amino-terminal segment in a subunit interface, coupled with the observation that each active site is made up of elements from two different subunits, provides a structural rationale for the phenomenon of alpha-complementation. The structure represents the longest polypeptide chain for which an atomic structure has been determined. Our results show that it is possible successfully to study non-viral protein crystals with unit cell dimensions in excess of 500 A and with relative molecular masses in the region of 2,000K per asymmetric unit. Non-crystallographic symmetry averaging proved to be a very powerful tool in the structure determination, as has been shown in other contexts.
Lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) has been strongly linked with atherosclerosis and is an independent risk factor for myocardial infarction. Distinguishing Lp(a) from other low-density lipoprotein particles is its content of a unique apoprotein, apo(a). The recently described sequence of apo(a) indicates a remarkable homology with plasminogen, the zymogen of the primary thrombolytic enzyme, plasmin. Lp(a) may contain 37 or more disulphide-looped kringle structures, which are 75-85% identical to the fourth kringle of plasminogen. Plasminogen receptors are widely distributed on blood cells and are present at extremely high density on endothelial cells. These receptors promote thrombolysis by accelerating plasminogen activation and protecting plasmin from inhibition. If, by molecular mimicry, Lp(a) competes with plasminogen for receptors, then thrombolysis would be inhibited and thrombosis promoted. Here we provide support for such a mechanism being responsible for the thrombotic risks associated with elevated Lp(a) by demonstrating that Lp(a) inhibits plasminogen binding to cells.
Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) is a potent pro-inflammatory agent produced primarily by activated monocytes and macrophages. TNF-alpha is synthesized as a precursor protein of M(r) 26,000 (26K) which is processed to a secreted 17K mature form by cleavage of an Ala-Val bond between residues 76-77. The enzyme(s) responsible for processing pro-TNF-alpha has yet to be identified. Here, we describe the capacity of a metalloproteinase inhibitor, GI 129471, to block TNF-alpha secretion both in vitro and in vivo. The inhibition is specific to TNF-alpha; the production of other secreted cytokines, such as the interleukins IL-1 beta, IL-2, or IL-6, is not inhibited. The mechanism of inhibition occurs at a post-translational step in TNF-alpha production. Our data suggest that TNF-alpha processing is mediated by a unique Zn2+ endopeptidase which is inhibited by GI 129471 and would represent a novel target for therapeutic intervention in TNF-alpha associated pathologies.
DNA mismatch repair ensures genomic integrity on DNA replication. Recognition of a DNA mismatch by a dimeric MutS protein initiates a cascade of reactions and results in repair of the newly synthesized strand; however, details of the molecular mechanism remain controversial. Here we present the crystal structure at 2.2 A of MutS from Escherichia coli bound to a G x T mismatch. The two MutS monomers have different conformations and form a heterodimer at the structural level. Only one monomer recognizes the mismatch specifically and has ADP bound. Mismatch recognition occurs by extensive minor groove interactions causing unusual base pairing and kinking of the DNA. Nonspecific major groove DNA-binding domains from both monomers embrace the DNA in a clamp-like structure. The interleaved nucleotide-binding sites are located far from the DNA. Mutations in human MutS alpha (MSH2/MSH6) that lead to hereditary predisposition for cancer, such as hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, can be mapped to this crystal structure.
RasGRP, a guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein for the small guanosine triphosphatase Ras, was characterized. Besides the catalytic domain, RasGRP has an atypical pair of "EF hands" that bind calcium and a diacylglycerol (DAG)-binding domain. RasGRP activated Ras and caused transformation in fibroblasts. A DAG analog caused sustained activation of Ras-Erk signaling and changes in cell morphology. Signaling was associated with partitioning of RasGRP protein into the membrane fraction. Sustained ligand-induced signaling and membrane partitioning were absent when the DAG-binding domain was deleted. RasGRP is expressed in the nervous system, where it may couple changes in DAG and possibly calcium concentrations to Ras activation.
The retrovirus involved in acquired immune deficiency syndrome (HTLV-III/LAV) contains a region that is necessary for stimulation of gene expression directed by the viral long terminal repeat. This region is located between nucleotides 5365 and 5607, immediately 5' to the envelope gene. A doubly-spliced message containing this region could encode an 86-amino acid protein with structural features similar to those of nucleic acid-binding proteins.
A single double-strand break (DSB) induced by HO endonuclease triggers both repair by homologous recombination and activation of the Mec1-dependent DNA damage checkpoint in budding yeast. Here we report that DNA damage checkpoint activation by a DSB requires the cyclin-dependent kinase CDK1 (Cdc28) in budding yeast. CDK1 is also required for DSB-induced homologous recombination at any cell cycle stage. Inhibition of homologous recombination by using an analogue-sensitive CDK1 protein results in a compensatory increase in non-homologous end joining. CDK1 is required for efficient 5' to 3' resection of DSB ends and for the recruitment of both the single-stranded DNA-binding complex, RPA, and the Rad51 recombination protein. In contrast, Mre11 protein, part of the MRX complex, accumulates at unresected DSB ends. CDK1 is not required when the DNA damage checkpoint is initiated by lesions that are processed by nucleotide excision repair. Maintenance of the DSB-induced checkpoint requires continuing CDK1 activity that ensures continuing end resection. CDK1 is also important for a later step in homologous recombination, after strand invasion and before the initiation of new DNA synthesis.
A role in folding of newly translated proteins in the cytosol of eukaryotes has been proposed for t-complex polypeptide-1 (TCP1), although its molecular targets have not yet been identified. Tubulin is a major cytosolic protein whose assembly into microtubules is critical to many cellular processes. Although numerous studies have focused on the expression of tubulin, little is known about the processes whereby newly translated tubulin subunits acquire conformations that enable them to form alpha-beta-heterodimers. We examined the biogenesis of alpha- and beta-tubulin in rabbit reticulocyte lysate, and report here that newly translated tubulin subunits entered a 900K complex in a protease-sensitive conformation. Addition of Mg-ATP, but not nonhydrolysable analogues, released the tubulin subunits as assembly-competent protein with a conformation that was relatively protease-resistant. The 900K complex purified from reticulocyte lysate contained as its major constituent a 58K protein that cross-reacted with a monoclonal antiserum against mouse TCP1. We conclude that TCP1 functions as a cytosolic chaperone in the biogenesis of tubulin.
Mitogen stimulation of cytoskeletal changes and c-jun amino-terminal kinases is mediated by Rac small guanine nucleotide-binding proteins. Vav, a guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-guanosine triphosphate (GTP) exchange factor for Rac that stimulates the exchange of bound GDP for GTP, bound to and was directly controlled by substrates and products of phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinase. The PI 3-kinase substrate phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate inhibited activation of Vav by the tyrosine kinase Lck, whereas the product phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate enhanced phosphorylation and activation of Vav by Lck. Control of Vav in response to mitogens by the products of PI 3-kinase suggests a mechanism for Ras-dependent activation of Rac.
Prostaglandins and glucocorticoids are potent mediators of inflammation. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) exert their effects by inhibition of prostaglandin production. The pharmacological target of NSAIDs is cyclooxygenase (COX, also known as PGH synthase), which catalyses the first committed step in arachidonic-acid metabolism. Two isoforms of the membrane protein COX are known: COX-1, which is constitutively expressed in most tissues, is responsible for the physiological production of prostaglandins; and COX-2, which is induced by cytokines, mitogens and endotoxins in inflammatory cells, is responsible for the elevated production of prostaglandins during inflammation. The structure of ovine COX-1 complexed with several NSAIDs has been determined. Here we report the structures of unliganded murine COX-2 and complexes with flurbiprofen, indomethacin and SC-558, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, determined at 3.0 to 2.5 A resolution. These structures explain the structural basis for the selective inhibition of COX-2, and demonstrate some of the conformational changes associated with time-dependent inhibition.
The crystal structure at 2.7 A resolution of the normal human c-H-ras oncogene protein lacking a flexible carboxyl-terminal 18 residue reveals that the protein consists of a six-stranded beta sheet, four alpha helices, and nine connecting loops. Four loops are involved in interactions with bound guanosine diphosphate: one with the phosphates, another with the ribose, and two with the guanine base. Most of the transforming proteins (in vivo and in vitro) have single amino acid substitutions at one of a few key positions in three of these four loops plus one additional loop. The biological functions of the remaining five loops and other exposed regions are at present unknown. However, one loop corresponds to the binding site for a neutralizing monoclonal antibody and another to a putative "effector region"; mutations in the latter region do not alter guanine nucleotide binding or guanosine triphosphatase activity but they do reduce the transforming activity of activated proteins. The data provide a structural basis for understanding the known biochemical properties of normal as well as activated ras oncogene proteins and indicate additional regions in the molecule that may possibly participate in other cellular functions.
Proteolytically produced carboxyl-terminal fragments of the human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) Tat protein that include a conserved region rich in arginine and lysine bind specifically to transactivation response RNA sequences (TAR). A chemically synthesized 14-residue peptide spanning the basic subdomain also recognizes TAR, identifying this subdomain as central for RNA interaction. TAR RNA forms a stable hairpin that includes a six-residue loop, a trinucleotide pyrimidine bulge, and extensive duplex structure. Competition and interference experiments show that the Tat-derived fragments bind to double-stranded RNA and interact specifically at the pyrimidine bulge and adjacent duplex of TAR.
In population studies of individuals given the antihypertensive drug debrisoquine, two distinct phenotypes have been described: extensive metabolizers excrete 10-200 times more of the urinary metabolite 4-hydroxydebrisoquine than poor metabolizers. In family studies the poor-metabolizer phenotype behaves as an autosomal recessive trait with an incidence between 5% and 10% in the white population of Europe and North America, and extends to the deficient metabolism of more than 20 commonly prescribed drugs. Clinical studies have shown that such individuals are at high risk for the development of adverse side effects from these and probably many other drugs. Here we show that poor metabolizers have negligible amounts of the cytochrome P450 enzyme P450db1. We have cloned the human P450db1 complementary DNA and expressed it in mammalian cell culture. Furthermore, by directly cloning and sequencing cDNAs from several poor-metabolizer livers, we have identified three variant messenger RNAs that are products of mutant genes producing incorrectly spliced db1 pre-mRNA, providing a molecular explanation for one of man's most commonly defective genes (frequency of mutant alleles 35-43%).
The packaging of the eukaryotic genome in chromatin presents barriers that restrict the access of enzymes that process DNA. To overcome these barriers, cells possess a number of multi-protein, ATP-dependent chromatin remodelling complexes, each containing an ATPase subunit from the SNF2/SWI2 superfamily. Chromatin remodelling complexes function by increasing nucleosome mobility and are clearly implicated in transcription. Here we have analysed SNF2/SWI2- and ISWI-related proteins to identify remodelling complexes that potentially assist other DNA transactions. We purified a complex from Saccharomyces cerevisiae that contains the Ino80 ATPase. The INO80 complex contains about 12 polypeptides including two proteins related to the bacterial RuvB DNA helicase, which catalyses branch migration of Holliday junctions. The purified complex remodels chromatin, facilitates transcription in vitro and displays 3' to 5' DNA helicase activity. Mutants of ino80 show hypersensitivity to agents that cause DNA damage, in addition to defects in transcription. These results indicate that chromatin remodelling driven by the Ino80 ATPase may be connected to transcription as well as DNA damage repair.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous approximately 22-nucleotide RNAs that mediate important gene-regulatory events by pairing to the mRNAs of protein-coding genes to direct their repression. Repression of these regulatory targets leads to decreased translational efficiency and/or decreased mRNA levels, but the relative contributions of these two outcomes have been largely unknown, particularly for endogenous targets expressed at low-to-moderate levels. Here, we use ribosome profiling to measure the overall effects on protein production and compare these to simultaneously measured effects on mRNA levels. For both ectopic and endogenous miRNA regulatory interactions, lowered mRNA levels account for most (>/=84%) of the decreased protein production. These results show that changes in mRNA levels closely reflect the impact of miRNAs on gene expression and indicate that destabilization of target mRNAs is the predominant reason for reduced protein output.
The ubiquitin system targets many cellular proteins. Doa10 (also known as Ssm4), a yeast transmembrane ubiquitin ligase (E3), resides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), but it attaches ubiquitin to soluble proteins that concentrate in the nucleus. A central question is how nuclear substrates gain access to an enzyme in the ER. Here we show that Doa10 reaches the inner nuclear membrane. A subcomplex of nuclear pore subunits is important for this transport. Notably, another ER transmembrane E3, Hrd1 (also known as Der3), cannot localize efficiently to the inner nuclear membrane. Tethering Doa10 at the cell periphery inhibits degradation of soluble nuclear substrates but not cytoplasmic ones. If Doa10 is released from these peripheral sites, localization of Doa10 to the nuclear envelope and degradation of its nuclear substrates are restored in parallel. Thus, localization of Doa10 to the inner nuclear membrane is necessary for nuclear substrate degradation. These data indicate that different membrane ubiquitin ligases are spatially sorted within the ER-nuclear envelope membrane system and that this differential localization contributes to their specificity.
The nucleotide sequence of SV40 DNA was determined, and the sequence was correlated with known genes of the virus and with the structure of viral messenger RNA's. There is a limited overlap of the coding regions for structural proteins and a complex pattern of leader sequences at the 5' end of late messenger RNA. The sequence of the early region is consistent with recent proposals that the large early polypeptide of SV40 is encoded in noncontinguous segments of DNA.
Cholesterol metabolism is tightly regulated at the cellular level. Here we show that miR-33, an intronic microRNA (miRNA) located within the gene encoding sterol-regulatory element-binding factor-2 (SREBF-2), a transcriptional regulator of cholesterol synthesis, modulates the expression of genes involved in cellular cholesterol transport. In mouse and human cells, miR-33 inhibits the expression of the adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) transporter, ABCA1, thereby attenuating cholesterol efflux to apolipoprotein A1. In mouse macrophages, miR-33 also targets ABCG1, reducing cholesterol efflux to nascent high-density lipoprotein (HDL). Lentiviral delivery of miR-33 to mice represses ABCA1 expression in the liver, reducing circulating HDL levels. Conversely, silencing of miR-33 in vivo increases hepatic expression of ABCA1 and plasma HDL levels. Thus, miR-33 appears to regulate both HDL biogenesis in the liver and cellular cholesterol efflux.
The dunce locus of Drosophila melanogaster is considered to house a gene involved in memory, because flies carrying lesions at the locus have shortened memory of several different conditioned behaviours. Our recent partial characterization of the gene at the molecular level, along with prior genetic and biochemical evidence, recently provides compelling evidence that the gene codes for the enzyme cAMP phosphodiesterase. The observation that the gene encodes at least six overlapping poly(A)+ RNA molecules ranging in size from 4.2 to 9.5 kilobases (kb) (ref. 8), suggests that the gene is extraordinarily complex. Here we provide the sequence of a dunce complementary DNA clone and the corresponding genomic coding regions which show that the organization of the gene is elaborate. The cDNA clone defines dunce exons which are separated by a large intron of 79 kb. More importantly, at least two other genes are shown to reside within the large intron, including the well-defined glue protein gene, Sgs-4. The location of dunce exons relative to the molecular breakpoints of chromosomal aberrations with defined cytological positions indicates that the dunce gene extends over more than five polytene chromosome bands.
The U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) particle is one of the Sm class of snRNPs essential for splicing of precursor messenger RNA. Mammalian U1 snRNP contains a 165-nucleotide long RNA molecule and at least 11 proteins: the U1-specific 70K proteins A and C, and the common U snRNP proteins (B', B, D1, D2, D3, E, F and G). One of the functions of U1 snRNP is recognition of the 5' splice site, an event that requires both U1 RNA and U1 proteins. The 70K protein is the only heavily phosphorylated U1 protein in the cell. Isolated U1 snRNPs are associated with a kinase activity that selectively phosphorylates the 70K protein in vitro in a reaction requiring ATP. Here we investigate the role of phosphorylation of the 70K protein in the splicing of pre-mRNA. The 70K protein on U1 snRNPs was phosphorylated in vitro with either ATP, or with ATP-gamma S, which gave a thiophosphorylated product that was resistant to dephosphorylation by phosphatases. When HeLa nuclear splicing extracts that had been depleted of endogenous U1 snRNPs were complemented with U1 snRNPs possessing normal phosphorylated 70K protein, mature spliceosomes were generated and the splicing activity of the extracts was fully restored. By contrast, if thiophosphorylated U1 snRNPs were used instead, splicing was completely inhibited, although formation of the mature spliceosome was unaffected. Our data show that the state of phosphorylation of the U1-specific 70K protein is critical for its participation in a pre-catalytic step of the splicing reaction.
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) commonly causes asymptomatic cutaneous neoplasms in children and sexually active adults as well as persistent opportunistic acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-associated disease. Sequencing the 190-kilobase pair genome of MCV has now revealed that the virus potentially encodes 163 proteins, of which 103 have homologs in the smallpox virus. MCV lacks counterparts to 83 genes of the smallpox virus, including those important in suppression of host responses to infection, nucleotide biosynthesis, and cell proliferation. MCV possesses 59 genes that are predicted to encode previously uncharacterized proteins, including major histocompatibility complex class I, chemokine, and glutathione peroxidase homologs, which suggests that there are MCV-specific strategies for coexistence with the human host.
All catalytic RNAs (ribozymes) require or are stimulated by divalent metal ions, but it has been difficult to separate the contribution of these metal ions to formation of the RNA tertiary structure from a more direct role in catalysis. The Tetrahymena ribozyme catalyses cleavage of exogenous RNA or DNA substrates with an absolute requirement for Mg2+ or Mn2+ (ref. 6). A DNA substrate, in which the bridging 3' oxygen atom at the cleavage site is replaced by sulphur, is cleaved by the ribozyme about 1,000 times more slowly than the corresponding unmodified DNA substrate when Mg2+ is present as the only divalent metal ion. But addition of Mn2+ or Zn2+ to the reaction relieves this negative effect, with the 3' S-P bond being cleaved nearly as fast as the 3' O-P bond. Considering that Mn2+ and Zn2+ coordinate sulphur more strongly than Mg2+ does, these results indicate that the metal ion contributes directly to catalysis by coordination to the 3' oxygen atom in the transition state, presumably stabilizing the developing negative charge on the leaving group. We conclude that the Tetrahymena ribozyme is a metalloenzyme, with mechanistic similarities to several protein enzymes.
Splicing of precursor messenger RNA takes place in the spliceosome, a large RNA/protein macromolecular machine. Spliceosome assembly occurs in an ordered pathway in vitro and is conserved between yeast and mammalian systems. The earliest step is commitment complex formation in yeast or E complex formation in mammals, which engages the pre-mRNA in the splicing pathway and involves interactions between U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) and the pre-mRNA 5' splice site. Complex formation depends on highly conserved base pairing between the 5' splice site and the 5' end of U1 snRNA, both in vivo and in vitro. U1 snRNP proteins also contribute to U1 snRNP activity. Here we show that U1 snRNP lacking the 5' end of its snRNA retains 5'-splice-site sequence specificity. We also show that recombinant yeast U1C protein, a U1 snRNP protein, selects a 5'-splice-site-like sequence in which the first four nucleotides, GUAU, are identical to the first four nucleotides of the yeast 5'-splice-site consensus sequence. We propose that a U1C 5'-splice-site interaction precedes pre-mRNA/U1 snRNA base pairing and is the earliest step in the splicing pathway.
The 1.9-A-resolution crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle containing 147 DNA base pairs reveals the conformation of nucleosomal DNA with unprecedented accuracy. The DNA structure is remarkably different from that in oligonucleotides and non-histone protein-DNA complexes. The DNA base-pair-step geometry has, overall, twice the curvature necessary to accommodate the DNA superhelical path in the nucleosome. DNA segments bent into the minor groove are either kinked or alternately shifted. The unusual DNA conformational parameters induced by the binding of histone protein have implications for sequence-dependent protein recognition and nucleosome positioning and mobility. Comparison of the 147-base-pair structure with two 146-base-pair structures reveals alterations in DNA twist that are evidently common in bulk chromatin, and which are of probable importance for chromatin fibre formation and chromatin remodelling.
Two DNA fragments, each containing tRNA(Arg)3 and a tRNA(Asp) gene in close conjunction, have been isolated from different genomic regions of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nucleotide Nucleotide sequence analysis of the gene regions revealed that in both fragments the tRNA(Arg)3 coding region is located 5'-proximal to the tRNA(Asp) coding region. They are separated by an identical spacer of 10 nucleotides. Although the 5'-flanking sequences are different in the two plasmids, some similarities are observed. To test the mode of expression of this gene configuration, we transcribed the DNA fragments in a Xenopus oocyte nuclear extract. Specific transcription of the yeast tRNA genes took place in an RNA precursor which comprised both tRNA species. We report here that the precursor RNA was processed to the mature-sized tRNA molecules, indicating the presence of an enzyme activity in the Xenopus nucleus capable of cutting a dimeric tRNA precursor. This is the first observation of a eukaryotic dimeric tRNA precursor.
Lineage choice is of great interest in developmental biology. In the immune system, the alphabeta and gammadelta lineages of T lymphocytes diverge during the course of the beta-, gamma- and delta-chain rearrangement of T-cell receptor (TCR) genes that takes place within the same precursor cell and which results in the formation of the gammadeltaTCR or pre-TCR proteins. The pre-TCR consists of the TCRbeta chain covalently linked to the pre-TCRalpha protein, which is present in immature but not in mature T cells which instead express the TCRalpha chain. Animals deficient in pre-TCRalpha have few alphabeta lineage cells but an increased number of gammadelta T cells. These gammadelta T cells exhibit more extensive TCRbeta rearrangement than gammadelta T cells from wild-type mice. These observations are consistent with the idea that different signals emanating from the gammadeltaTCR and pre-TCR instruct lineage commitment. Here we show, by using confocal microscopy and biochemistry to analyse the initiation of signalling, that the pre-TCR but not the gammadeltaTCR colocalizes with the p56lck Src kinase into glycolipid-enriched membrane domains (rafts) apparently without any need for ligation. This results in the phosphorylation of CD3epsilon and Zap-70 signal transducing molecules. The results indicate clear differences between pre-TCR and gammadeltaTCR signalling.
The principal guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rho family G proteins contain tandem Dbl-homology (DH) and pleckstrin-homology (PH) domains that catalyse nucleotide exchange and the activation of G proteins. Here we have determined the crystal structure of the DH and PH domains of the T-lymphoma invasion and metastasis factor 1 (Tiam1) protein in complex with its cognate Rho family G protein, Rac1. The two switch regions of Rac1 are stabilized in conformations that disrupt both magnesium binding and guanine nucleotide interaction. The resulting cleft in Rac1 is devoid of nucleotide and highly exposed to solvent. The PH domain of Tiam1 does not contact Rac1, and the position and orientation of the PH domain is markedly altered relative to the structure of the uncomplexed, GTPase-free DH/PH element from Sos1. The Tiam1/Rac1 structure highlights the interactions that catalyse nucleotide exchange on Rho family G proteins, and illustrates structural determinants dictating specificity between individual Rho family members and their associated Dbl-related guanine nucleotide exchange factors.
Carbamylcholine (30 micronM) increased the concentration of guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic GMP) in guinea pig pancreatic lobules about eight-to tenfold over the basal concentration in 30 seconds with a concomitant increase in the rate of amylase secretion. The concentration of cyclic GMP rapidly declined to a plateau value of about 16 percent of the peak level in 10 minutes. Cellular cyclic GMP decreased, mostly because the nucleotide was secreted into medium; cellular adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP), however did not change, nor was this nucleotide secreted into the medium. An immunocytochemical technique showed that cyclic GMP was distributed in the apical plasmalemma membrane and lumen of the pancreas. Carbamylcholine increased the cyclic GMP fluorescence in tha apical plasmalemma membrane within 30 seconds, and in zymogen granules and the plasma membrane in the apical part of acinar cells in 10 minutes. The islets of Langerhans did not show any change in cyclic GMP. Fluorescence of cyclic AMP in pancreatic lobules was not altered by carbamylcholine and was localized along the apical portion of plasmalemma and cytoplasm. Cyclic GMP  may thus participate either in the process of exocytosis or in the activation of enzymes secreted from the pancreas.
Lymphocytes are known to interact directly with other cells in vivo and in vitro, and have recently been shown to transfer the lysosomal enzyme, beta-glucuronidase, to fibroblasts from patients with an inherited deficiency of the enzyme. This process requires cell-cell contact, is unaffected by inhibitors of 'classical' receptor-mediated endocytosis and is abolished by inhibitors of protein synthesis. Although it is not yet known to what extent the transfer of enzymes by direct cellular interaction is a general phenomenon, a similar mechanism could possibly be involved in the transfer of other lysosomal enzymes in vivo and in the exchange of protein in vitro. We show here that the direct transfer of enzymes from lymphocytes to fibroblasts is restricted to only certain lysosomal enzymes.
The transcription factor C/EBP uses a bipartite structural motif to bind DNA. Two protein chains dimerize through a set of amphipathic alpha helices termed the leucine zipper. Highly basic polypeptide regions emerge from the zipper to form a linked set of DNA contact surfaces. In the recently proposed a "scissors grip" model, the paired set of basic regions begin DNA contact at a central point and track in opposite directions along the major groove, forming a molecular clamp around DNA. This model predicts that C/EBP must undertake significant changes in protein conformation as it binds and releases DNA. The basic region of ligand-free C/EBP is highly sensitive to protease digestion. Pronounced resistance to proteolysis occurred when C/EBP associated with its specific DNA substrate. Sequencing of discrete proteolytic fragments showed that prominent sites for proteolysis occur at two junction points predicted by the "scissors grip" model. One junction corresponds to the cleft where the basic regions emerge from the leucine zipper. The other corresponds to a localized nonhelical segment that has been hypothesized to contain an N-cap and facilitate the sharp angulation necessary for the basic region to track continuously in the major groove of DNA.
An attractive solution to the problem of the origin of protein synthesis in an evolving 'RNA world' involves catalysis by nucleic acid without assistance from proteins. Indeed, even the modern ribosome has been considered to be fundamentally an RNA machine, and the large ribosomal subunit can carry out peptidyl transfer in the absence of most of its protein subunits. Successive cycles of in vitro selection and amplification have been used to find RNAs that perform many biochemical reactions, including transfer of an RNA-linked amino acid to their own 5'-amino-modified terminus. Here we demonstrate the in vitro selection of ribozymes (196 nucleotides) that perform the same peptidyl transferase reaction as the ribosome: that is, they can join amino acids by a peptide bond. Like ribosome substrates, one amino acid (N-blocked methionine) is esterified to the 3'(2')-O of adenosine, whereas the acceptor amino acid (phenylalanine) has a free amino group. Our best characterized ribozyme recognizes the amino-acid ester substrate by binding its adenosine moiety, and is therefore capable of utilizing Leu- and Phe- as well as Met-derived substrates. Such lack of specificity with respect to the amino acid is a feature necessary for a generalized protein-synthesizing enzyme.
Proteolysis is essential for the execution of many cellular functions. These include removal of incorrectly folded or damaged proteins, the activation of transcription factors, the ordered degradation of proteins involved in cell cycle control, and the generation of peptides destined for presentation by class I molecules of the major histocompatibility complex. A multisubunit protease complex, the proteasome, accomplishes these tasks. Here we show that in mammalian cells inactivation of the proteasome by covalent inhibitors allows the outgrowth of inhibitor-resistant cells. The growth of such adapted cells is apparently maintained by the induction of other proteolytic systems that compensate for the loss of proteasomal activity.
What do the regulation of translation initiation and glucose metabolism have to do with each other? Quite a lot, it seems, according to Sonenberg and Newgard in their Perspective. They discuss new findings that identify the kinase responsible for inactivating eIF2--a factor that is required for translation initiation (and hence protein synthesis)--when the endoplasmic reticulum is under stress. Loss of this kinase results in destruction of insulin-producing b cells in the pancreas and dysregulation of glucose homeostasis.
Investigation of bovine lacrimal and harderian glands revealed the presence of the enzyme lactoperoxidase, which was isolated and purified. A nonheme, iron-containing protein was identified at the same time. Both proteins are present in milk, mammary glands, and salivary glands. Their roles are discussed: The lactoperoxidase may be important in controlling bacterial flora.
Virtually all of the 560 human proteases are stored as inactive proenyzmes and are strictly regulated. We report the identification and characterization of the first small molecules that directly activate proenzymes, the apoptotic procaspases-3 and -6. It is surprising that these compounds induce autoproteolytic activation by stabilizing a conformation that is both more active and more susceptible to intermolecular proteolysis. These procaspase activators bypass the normal upstream proapoptotic signaling cascades and induce rapid apoptosis in a variety of cell lines. Systematic biochemical and biophysical analyses identified a cluster of mutations in procaspase-3 that resist small-molecule activation both in vitro and in cells. Compounds that induce gain of function are rare, and the activators reported here will enable direct control of the executioner caspases in apoptosis and in cellular differentiation. More generally, these studies presage the discovery of other proenzyme activators to explore fundamental processes of proenzyme activation and their fate-determining roles in biology.
DNA methylation is a major epigenetic modification of the genome that regulates crucial aspects of its function. Genomic methylation patterns in somatic differentiated cells are generally stable and heritable. However, in mammals there are at least two developmental periods-in germ cells and in preimplantation embryos-in which methylation patterns are reprogrammed genome wide, generating cells with a broad developmental potential. Epigenetic reprogramming in germ cells is critical for imprinting; reprogramming in early embryos also affects imprinting. Reprogramming is likely to have a crucial role in establishing nuclear totipotency in normal development and in cloned animals, and in the erasure of acquired epigenetic information. A role of reprogramming in stem cell differentiation is also envisaged. DNA methylation is one of the best-studied epigenetic modifications of DNA in all unicellular and multicellular organisms. In mammals and other vertebrates, methylation occurs predominantly at the symmetrical dinucleotide CpG (1-4). Symmetrical methylation and the discovery of a DNA methyltransferase that prefers a hemimethylated substrate, Dnmt1 (4), suggested a mechanism by which specific patterns of methylation in the genome could be maintained. Patterns imposed on the genome at defined developmental time points in precursor cells could be maintained by Dnmt1, and would lead to predetermined programs of gene expression during development in descendants of the precursor cells (5, 6). This provided a means to explain how patterns of differentiation could be maintained by populations of cells. In addition, specific demethylation events in differentiated tissues could then lead to further changes in gene expression as needed. Neat and convincing as this model is, it is still largely unsubstantiated. While effects of methylation on expression of specific genes, particularly imprinted ones (7) and some retrotransposons (8), have been demonstrated in vivo, it is still unclear whether or not methylation is involved in the control of gene expression during normal development (9-13). Although enzymes have been identified that can methylate DNA de novo (Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b) (14), it is unknown how specific patterns of methylation are established in the genome. Mechanisms for active demethylation have been suggested, but no enzymes have been identified that carry out this function in vivo (15-17). Genomewide alterations in methylation-brought about, for example, by knockouts of the methylase genes-result in embryo lethality or developmental defects, but the basis for abnormal development still remains to be discovered (7, 14). What is clear, however, is that in mammals there are developmental periods of genomewide reprogramming of methylation patterns in vivo. Typically, a substantial part of the genome is demethylated, and after some time remethylated, in a cell- or tissue-specific pattern. The developmental dynamics of these reprogramming events, as well as some of the enzymatic mechanisms involved and the biological purposes, are beginning to be understood. Here we look at what is known about reprogramming in mammals and discuss how it might relate to developmental potency and imprinting.
From comparative analyses of the nucleotide sequences of genes encoding ribosomal RNAs and several proteins, molecular phylogeneticists have constructed a "universal tree of life," taking it as the basis for a "natural" hierarchical classification of all living things. Although confidence in some of the tree's early branches has recently been shaken, new approaches could still resolve many methodological uncertainties. More challenging is evidence that most archaeal and bacterial genomes (and the inferred ancestral eukaryotic nuclear genome) contain genes from multiple sources. If "chimerism" or "lateral gene transfer" cannot be dismissed as trivial in extent or limited to special categories of genes, then no hierarchical universal classification can be taken as natural. Molecular phylogeneticists will have failed to find the "true tree," not because their methods are inadequate or because they have chosen the wrong genes, but because the history of life cannot properly be represented as a tree. However, taxonomies based on molecular sequences will remain indispensable, and understanding of the evolutionary process will ultimately be enriched, not impoverished.
Dibutyryl cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP) produces phosphodiesterase induction, growth arrest, and cytolysis in S49 lymphoma cells. The striking parallelism between protein kinase activity that is dependent on cytosol cyclic AMP and cellular responses to dibutyryl cyclic AMP in wild-type cells and three classes of clones resistant to cyclic AMP indicates that protein kinase mediates cyclic AMP regulation of growth and enzyme induction in S49 cells.
Prion diseases are transmissible neurodegenerative conditions of humans and animals. Prions consist principally of a post-translationally modified form of prion protein (PrP), PrP(Sc), which is partly protease resistant. Transmission of prion diseases between species is limited by a 'species barrier' determined in part by the degree of sequence homology between host PrP and inoculated PrP(Sc) (ref.3) and by prion strain type. The epidemic of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in the United Kingdom and other countries has led to concerns that transmission to humans may occur by dietary exposure. BSE appears to be caused by a single strain, distinct from those of natural or experimental scrapie, which is also seen in the new prion diseases of cats and ruminants that have presumably arisen from dietary BSE exposure. Here we show that transgenic mice expressing human PrP in addition to mouse PrP can generate human PrP(Sc) and 'human' prions. These mice therefore provide a model to study experimentally the species barrier limiting BSE transmission to humans. Incubation periods to BSE in transgenic mice are not shortened by expression of human PrP, and only mouse PrP(Sc) is produced in response to such challenge.
Legionella pneumophila actively modulates host vesicle trafficking pathways to facilitate its intracellular replication with effectors translocated by the Dot/Icm type IV secretion system (T4SS). The SidM/DrrA protein functions by locking the small GTPase Rab1 into an active form by its guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) and AMPylation activity. Here we demonstrate that the L. pneumophila protein SidD preferably deAMPylates Rab1. We found that the deAMPylation activity of SidD could suppress the toxicity of SidM to yeast and is required to release Rab1 from bacterial phagosomes efficiently. A molecular mechanism for the temporal control of Rab1 activity in different phases of L. pneumophila infection is thus established. These observations indicate that AMPylation-mediated signal transduction is a reversible process regulated by specific enzymes.
THE 5'-exonucleases are enzymes that are essential for DNA replication and repair. As well as their exonucleolytic action, removing nucleotides from the 5'-end of nucleic acid molecules such as Okazaki fragments, many 5'-3'-exonucleases have been shown to possess endonucleolytic activities. T5 5'-3'-exonuclease shares many similarities with the amino terminal of eubacterial DNA polymerases, although, unlike eubacteria, phages such as T5, T4 and T7 express polymerase and 5'-exonuclease proteins from separate genes. Here we report the 2.5-A crystal structure of the phage T5 5'-exonuclease, which reveals a helical arch for binding DNA. We propose a model consistent with a threading mechanism in which single-stranded DNA could slide through the arch, which is formed by two helices, one containing positively charged, and the other hydrophobic, residues. The active site is at the base of the arch, and contains two metal-binding sites.
The oligonucleotide (2'-5') oligoadenylate that is induced in interferon-treated animal cells protects plant tissue from infection by the tobacco mosaic virus. This inhibition of virus multiplication was obtained at concentrations comparable to those affecting protein synthesis and antiviral activities in animal cells. After treatment with (2'-5') oligoadenylate, the multiplicability of tobacco mosaic virus was reduced by 80 to 90 percent as measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. These results, along with the observation that human interferon protects tobacco tissue from infection by tobacco mosaic virus, indicate that plants and animals may have a common pathway for virus resistance.
The mechanisms that enable cytotoxic T lymphocytes (Tc cells) to destroy target cells are only vaguely understood. However, recent studies have identified in Tc cells and natural killer cells cytoplasmic granules that contain perforin, a cytolytic protein that resembles the ninth component of complement (C9). Antigen-specific lysis of target cells, traditionally ascribed solely to Tc cells, has now also been demonstrated in some T-helper cell (Th cell) lines, referred to here as T helper-killer or Th/c cells. We recently found a novel serine esterase that is present at greatly elevated levels in cloned murine Tc cell lines and one Th/c cell line, but not in two non-cytolytic Th cell lines. These findings suggest that the serine esterase is involved in cytolytic activity and that a variety of effector cells share a common cytolytic mechanism. To explore the role of the serine esterase in this process, we have been studying additional properties of the enzyme in murine T cells. We show here that it is a membrane-associated, disulphide-linked dimer, it has trypsin-like properties but is not a general protease, in density gradient centrifugation it sediments with perforin, it is secreted by Tc cells during their cytolytic attack on target cells, and antiserum to Tc-cell serine esterase reacts with the enzyme in Th/c cells.
Events that stall bacterial protein synthesis activate the ssrA-tagging machinery, resulting in resumption of translation and addition of an 11-residue peptide to the carboxyl terminus of the nascent chain. This ssrA-encoded peptide tag marks the incomplete protein for degradation by the energy-dependent ClpXP protease. Here, a ribosome-associated protein, SspB, was found to bind specifically to ssrA-tagged proteins and to enhance recognition of these proteins by ClpXP. Cells with an sspB mutation are defective in degrading ssrA-tagged proteins, demonstrating that SspB is a specificity-enhancing factor for ClpXP that controls substrate choice.
The Tat protein of bovine immunodeficiency virus (BIV) binds to its target RNA, TAR, and activates transcription. A 14-amino acid arginine-rich peptide corresponding to the RNA-binding domain of BIV Tat binds specifically to BIV TAR, and biochemical and in vivo experiments have identified the amino acids and nucleotides required for binding. The solution structure of the RNA-peptide complex has now been determined by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. TAR forms a virtually continuous A-form helix with two unstacked bulged nucleotides. The peptide adopts a beta-turn conformation and sits in the major groove of the RNA. Specific contacts are apparent between critical amino acids in the peptide and bases and phosphates in the RNA. The structure is consistent with all biochemical data and demonstrates ways in which proteins can recognize the major groove of RNA.
The gene responsible for autosomal dominant, fully penetrant, nonsyndromic sensorineural progressive hearing loss in a large Costa Rican kindred was previously localized to chromosome 5q31 and named DFNA1. Deafness in the family is associated with a protein-truncating mutation in a human homolog of the Drosophila gene diaphanous. The truncation is caused by a single nucleotide substitution in a splice donor, leading to a four-base pair insertion in messenger RNA and a frameshift. The diaphanous protein is a profilin ligand and target of Rho that regulates polymerization of actin, the major component of the cytoskeleton of hair cells of the inner ear.
alpha-Lactalbumin (alpha-LA) is a milk protein that interacts with the enzyme galactosyltransferase, modifying its substrate specificity in a way which promotes the transfer of galactose to glucose, resulting in a way which promotes the transfer of galactose to glucose, resulting in a beta-1----4 glycosidic linkage and the synthesis of lactose. Lysozyme, an enzyme which catalyses the hydrolysis of a beta-1----4 glycosidic linkage in polysaccharides, has been shown to be structurally related to alpha-LA and it has been proposed that they have arisen from a common ancestral gene. To compare their evolutionary relationships, we report here the complete nucleotide sequence of the rat alpha-LA gene, including its 5'-flanking sequences, and compare its gene structure with the chicken egg-white lysozyme gene. Both genes contain three introns at similar positions. The first three exons of the two genes have similar nucleotide sequences. The fourth exon of alpha-LA, which partly codes for the C-terminal residues of the protein, essential for its interaction with galactosyltransferase, is markedly different from the corresponding exon of the lysozyme gene and is preceded by two (TG)n repeats.
CD8+ cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTL) identify virally infected cells by recognizing processed viral antigen in association with class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on infected cells. Processing begins in the cytosol with the generation of peptides, possibly by a protease complex with MHC-encoded subunits, known as the proteasome. Transport of the resulting cytosolic peptides into the endoplasmic reticulum for association with class I molecules is essential and probably involves a heterodimer of the MHC-encoded proteins, Tap-1 and Tap-2. The site of processing of viral envelope proteins is uncertain. These proteins are not present in the cytosol because of cotranslational translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum. We show here that the HIV-1 envelope (env) protein is processed in infected cells by a novel Tap-1/Tap-2-independent pathway that seems to be localized to the endoplasmic reticulum.
Selective lowering of Abeta42 levels (the 42-residue isoform of the amyloid-beta peptide) with small-molecule gamma-secretase modulators (GSMs), such as some non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, is a promising therapeutic approach for Alzheimer's disease. To identify the target of these agents we developed biotinylated photoactivatable GSMs. GSM photoprobes did not label the core proteins of the gamma-secretase complex, but instead labelled the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), APP carboxy-terminal fragments and amyloid-beta peptide in human neuroglioma H4 cells. Substrate labelling was competed by other GSMs, and labelling of an APP gamma-secretase substrate was more efficient than a Notch substrate. GSM interaction was localized to residues 28-36 of amyloid-beta, a region critical for aggregation. We also demonstrate that compounds known to interact with this region of amyloid-beta act as GSMs, and some GSMs alter the production of cell-derived amyloid-beta oligomers. Furthermore, mutation of the GSM binding site in the APP alters the sensitivity of the substrate to GSMs. These findings indicate that substrate targeting by GSMs mechanistically links two therapeutic actions: alteration in Abeta42 production and inhibition of amyloid-beta aggregation, which may synergistically reduce amyloid-beta deposition in Alzheimer's disease. These data also demonstrate the existence and feasibility of 'substrate targeting' by small-molecule effectors of proteolytic enzymes, which if generally applicable may significantly broaden the current notion of 'druggable' targets.
Irradiation of the electron transport particles of Mycobacterium phlei with light at a wavelength of 360 manometers resulted in a loss of oxidase activities of succinate and the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. The lesion in the two pathways caused by irradiation of the particles differs. The succinoxidase pathway was more labile to irradiation than the pathway linked to nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. Restoration of succinoxidase activity (up to 50 to 60 percent) occurred on addition of a thermostable, water-soluble material obtained from Mycobacterium phlei cells or with an extract of mitochondria from boiled rat liver. Other known cofactors, such as flavine adenine dinucleotide, flavine mononucleotide, benzo- and naphthoquinones, as well as sulfhydryl agents, failed to restore succinoxidase activity after irradiation. Water-soluble material from Mycobacterium phlei appears to function between the flavoprotein and cytochrome b on the succinoxidase pathway. In contrast to the requirements for restoration of the pathway linked to nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, restoration of succinoxidase does not occur with quinones or other cofactors such as flavine adenine dinucleotide.
Posttranslational modifications play key roles in regulating chromatin plasticity. Although various chromatin-remodeling enzymes have been described that respond to specific histone modifications, little is known about the role of poly[adenosine 5'-diphosphate (ADP)-ribose] in chromatin remodeling. Here, we identify a chromatin-remodeling enzyme, ALC1 (Amplified in Liver Cancer 1, also known as CHD1L), that interacts with poly(ADP-ribose) and catalyzes PARP1-stimulated nucleosome sliding. Our results define ALC1 as a DNA damage-response protein whose role in this process is sustained by its association with known DNA repair factors and its rapid poly(ADP-ribose)-dependent recruitment to DNA damage sites. Furthermore, we show that depletion or overexpression of ALC1 results in sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents. Collectively, these results provide new insights into the mechanisms by which poly(ADP-ribose) regulates DNA repair.
Human polymerase-iota belongs to the error-prone Y family of polymerases, which frequently incorporate incorrect nucleotides during DNA replication but can efficiently bypass DNA lesions. On the basis of X-ray diffraction data, Nair et al. propose that Hoogsteen base-pairing is adopted by DNA during its replication by this enzyme. Here I re-examine their X-ray data and find that the electron density is very weak for a Hoogsteen base pair formed between a template adenine deoxyribonucleotide in the syn conformation and a deoxythymidine 5'-triphosphate (dTTP), and that the fit is better for a normal Watson-Crick base pair. As a guanine-cytosine (G-C) base pair has no potential to form a Hoogsteen base pair at physiological pH, Hoogsteen base-pairing is unlikely to be used in replication by this polymerase.
The structure of the membrane protein formate dehydrogenase-N (Fdn-N), a major component of Escherichia coli nitrate respiration, has been determined at 1.6 angstroms. The structure demonstrates 11 redox centers, including molybdopterin-guanine dinucleotides, five [4Fe-4S] clusters, two heme b groups, and a menaquinone analog. These redox centers are aligned in a single chain, which extends almost 90 angstroms through the enzyme. The menaquinone reduction site associated with a possible proton pathway was also characterized. This structure provides critical insights into the proton motive force generation by redox loop, a common mechanism among a wide range of respiratory enzymes.
Ribonuclease mitochondrial RNA processing, a site-specific endoribonuclease involved in primer RNA metabolism in mammalian mitochondria, requires an RNA component for its activity. On the basis of copurification and selective inactivation with complementary oligonucleotides, a 135-nucleotide RNA species, not encoded in the mitochondrial genome, is identified as the RNA moiety of the endoribonuclease. This finding implies transport of a nucleus-encoded RNA, essential for organelle DNA replication, to the mitochondrial matrix.
Complementary DNA's that encode an adenylyl cyclase were isolated from a bovine brain library. Most of the deduced amino acid sequence of 1134 residues is divisible into two alternating sets of hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains. Each of the two large hydrophobic domains appears to contain six transmembrane spans. Each of the two large hydrophilic domains contains a sequence that is homologous to a single cytoplasmic domain of several guanylyl cyclases; these sequences may represent nucleotide binding sites. An unexpected topographical resemblance between adenylyl cyclase and various plasma membrane channels and transporters was observed. This structural complexity suggests possible, unappreciated functions for this important enzyme.
Since the pioneering work of the Millers it has become clear that most chemical carcinogens require metabolism to reactive electrophiles and then exhibit their carcinogenic potential by reacting chemically with, and modifying, cellular macromolecules. At first modification of proteins was considered most likely to be of importance in carcinogenesis. Later, Brookes and Lawley demonstrated that the extent of binding of several polycyclic hydrocarbons to DNA, but not to RNA or protein isolated from the skin of mice treated topically with these compounds, correlated with their known carcinogenic potency to this tissue. Mammalian cells, particularly mouse embryo cells, treated with chemical carcinogens have often been used, and DNA has been involved almost exclusively from whole cells. However, mitochondria possess unique DNA which accounts for 0.1-1% of the total DNA present in mammalian cells, and three studies have shown that carcinogenic alkylating agents modify the michondrial DNA by a factor about five times greater than the nuclear DNA from the same cells. We demonstrate here that with six polycyclic aromatic compounds, all of which require metabolic activation and bind to DNA to a much smaller extent than direct than direct-acting alkylating agents, the binding to mitochondrial relative to DNA is dramatically increased by a factor of nearly 50 to over 500.
Translesion synthesis (TLS) by Y-family DNA polymerases is a chief mechanism of DNA damage tolerance. Such TLS can be accurate or error-prone, as it is for bypass of a cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer by DNA polymerase eta (XP-V or Rad30) or bypass of a (6-4) TT photoproduct by DNA polymerase V (UmuD'2C), respectively. Although DinB is the only Y-family DNA polymerase conserved among all domains of life, the biological rationale for this striking conservation has remained enigmatic. Here we report that the Escherichia coli dinB gene is required for resistance to some DNA-damaging agents that form adducts at the N2-position of deoxyguanosine (dG). We show that DinB (DNA polymerase IV) catalyses accurate TLS over one such N2-dG adduct (N2-furfuryl-dG), and that DinB and its mammalian orthologue, DNA polymerase kappa, insert deoxycytidine (dC) opposite N2-furfuryl-dG with 10-15-fold greater catalytic proficiency than opposite undamaged dG. We also show that mutating a single amino acid, the 'steric gate' residue of DinB (Phe13 --> Val) and that of its archaeal homologue Dbh (Phe12 --> Ala), separates the abilities of these enzymes to perform TLS over N2-dG adducts from their abilities to replicate an undamaged template. We propose that DinB and its orthologues are specialized to catalyse relatively accurate TLS over some N2-dG adducts that are ubiquitous in nature, that lesion bypass occurs more efficiently than synthesis on undamaged DNA, and that this specificity may be achieved at least in part through a lesion-induced conformational change.
The body responds to stress by activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and release of glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoid production in the adult regulates carbohydrate and amino-acid metabolism, maintains blood pressure, and restrains the inflammatory response. In the fetus, exogenous glucocorticoids accelerate maturation of lung and gastrointestinal enzyme systems and promote hepatic glycogen deposition. Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), a 41-amino-acid neuropeptide produced in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and many regions of the cerebral cortex, has been implicated in both the HPA axis and behavioural responses to stress. To define the importance of CRH in the response of the HPA axis to stress and fetal development, we have constructed a mammalian model of CRH deficiency by targeted mutation in embryonic stem (ES) cells. We report here that corticotropin-releasing hormone-deficient mice reveal a fetal glucocorticoid requirement for lung maturation. Postnatally, despite marked glucocorticoid deficiency, these mice exhibit normal growth, fertility and longevity, suggesting that the major role of glucocorticoid is during fetal rather than postnatal life.
NiFe-hydrogenases have an Ni-Fe site in which the iron has one CO and two CN groups as ligands. Synthesis of the CN ligands requires the activity of two hydrogenase maturation proteins: HypF and HypE. HypF is a carbamoyltransferase that transfers the carbamoyl moiety of carbamoyladenylate to the COOH-terminal cysteine of HypE and thus forms an enzyme-thiocarbamate. HypE dehydrates the S-carbamoyl moiety in an adenosine triphosphate-dependent process to yield the enzyme thiocyanate. Chemical model reactions corroborate the feasibility of this unprecedented biosynthetic route and show that thiocyanates can donate CN to iron. This finding underscores a striking parallel between biochemistry and organometallic chemistry in the formation of an iron-cyano complex.
In diverse organisms, calorie restriction slows the pace of ageing and increases maximum lifespan. In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, calorie restriction extends lifespan by increasing the activity of Sir2 (ref. 1), a member of the conserved sirtuin family of NAD(+)-dependent protein deacetylases. Included in this family are SIR-2.1, a Caenorhabditis elegans enzyme that regulates lifespan, and SIRT1, a human deacetylase that promotes cell survival by negatively regulating the p53 tumour suppressor. Here we report the discovery of three classes of small molecules that activate sirtuins. We show that the potent activator resveratrol, a polyphenol found in red wine, lowers the Michaelis constant of SIRT1 for both the acetylated substrate and NAD(+), and increases cell survival by stimulating SIRT1-dependent deacetylation of p53. In yeast, resveratrol mimics calorie restriction by stimulating Sir2, increasing DNA stability and extending lifespan by 70%. We discuss possible evolutionary origins of this phenomenon and suggest new lines of research into the therapeutic use of sirtuin activators.
The enzymes adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A) and protein kinase C regulate the activity of a diverse group of cellular proteins including membrane ion channel proteins. When protein kinase A was stimulated in cardiac ventricular myocytes with the membrane-soluble cAMP analog 8-chlorphenylthio cAMP (8-CPT cAMP), the amplitude of the delayed-rectifier potassium current (IK) doubled when recorded at 32 degrees C but was not affected at 22 degrees C. In contrast, modulation of the calcium current (ICa) by 8-CPT cAMP was independent of temperature with similar increases in ICa occurring at both temperatures. Stimulation of protein kinase C by phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate also enhanced IK in a temperature-dependent manner but failed to increase ICa at either temperature. Thus, cardiac delayed-rectifier potassium but not calcium channels are regulated by two distinct protein kinases in a similar temperature-dependent fashion.
The nitrogen regulatory protein NtrC of enteric bacteria activates transcription of the glnA gene by catalyzing isomerization of closed complexes between RNA polymerase and the glnA promoter to open complexes. NtrC binds to sites upstream of glnA that have properties of eukaryotic transcriptional enhancers. NtrC-binding sites were found to facilitate open complex formation when these sites and the glnA promoter were located on different rings of a singly linked catenane, but not when the two rings were decatenated. The results provide evidence that NtrC contacts RNA polymerase-promoter complexes in a process mediated by formation of a DNA loop. NtrC-binding sites serve to tether NtrC near the glnA promoter, thereby increasing the frequency of collisions between NtrC and polymerase-promoter complexes.
Cytochrome cd1 nitrite reductase catalyses the conversion of nitrite to nitric oxide in the nitrogen cycle. The crystal structure of the oxidized enzyme shows that the d1 haem iron of the active site is ligated by His/Tyr side chains, and the c haem iron is ligated by a His/His ligand pair. Here we show that both haems undergo re-ligation during catalysis. Upon reduction, the tyrosine ligand of the d1 haem is released to allow substrate binding. Concomitantly, a refolding of the cytochrome c domain takes place, resulting in an unexpected change of the c haem iron coordination from His 17/His 69 to Met106/His69. This step is similar to the last steps in the folding of cytochrome c. The changes must affect the redox potential of the haems, and suggest a mechanism by which internal electron transfer is regulated. Structures of reaction intermediates show how nitric oxide is formed and expelled from the active-site iron, as well as how both haems return to their starting coordination. These results show how redox energy can be switched into conformational energy within a haem protein.
The excitatory amino acid, L-glutamate, acting through its N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, may contribute to neuronal death following cerebral vascular occlusion. In support of this hypothesis, NMDA receptor antagonists reduce the volume of infarction produced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in vivo and attenuate Ca2+ influx and neuronal death elicited by L-glutamate or NMDA in vitro. A complementary DNA coding for a major component of the NMDA receptor channel complex, a single protein of M(r) 105.5K (NMDA-R1), has been isolated from rat brain. Here we demonstrate that inhibition of the synthesis of NMDA-R1 by treatment with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides selectively reduces the expression of NMDA receptors, prevents the neurotoxicity elicited by NMDA in vitro and reduces the volume of the focal ischaemic infarction produced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in the rat.
To reach the mammalian gut, enteric bacteria must pass through the stomach. Many such organisms survive exposure to the harsh gastric environment (pH 1.5-4) by mounting extreme acid-resistance responses, one of which, the arginine-dependent system of Escherichia coli, has been studied at levels of cellular physiology, molecular genetics and protein biochemistry. This multiprotein system keeps the cytoplasm above pH 5 during acid challenge by continually pumping protons out of the cell using the free energy of arginine decarboxylation. At the heart of the process is a 'virtual proton pump' in the inner membrane, called AdiC, that imports L-arginine from the gastric juice and exports its decarboxylation product agmatine. AdiC belongs to the APC superfamily of membrane proteins, which transports amino acids, polyamines and organic cations in a multitude of biological roles, including delivery of arginine for nitric oxide synthesis, facilitation of insulin release from pancreatic beta-cells, and, when inappropriately overexpressed, provisioning of certain fast-growing neoplastic cells with amino acids. High-resolution structures and detailed transport mechanisms of APC transporters are currently unknown. Here we describe a crystal structure of AdiC at 3.2 A resolution. The protein is captured in an outward-open, substrate-free conformation with transmembrane architecture remarkably similar to that seen in four other families of apparently unrelated transport proteins.
AIDS, caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), is one of the world's most serious health problems, with current protocols being inadequate for either prevention or successful long-term treatment. In retroviruses such as HIV, the enzyme reverse transcriptase copies the single-stranded RNA genome into double-stranded DNA that is then integrated into the chromosomes of infected cells. Reverse transcriptase is the target of the most widely used treatments for AIDS, 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) and 2',3'-dideoxyinosine (ddI), but resistant strains of HIV-1 arise in patients after a relatively short time. There are several nonnucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase, but resistance to such agents also develops rapidly. We report here the structure at 7 A resolution of a ternary complex of the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase heterodimer, a monoclonal antibody Fab fragment, and a duplex DNA template-primer. The double-stranded DNA binds in a groove on the surface of the enzyme. The electron density near one end of the DNA matches well with the known structure of the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase RNase H domain. At the opposite end of the DNA, a mercurated derivative of UTP has been localized by difference Fourier methods, allowing tentative identification of the polymerase nucleoside triphosphate binding site. We also determined the structure of the reverse transcriptase/Fab complex in the absence of template-primer to compare the bound and free forms of the enzyme. The presence of DNA correlates with movement of protein electron density in the vicinity of the putative template-primer binding groove. These results have important implications for developing improved inhibitors of reverse transcriptase for the treatment of AIDS.
Voltage-gated proton (H+) channels are found in many human and animal tissues and play an important role in cellular defense against acidic stress. However, a molecular identification of these unique ion conductances has so far not been achieved. A 191-amino acid protein is described that, upon heterologous expression, has properties indistinguishable from those of native H+ channels. This protein is generated through alternative splicing of messenger RNA derived from the gene NOH-1 (NADPH oxidase homolog 1, where NADPH is the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate).
In eukaryotes, transcriptional activators have been proposed to function by recruiting the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) machinery, by altering the conformation of this machinery, or by affecting steps after initiation, but the evidence is not definitive. Genomic footprinting of yeast TATA-box elements reveals activator-dependent alterations of chromatin structure and activator-independent protection, but little is known about the association of specific components of the Pol II machinery with promoters in vivo. Here we analyse TATA-box-binding-protein (TBP) occupancy of 30 yeast promoters in vivo. We find that TBP association with promoters is stimulated by activators and inhibited by the Cyc8-Tup1 repressor, and that transcriptional activity correlates strongly with the degree of TBP occupancy. In a small subset of promoters, TBP occupancy is higher than expected when gene activity is low, and the activator-dependent increase is modest. TBP association depends on the Pol II holoenzyme component Srb4, but not on the Kin28 subunit of the transcription factor TFIIH, even though both proteins are generally required for transcription. Thus in yeast cells, TBP association with promoters occurs in concert with the Pol II holoenzyme, activator-dependent recruitment of the Pol II machinery occurs at the vast majority of promoters, and Kin28 acts after the initial recruitment.
Activation of the chromosome end-replicating enzyme telomerase can greatly extend the lifespan of normal human cells and is associated with most human cancers. In all eukaryotes examined, telomerase has an RNA subunit, a conserved reverse transcriptase subunit and additional proteins, but little is known about the assembly of these components. Here we show that the Saccharomyces cerevisiae telomerase RNA has a 5'-2,2,7-trimethylguanosine (TMG) cap and a binding site for the Sm proteins, both hallmarks of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) that are involved in nuclear messenger RNA splicing. Immunoprecipitation of telomerase from yeast extracts shows that Sm proteins are assembled on the RNA and that most or all of the telomerase activity is associated with the Sm-containing complex. These data support a model in which telomerase RNA is transcribed by RNA polymerase II and 7-methylguanosine-capped, binds the seven Sm proteins, becomes TMG-capped and picks up the other protein subunits. We conclude that the functions of snRNPs assembled by this pathway are not restricted to RNA processing, but also include chromosome telomere replication.
Potassium channels in neurons are linked by guanine nucleotide binding (G) proteins to numerous neurotransmitter receptors. The ability of Go, the predominant G protein in the brain, to stimulate potassium channels was tested in cell-free membrane patches of hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Four distinct types of potassium channels, which were otherwise quiescent, were activated by both isolated brain G0 and recombinant Go alpha. Hence brain Go can couple diverse brain potassium channels to neurotransmitter receptors.
Second messenger cascades involving G proteins and calcium are known to modulate neurotransmitter release. A prominent effect of such a cascade is the downmodulation of presynaptic calcium influx, which markedly reduces evoked neurotransmitter release. Here we show that G-protein-mediated signalling, such as through GABA (gamma-amino butyric acid) subtype B (GABA(B)) receptors, retards the recruitment of synaptic vesicles during sustained activity and after short-term depression. This retardation occurs through a lowering of cyclic AMP, which blocks the stimulatory effect of increased calcium concentration on vesicle recruitment. In this signalling pathway, cAMP (functioning through the cAMP-dependent guanine nucleotide exchange factor) and calcium/calmodulin cooperate to enhance vesicle priming. The differential modulation of the two forms of synaptic plasticity, presynaptic inhibition and calcium-dependent recovery from synaptic depression, is expected to have interesting consequences for the dynamic behaviour of neural networks.
Glycoproteins exposed on cell surfaces are commonly anchored in the membrane via hydrophobic peptide domains which penetrate the lipid bilayer. However, it has recently been appreciated that there are exceptions to this generalization and certain cell-surface proteins appear to be anchored via a specific association with phosphatidylinositol. Thy-1 glycoprotein may also be attached to cell membranes by a non-protein hydrophobic domain located at the C-terminus and although the chemical nature of this moiety has not been determined, it was postulated that it might be a lipid. On the other hand, amino-acid sequences predicted from nucleotide sequence analyses suggest that a C-terminal hydrophobic peptide segment not found in the purified, detergent-solubilized Thy-1 glycoprotein may be responsible for attachment. We report here that a highly purified phospholipase C specific for phosphatidylinositol selectively released Thy-1 from viable normal or malignant T lymphocytes. This result supports the proposed lipid nature of the Thy-1 anchoring domain and further suggests that this lipid is, or is closely related to, phosphatidylinositol.
Pathways for the reduction of protein disulfide bonds are found in all organisms and are required for the reductive recycling of certain enzymes including the essential protein ribonucleotide reductase. An Escherichia coli strain that lacks both thioredoxin reductase and glutathione reductase grows extremely poorly. Here, we show that a mutation occurring at high frequencies in the gene ahpC, encoding a peroxiredoxin, restores normal growth to this strain. This mutation is the result of a reversible expansion of a triplet nucleotide repeat sequence, leading to the addition of one amino acid that converts the AhpC protein from a peroxidase to a disulfide reductase. The ready mutational interconversion between the two activities could provide an evolutionary advantage to E. coli.
A rapid, sensitive method is described for measuring C(14)-aminoacyl-sRNA interactions with ribosomes which are specifically induced by the appropriate RNA codewords prior to peptide-bond formation. Properties of the codeword recognition process and the minimum oligonucleotide chain length required to induce such interactions are presented. The trinucleotides, pUpUpU, pApApA, and pCpCpC, but not dinucleotides, specifically direct the binding to ribosomes of phenylalanine-, lysine-, and proline-sRNA, respectively. Since 5'-terminal, 3'-terminal, and internal codewords differ in chemical structure, three corresponding classes of codewords are proposed. The recognition of each class in this system is described. The template efficiency of trinucleotide codewords is modified greatly by terminal phosphate. Triplets with 5'-terminal phosphate are more active as templates than triplets without terminal phosphate. Triplets with 3'- or 3' (2')-terminal phosphate are markedly less active as templates. These findings are discussed in relation to the probable functions of terminal codewords. The modification of RNA and DNA codewords, converting sense into missense or nonsense codewords, is suggested as a possible regulatory mechanism in protein synthesis.
Selective antagonism of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT) and noradrenaline transport by antidepressants is a key element in the 'amine' hypothesis of affective disorders. Uptake and/or transport sites of 5HT have been reported to be reduced in platelets of patients suffering from depression and in post-mortem brain samples of depressed patients and suicide victims. To date there has been little molecular information available on the structure and regulation of 5HT transporters. Using the polymerase chain reaction with degenerate oligonucleotides derived from two highly conserved regions of the transporters for noradrenaline and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), we have identified a large family of related gene products expressed in rodent brain. One of these products hybridizes to a single 3.7-kilobase RNA restricted to rat midbrain and brainstem, where it is highly enriched within the serotonergic raphe complex. Transfection with a single 2.3-kilobase brainstem complementary DNA clone is sufficient to confer expression of a Na(+)-dependent 5HT transporter upon nonneural cells, with transport selectively and potently antagonized by 5HT uptake-specific antidepressants, including paroxetine, citalopram and fluoxetine.
Accumulation of misfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers an adaptive stress response-termed the unfolded protein response (UPR)-mediated by the ER transmembrane protein kinase and endoribonuclease inositol-requiring enzyme-1alpha (IRE1alpha). We investigated UPR signaling events in mice in the absence of the proapoptotic BCL-2 family members BAX and BAK [double knockout (DKO)]. DKO mice responded abnormally to tunicamycin-induced ER stress in the liver, with extensive tissue damage and decreased expression of the IRE1 substrate X-box-binding protein 1 and its target genes. ER-stressed DKO cells showed deficient IRE1alpha signaling. BAX and BAK formed a protein complex with the cytosolic domain of IRE1alpha that was essential for IRE1alpha activation. Thus, BAX and BAK function at the ER membrane to activate IRE1alpha signaling and to provide a physical link between members of the core apoptotic pathway and the UPR.
Receptor-mediated activation of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) results in the dissociation of alpha from beta gamma subunits, thereby allowing both to regulate effectors. Little is known about the regions of effectors required for recognition of G beta gamma. A peptide encoding residues 956 to 982 of adenylyl cyclase 2 specifically blocked G beta gamma stimulation of adenylyl cyclase 2, phospholipase C-beta 3, potassium channels, and beta-adrenergic receptor kinase as well as inhibition of calmodulin-stimulated adenylyl cyclases, but had no effect on interactions between G beta gamma and G alpha o. Substitutions in this peptide identified a functionally important motif, Gln-X-X-Glu-Arg, that is also conserved in regions of potassium channels and beta-adrenergic receptor kinases that participate in G beta gamma interactions. Thus, the region defined by residues 956 to 982 of adenylyl cyclase 2 may contain determinants important for receiving signals from G beta gamma.
Many therapeutic agents are associated with adverse effects in patients. Anticoagulants can engender acute complications such as significant bleeding that increases patient morbidity and mortality. Antidote control provides the safest means to regulate drug action. For this reason, despite its known limitations and toxicities, heparin use remains high because it is the only anticoagulant that can be controlled by an antidote, the polypeptide protamine. To date, no generalizable strategy for developing drug-antidote pairs has been described. We investigated whether drug-antidote pairs could be rationally designed by taking advantage of properties inherent to nucleic acids to make antidote-controlled anticoagulant agents. Here we show that protein-binding oligonucleotides (aptamers) against coagulation factor IXa are potent anticoagulants. We also show that oligonucleotides complementary to these aptamers can act as antidotes capable of efficiently reversing the activity of these new anticoagulants in plasma from healthy volunteers and from patients who cannot tolerate heparin. This generalizable strategy for rationally designing a drug-antidote pair thus opens up the way for developing safer regulatable therapeutics.
Eukaryotic transcriptional activators function, at least in part, by promoting assembly of the preinitiation complex, which comprises RNA polymerase II and its general transcription factors (GTFs). Activator-mediated stimulation of the assembly of the preinitiation complex has been studied in vitro but has been relatively refractory to in vivo analysis. Here we use a DNA-crosslinking/immunoprecipitation assay to study in living cells the first step in the assembly of the preinitiation complex, the interaction between the TATA-box-binding protein (TBP) and its binding site, the TATA box. Analysis of a variety of endogenous yeast genes, and of a series of activators of differing strength, reveals a general correlation between TBP binding and transcriptional activity. Using mutant yeast strains, we show that Mot1 prevents the binding of TBP to inactive promoters and that activator-mediated stimulation of TBP binding requires additional GTFs, including TFIIB and Srb4. Taken together, our results indicate that TBP binding in vivo is stringently controlled, and that the ability of activators to stimulate this step in the assembly of the preinitiation complex is a highly cooperative process involving multiple transcription factors.
Pre-messenger-RNA maturation in nematodes and in several other lower eukaryotic phyla involves spliced leader (SL) addition trans-splicing. In this unusual RNA processing reaction, a short common 5' exon, the SL, is affixed to the 5'-most exon of multiple pre-mRNAs. The nematode SL is derived from a trans-splicing-specific approximately 100-nucleotide RNA (SL RNA) that bears striking similarities to the cis-spliceosomal U small nuclear RNAs U1, U2, U4 and U5 (refs 3, 4); for example, the SL RNA functions only if it is assembled into an Sm small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP). Here we have purified and characterized the SL RNP and show that it contains two proteins (relative molecular masses 175,000 and 30,000 (M(r) 175K and 30K)) in addition to core Sm proteins. Immunodepletion and reconstitution with recombinant proteins demonstrates that both proteins are essential for SL trans-splicing; however, neither protein is required either for conventional cis-splicing or for bimolecular (trans-) splicing of fragmented cis constructs. The M(r) 175K and 30K SL RNP proteins are the first factors identified that are involved uniquely in SL trans-splicing. Several lines of evidence indicate that the SL RNP proteins function by participating in a trans-splicing specific network of protein protein interactions analogous to the U1 snRNP SF1/BBP U2AF complex that comprises the cross-intron bridge in cis-splicing.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV, a betaherpes virus) is the cause of serious disease in immunologically compromised individuals, including those with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. One of the compounds used in the chemotherapy of HCMV infections is the nucleoside analogue 9-(1,3-dihydroxy-2-propoxymethyl)-guanine (ganciclovir). The mechanism of action of this drug is dependent on the formation of the nucleoside triphosphate, which is a strong inhibitor of the viral DNA polymerase. Thymidine kinase, which is encoded by many of the herpesviruses, catalyses the initial phosphorylation of ganciclovir. But there is no evidence for the coding of this enzyme by HCMV, and DNA sequence analysis of the HCMV genome has shown that there is no open reading frame characteristic of a herpesvirus thymidine kinase. Here we present biochemical and immunological evidence that the HCMV UL97 open reading frame codes for a protein capable of phosphorylating ganciclovir. This protein seems to be responsible for the selectivity of ganciclovir and will be useful tool in the understanding and refinement of the antiviral activity of new selective anti-HCMV compounds.
Diabetes, a disease in which carbohydrate and lipid metabolism are regulated improperly by insulin, is a serious worldwide health issue. Insulin is secreted from pancreatic beta cells in response to elevated plasma glucose, with various factors modifying its secretion. Free fatty acids (FFAs) provide an important energy source as nutrients, and they also act as signalling molecules in various cellular processes, including insulin secretion. Although FFAs are thought to promote insulin secretion in an acute phase, this mechanism is not clearly understood. Here we show that a G-protein-coupled receptor, GPR40, which is abundantly expressed in the pancreas, functions as a receptor for long-chain FFAs. Furthermore, we show that long-chain FFAs amplify glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells by activating GPR40. Our results indicate that GPR40 agonists and/or antagonists show potential for the development of new anti-diabetic drugs.
The enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of the major structural component of the yeast cell wall, beta(1-->3)-D-glucan synthase (also known as 1,3-beta-glucan synthase), requires a guanosine triphosphate (GTP) binding protein for activity. The GTP binding protein was identified as Rho1p. The rho1 mutants were defective in GTP stimulation of glucan synthase, and the defect was corrected by addition of purified or recombinant Rho1p. A protein missing in purified preparations from a rho1 strain was identified as Rho1p. Rho1p also regulates protein kinase C, which controls a mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade. Experiments with a dominant positive PKC1 gene showed that the two effects of Rho1p are independent of each other. The colocalization of Rho1p with actin patches at the site of bud emergence and the role of Rho1p in cell wall synthesis emphasize the importance of Rho1p in polarized growth and morphogenesis.
All animals and plants dynamically attach and remove O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) at serine and threonine residues on myriad nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. O-GlcNAc cycling, which is tightly regulated by the concerted actions of two highly conserved enzymes, serves as a nutrient and stress sensor. On some proteins, O-GlcNAc competes directly with phosphate for serine/threonine residues. Glycosylation with O-GlcNAc modulates signalling, and influences protein expression, degradation and trafficking. Emerging data indicate that O-GlcNAc glycosylation has a role in the aetiology of diabetes and neurodegeneration.
Vertebrates and invertebrates initiate a series of defence mechanisms following infection by Gram-negative bacteria by sensing the presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a major component of the cell wall of the invading pathogen. In humans, monocytes and macrophages respond to LPS by inducing the expression of cytokines, cell-adhesion proteins, and enzymes involved in the production of small proinflammatory mediators. Under pathophysiological conditions, LPS exposure can lead to an often fatal syndrome known as septic shock. Sensitive responses of myeloid cells to LPS require a plasma protein called LPS-binding protein and the glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored membrane protein CD14. However, the mechanism by which the LPS signal is transduced across the plasma membrane remains unknown. Here we show that Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) is a signalling receptor that is activated by LPS in a response that depends on LPS-binding protein and is enhanced by CD14. A region in the intracellular domain of TLR2 with homology to a portion of the interleukin (IL)-1 receptor that is implicated in the activation of the IL-1-receptor-associated kinase is required for this response. Our results indicate that TLR2 is a direct mediator of signalling by LPS.
ABC (ATP-binding cassette) proteins constitute a large family of membrane proteins that actively transport a broad range of substrates. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), the protein dysfunctional in cystic fibrosis, is unique among ABC proteins in that its transmembrane domains comprise an ion channel. Opening and closing of the pore have been linked to ATP binding and hydrolysis at CFTR's two nucleotide-binding domains, NBD1 and NBD2 (see, for example, refs 1, 2). Isolated NBDs of prokaryotic ABC proteins dimerize upon binding ATP, and hydrolysis of the ATP causes dimer dissociation. Here, using single-channel recording methods on intact CFTR molecules, we directly follow opening and closing of the channel gates, and relate these occurrences to ATP-mediated events in the NBDs. We find that energetic coupling between two CFTR residues, expected to lie on opposite sides of its predicted NBD1-NBD2 dimer interface, changes in concert with channel gating status. The two monitored side chains are independent of each other in closed channels but become coupled as the channels open. The results directly link ATP-driven tight dimerization of CFTR's cytoplasmic nucleotide-binding domains to opening of the ion channel in the transmembrane domains. This establishes a molecular mechanism, involving dynamic restructuring of the NBD dimer interface, that is probably common to all members of the ABC protein superfamily.
Olfactory receptor neurons depolarize in response to odorant stimulation of their sensory cilia. One transduction mechanism involves a G-protein-mediated increase in adenylate cyclase activity, raising the internal cyclic AMP concentration to open a cyclic nucleotide-activated cation channel on the plasma membrane. An influx of Ca2+ through this channel, which is permeable to both monovalent and divalent cations, triggers olfactory adaptation. Previous work has indicated that at least part of this Ca(2+)-mediated adaptation resides in the channel itself, but the mechanism remains unclear and controversial. Here we use the cloned channel from rat expressed in a cell line and the native channel from rat olfactory receptor cells to show that Ca2+ reduces the apparent affinity of the channel for cAMP by up to 20-fold in the presence of calmodulin, an abundant protein in olfactory cilia. This decrease in apparent affinity appears to involve a direct interaction between Ca(2+)-calmodulin and the channel, and it can reduce the activation of the channel by cAMP by up to a few hundred-fold, suggesting that it may be a key component of the Ca(2+)-triggered olfactory adaptation.
Asthma is caused by a combination of poorly understood genetic and environmental factors. We have systematically mapped the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the presence of childhood onset asthma by genome-wide association. We characterized more than 317,000 SNPs in DNA from 994 patients with childhood onset asthma and 1,243 non-asthmatics, using family and case-referent panels. Here we show multiple markers on chromosome 17q21 to be strongly and reproducibly associated with childhood onset asthma in family and case-referent panels with a combined P value of P < 10(-12). In independent replication studies the 17q21 locus showed strong association with diagnosis of childhood asthma in 2,320 subjects from a cohort of German children (P = 0.0003) and in 3,301 subjects from the British 1958 Birth Cohort (P = 0.0005). We systematically evaluated the relationships between markers of the 17q21 locus and transcript levels of genes in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines from children in the asthma family panel used in our association study. The SNPs associated with childhood asthma were consistently and strongly associated (P < 10(-22)) in cis with transcript levels of ORMDL3, a member of a gene family that encodes transmembrane proteins anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum. The results indicate that genetic variants regulating ORMDL3 expression are determinants of susceptibility to childhood asthma.
Much evidence supports the hypothesis that the infectious agents of prion diseases are devoid of nucleic acid, and instead are composed of a specific infectious protein. This protein, PrP(Sc), seems to be generated by template-induced conformational change of a normally expressed glycoprotein, PrP(C) (ref. 2). Although numerous studies have established the conversion of PrP(C) to PrP(Sc) as the central pathogenic event of prion disease, it is unknown whether cellular factors other than PrP(C) might be required to stimulate efficient PrP(Sc) production. We investigated the biochemical amplification of protease-resistant PrP(Sc)-like protein (PrPres) using a modified version of the protein-misfolding cyclic amplification method. Here we report that stoichiometric transformation of PrP(C) to PrPres in vitro requires specific RNA molecules. Notably, whereas mammalian RNA preparations stimulate in vitro amplification of PrPres, RNA preparations from invertebrate species do not. Our findings suggest that host-encoded stimulatory RNA molecules may have a role in the pathogenesis of prion disease. They also provide a practical approach to improve the sensitivity of diagnostic techniques based on PrPres amplification.
The catalytically essential amino acid in the active site of bacterial alkaline phosphatase (Ser-102) has been replaced with a cysteine by site-directed mutagenesis. The resulting thiol enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of a variety of phosphate monoesters. The rate-determining step of hydrolysis, however, is no longer the same for catalysis when the active protein nucleophile is changed from the hydroxyl of serine to the thiol of cysteine. Unlike the steady-state kinetics of native alkaline phosphatase, those of the mutant show sensitivity to the leaving group of the phosphate ester.
The mammalian G proteins transduce information from extracellular signals, including neurotransmitters, hormones and sensory stimuli, into regulation of effector enzymes or ion channels within cells. Triggered by appropriate extracellular signals, receptor proteins specifically activate members of the G protein family by catalysing replacement of GDP by GTP at the guanine nucleotide binding site. Like the receptor proteins, the heterotrimeric G proteins exhibit impressive structural similarities, suggesting that all receptor-G protein interactions use homologous structural elements and a single molecular mechanism. Topologically equivalent portions of each G protein may therefore interact with the appropriate receptor. We recently predicted the secondary structure of a composite G protein alpha-chain and proposed that a predicted amphipathic alpha-helix at the extreme carboxy-terminus of the polypeptide directly contacts receptors. This proposal has now been confirmed by sequencing complementary DNAs of the gene that encodes the alpha-chain (alpha s) of the stimulatory regulator (Gs) of adenylyl cyclase in wild-type cells and in a mutant mouse S49 lymphoma cell line, unc, in which Gs cannot be activated by hormone receptors. The sequences reveal a point mutation in the unc gene that substitutes a proline residue for an arginine near the carboxy-terminus of the alpha s-polypeptide. Expression of recombinant alpha s-unc in genetically alpha s-deficient S49 cells reproduces the unc phenotype.
Both the phosphatidylinositol-hydrolysing and the phosphatidylcholine-hydrolysing phospholipases C have been implicated in the generation of second messengers in mammalian cells. The phosphatidylcholine-hydrolysing phospholipase C (PLC) from Bacillus cereus, a monomeric protein containing 245 amino-acid residues, is similar to some of the corresponding mammalian proteins. This, together with the fact that the bacterial enzyme can mimic the action of mammalian PLC in causing, for example, enhanced prostaglandin biosynthesis, suggests that B. cereus PLC can be used as a model for the hitherto poorly characterized mammalian PLCs. We report here the three-dimensional structure of B. cereus PLC at 1.5 A resolution. The enzyme is an all-helix protein belonging to a novel structural class and contains, at least in the crystalline state, three Zn2+ in the active site. We also present preliminary results from a study at 1.9 A resolution of the complex between PLC and inorganic phosphate (Pi) which indicate that the substrate binds directly to the metal ions.
Secretion of proteins is initiated by their uptake into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which possesses a proteolytic system able to degrade misfolded and nonassembled proteins. The ER degradation system was studied with yeast mutants defective in the breakdown of a mutated soluble vacuolar protein, carboxypeptidase yscY (CPY*). The ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc7p participated in the degradation process, which was mediated by the cytosolic 26S proteasome. It is likely that CPY* entered the ER, was glycosylated, and was then transported back out of the ER lumen to the cytoplasmic side of the organelle, where it was conjugated with ubiquitin and degraded.
Uncoupling proteins (UCPs) are thought to be intricately controlled uncouplers that are responsible for the futile dissipation of mitochondrial chemiosmotic gradients, producing heat rather than ATP. They occur in many animal and plant cells and form a subfamily of the mitochondrial carrier family. Physiological uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation must be strongly regulated to avoid deterioration of the energy supply and cell death, which is caused by toxic uncouplers. However, an H+ transporting uncoupling function is well established only for UCP1 from brown adipose tissue, and the regulation of UCP1 by fatty acids, nucleotides and pH remains controversial. The failure of UCP1 expressed in Escherichia coli inclusion bodies to carry out fatty-acid-dependent H+ transport activity inclusion bodies made us seek a native UCP cofactor. Here we report the identification of coenzyme Q (ubiquinone) as such a cofactor. On addition of CoQ10 to reconstituted UCP1 from inclusion bodies, fatty-acid-dependent H+ transport reached the same rate as with native UCP1. The H+ transport was highly sensitive to purine nucleotides, and activated only by oxidized but not reduced CoQ. H+ transport of native UCP1 correlated with the endogenous CoQ content.
A complementary DNA (cDNA) for the rat luteal lutropin-choriogonadotropin receptor (LH-CG-R) was isolated with the use of a DNA probe generated in a polymerase chain reaction with oligonucleotide primers based on peptide sequences of purified receptor protein. As would be predicted from the cDNA sequence, the LH-CG-R consists of a 26-residue signal peptide, a 341-residue extracellular domain displaying an internal repeat structure characteristic of members of the leucine-rich glycoprotein (LRG) family, and a 333-residue region containing seven transmembrane segments. This membrane-spanning region displays sequence similarity with all members of the G protein-coupled receptor family. Hence, the LH-CG-R gene may have evolved by recombination of LRG and G protein-coupled receptor genes. Cells engineered to express LH-CG-R cDNA bind human choriogonadotropin with high affinity and show an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate when exposed to hormone. As revealed by RNA blot analysis and in situ hybridization, the 4.4-kilobase cognate messenger RNA is prominently localized in the rat ovary.
Although deoxythymidylate cannot be provided directly by ribonucleotide reductase, the gene encoding thymidylate synthase ThyA is absent from the genomes of a large number of nonsymbiotic microbes. We show that ThyX (Thy1) proteins of previously unknown function form a large and distinct class of thymidylate synthases. ThyX has a wide but sporadic phylogenetic distribution, almost exclusively limited to microbial genomes lacking thyA. ThyX and ThyA use different reductive mechanisms, because ThyX activity is dependent on reduced flavin nucleotides. Our findings reveal complexity in the evolution of thymidine in present-day DNA. Because ThyX proteins are found in many pathogenic microbes, they present a previously uncharacterized target for antimicrobial compounds.
Mammalian bombesin-like peptides are widely distributed in the central nervous system as well as in the gastrointestinal tract, where they modulate smooth-muscle contraction, exocrine and endocrine processes, metabolism and behaviour. They bind to G-protein-coupled receptors on the cell surface to elicit their effects. Bombesin-like peptide receptors cloned so far include, gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRP-R), neuromedin B receptor (NMB-R), and bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3). However, despite the molecular characterization of BRS-3, determination of its function has been difficult as a result of its low affinity for bombesin and its lack of an identified natural ligand. We have generated BRS-3-deficient mice in an attempt to determine the in vivo function of the receptor. Mice lacking functional BRS-3 developed a mild obesity, associated with hypertension and impairment of glucose metabolism. They also exhibited reduced metabolic rate, increased feeding efficiency and subsequent hyperphagia. Our data suggest that BRS-3 is required for the regulation of endocrine processes and metabolism responsible for energy balance and adiposity. BRS-3-deficient mice provide a useful new model for the investigation of human obesity and associated diseases.
Both C/EBP and GCN4 are sequence-specific DNA binding proteins that control gene expression. Recent evidence implicates C/EBP as a transcriptional regulator of genes involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. The C/EBP protein binds avidly to the dyad symmetric sequence 5'-ATTGCGCAAT-3'; GCN4 regulates the transcription of genes that control amino acid biosynthesis in yeast, and binds avidly to the dyad symmetric sequence 5'-ATGA(G/C)TCAT-3'. Both C/EBP and GCN4 bind DNA via the same structural motif. This motif has been predicted to be bipartite, consisting of a dimerization interface termed the "leucine zipper" and a DNA contact surface termed the "basic region." Specificity of DNA binding has been predicted to be imparted by the basic region. As a test of this hypothesis, recombinant proteins were created wherein the basic regions and leucine zippers of GCN4 and C/EBP were reciprocally exchanged. In both of the recombinant polypeptides, DNA binding specificity is shown to track with the basic region.
Herpesviruses encode a serine protease that specifically cleaves assembly protein. This protease is critical for replication, and represents a new target for antiviral drug design. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of the protease from human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) at 2.27 angstroms resolution. The structure reveals a unique fold and new catalytic strategy for cleavage. The monomer fold of the enzyme, a seven-stranded beta-barrel encircled by a chain of helices that form the carboxy terminus of the molecule, is unrelated to those observed in classic serine proteases such as chymotrypsin and subtilisin. The serine nucleophile at position 132 is activated by two juxtaposed histidine residues at positions 63 and 157. Dimerization, which seems to be necessary for activity, is observed in the crystals. Correlations of the structure with the sequences of herpesvirus proteases suggest that dimerization may confer specificity and recognition in substrate binding.
Short RNAs mediate gene silencing, a process associated with virus resistance, developmental control and heterochromatin formation in eukaryotes. RNA silencing is initiated through Dicer-mediated processing of double-stranded RNA into small interfering RNA (siRNA). The siRNA guide strand associates with the Argonaute protein in silencing effector complexes, recognizes complementary sequences and targets them for silencing. The PAZ domain is an RNA-binding module found in Argonaute and some Dicer proteins and its structure has been determined in the free state. Here, we report the 2.6 A crystal structure of the PAZ domain from human Argonaute eIF2c1 bound to both ends of a 9-mer siRNA-like duplex. In a sequence-independent manner, PAZ anchors the 2-nucleotide 3' overhang of the siRNA-like duplex within a highly conserved binding pocket, and secures the duplex by binding the 7-nucleotide phosphodiester backbone of the overhang-containing strand and capping the 5'-terminal residue of the complementary strand. On the basis of the structure and on binding assays, we propose that PAZ might serve as an siRNA-end-binding module for siRNA transfer in the RNA silencing pathway, and as an anchoring site for the 3' end of guide RNA within silencing effector complexes.
Structural insights have been provided by mercury-199 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) into the metal receptor site of the MerR metalloregulatory protein alone and in a complex with the regulatory target, DNA. The one- and two-dimensional NMR data are consistent with a trigonal planar Hg-thiolate coordination environment consisting only of Cys side chains and resolve structural aspects of both metal ion recognition and the allosteric mechanism. These studies establish 199Hg NMR techniques as useful probes of the metal coordination environment of regulatory proteins, copper enzymes, and zinc transcription factor complexes as large as 50 kilodaltons.
Disulphide bonds in secreted proteins are considered to be inert because of the oxidizing nature of the extracellular milieu. An exception to this rule is a reductase secreted by tumour cells that reduces disulphide bonds in the serine proteinase plasmin. Reduction of plasmin initiates proteolytic cleavage in the kringle 5 domain and release of the tumour blood vessel inhibitor angiostatin. New blood vessel formation or angiogenesis is critical for tumour expansion and metastasis. Here we show that the plasmin reductase isolated from conditioned medium of fibrosarcoma cells is the glycolytic enzyme phosphoglycerate kinase. Recombinant phosphoglycerate kinase had the same specific activity as the fibrosarcoma-derived protein. Plasma of mice bearing fibrosarcoma tumours contained several-fold more phosphoglycerate kinase, as compared with mice without tumours. Administration of phosphoglycerate kinase to tumour-bearing mice caused an increase in plasma levels of angiostatin, and a decrease in tumour vascularity and rate of tumour growth. Our findings indicate that phosphoglycerate kinase not only functions in glycolysis but is secreted by tumour cells and participates in the angiogenic process as a disulphide reductase.
The neurotransmitter functions of nitric oxide are dependent on dynamic regulation of its biosynthetic enzyme, neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS). By means of a yeast two-hybrid screen, a 10-kilodalton protein was identified that physically interacts with and inhibits the activity of nNOS. This inhibitor, designated PIN, appears to be one of the most conserved proteins in nature, showing 92 percent amino acid identity with the nematode and rat homologs. Binding of PIN destabilizes the nNOS dimer, a conformation necessary for activity. These results suggest that PIN may regulate numerous biological processes through its effects on nitric oxide synthase activity.
Two electrophoretically distinct variants of supernatant nicotinamideadenine dinucleotide phosphate-dependent malate dehydrogenase exist in mice (Mus musculus). They are controlled by codominant alleles segregating at an autosomal locus. The two forms exist in a polymorphic condition in wild populations of Mus musculus and are fixed in a homozygous condition in inbred lines. These genetic electrophoretic variants are used here to study the subunit structure of this enzyme. Evidence indicating a tetrameric structure for mouse nicotinamideadenine dinucleotide phosphate-dependent malate dehydrogenase is presented. This interpretation is based on the occurrence in heterozygote tissue extracts of five electrophoretically distinct enzymes. This is the predicted phenotype for tetramers composed of two types of subunits which associate randomly in heterozygotes forming three hybrid enzymes having mobilities intermediate between the parental forms.
Various acyl-acyl carrier protein intermediates in saturated and unsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis were tested as substrates for beta-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthetase. With both classes of substrates the condensing enzyme in fatty biosynthesis demonstrates specificities which indicate that it might be an important factor in determining fatty acid chain length in Escherichia coli.
The AXR1 (auxin-resistant) protein, which has features of the ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1, is required for normal response to the plant hormone auxin in Arabidopsis thaliana. ECR1 functions together with AXR1 to activate members of the RUB/NEDD8 family of ubiquitin-related proteins. Extracts from mutant seedlings lacking AXR1 did not promote formation of the RUB-ECR1 thiolester, indicating that AXR1 is the major activity in this tissue. AXR1 was localized primarily to the nucleus of dividing and elongating cells, suggesting that the targets of RUB modification are nuclear. These results indicate that auxin response depends on RUB modification of one or more nuclear proteins.
Neurons in culture can have fundamentally distinct morphologies which permit their cytological identification and the recognition of their neurites as axons or dendrites. Microtubules may have a role in determining morphology by the selective stabilization of spatially distinct microtubule subsets. The plasticity of a neurite correlates inversely with the stability of its component microtubules: microtubules in growth cones are very dynamic, and in initial neurites there is continuous incorporation of labelled subunits, whereas in mature neurites, microtubules are highly stabilized. The binding of microtubule-associated proteins to the microtubules very probably contributes to this stability. Cerebellar neurons in dissociated culture initially extend exploratory neurites and, after a relatively constant interval, become polarized. Polarity becomes evident when a single neurite exceeds the others in length. These stable neurites cease to undergo the retractions and extensions characteristic of initial neurites and assume many features of axons and dendrites. We have now studied the role of the neuronal microtubule-associate protein tau in neurite polarization by selectively inhibiting tau expression by the addition of antisense oligonucleotides to the culture media. Although the extension of initial exploratory neurites occurred normally, neurite asymmetry was inhibited by the failure to elaborate an axon.
The three-dimensional atomic structure of a single-stranded DNA virus has been determined. Infectious virions of canine parvovirus contain 60 protein subunits that are predominantly VP-2. The central structural motif of VP-2 has the same topology (an eight-stranded antiparallel beta barrel) as has been found in many other icosahedral viruses but represents only about one-third of the capsid protein. There is a 22 angstrom (A) long protrusion on the threefold axes, a 15 A deep canyon circulating about each of the five cylindrical structures at the fivefold axes, and a 15 A deep depression at the twofold axes. By analogy with rhinoviruses, the canyon may be the site of receptor attachment. Residues related to the antigenic properties of the virus are found on the threefold protrusions. Some of the amino termini of VP-2 run to the exterior in full but not empty virions, which is consistent with the observation that some VP-2 polypeptides in full particles can be cleaved by trypsin. Eleven nucleotides are seen in each of 60 symmetry-related pockets on the interior surface of the capsid and together account for 13 percent of the genome.
The bombesin-like peptides are potent mitogens for Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts, human bronchial epithelial cells, and cells isolated from small cell carcinoma of the lung. The mechanism of signal transduction in the proliferative response to bombesin was investigated by studying the effect of Bordetella pertussis toxin on bombesin-stimulated mitogenesis. At nanomolar concentrations, bombesin increased levels of c-myc messenger RNA and stimulated DNA synthesis in Swiss 3T3 cells. Treatment of the cells with pertussis toxin (5 nanograms per milliliter) completely blocked bombesin-enhanced c-myc expression and eliminated bombesin-stimulated DNA synthesis. This treatment had essentially no effect on the mitogenic responses to either platelet-derived growth factor or phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate. These results suggest that the mitogenic actions of bombesin-like growth factors are mediated through a pertussis toxin-sensitive guanine nucleotide-binding protein. Furthermore they indicate that bombesin-like growth factors act through pathways that are different from those activated by platelet-derived growth factor.
Thiamine pyrophosphate 1 is an essential cofactor in all living systems. Its biosynthesis involves the separate syntheses of the pyrimidine 2 and thiazole 3 precursors, which are then coupled. Two biosynthetic routes to the thiamine thiazole have been identified. In prokaryotes, five enzymes act on three substrates to produce the thiazole via a complex oxidative condensation reaction, the mechanistic details of which are now well established. In contrast, only one gene product is involved in thiazole biosynthesis in eukaryotes (THI4p in Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Here we report the preparation of fully active recombinant wild-type THI4p, the identification of an iron-dependent sulphide transfer reaction from a conserved cysteine residue of the protein to a reaction intermediate and the demonstration that THI4p is a suicide enzyme undergoing only a single turnover.
A family of proteins called G proteins couples cell surface receptors to a variety of enzymes and ion channels. Since many cells contain several very similar G proteins, an important question is how signals remain specific as they cross the cell membrane.
The four-way (Holliday) DNA junction is the central intermediate in homologous recombination, a ubiquitous process that is important in DNA repair and generation of genetic diversity. The penultimate stage of recombination requires resolution of the DNA junction into nicked-duplex species by the action of a junction-resolving enzyme, examples of which have been identified in a wide variety of organisms. These enzymes are nucleases that are highly selective for the structure of branched DNA. The mechanism of this selectivity has, however, been unclear in the absence of structural data. Here we present the crystal structure of the junction-resolving enzyme phage T7 endonuclease I in complex with a synthetic four-way DNA junction. Although the enzyme is structure-selective, significant induced fit occurs in the interaction, with changes in the structure of both the protein and the junction. The dimeric enzyme presents two binding channels that contact the backbones of the junction's helical arms over seven nucleotides. These interactions effectively measure the relative orientations and positions of the arms of the junction, thereby ensuring that binding is selective for branched DNA that can achieve this geometry.
The sequence of the 3' terminus of the human T lymphotropic virus type II (HTLV-II) was determined and compared to the corresponding sequence of HTLV-I. The 1557-nucleotide-long sequence can be divided into a 5' region that is not conserved between the two viruses, and a 3', 1011-nucleotide-long region that is highly conserved and that corresponds precisely with a long open reading frame for both HTLV-I and -II. The proteins that could be encoded by these open reading frames have a molecular weight of about 38,000 and are closely related in primary amino acid sequence. The genomic structure in the 3' region of HTLV was found to be similar to that of bovine leukemia virus.
The Escherichia coli recA gene product is both a direct participant and a central regulatory element in important processes of DNA repair, including one that is probably responsible for all radiation mutagenesis and some chemical mutagenesis. It has the direct function of catalysing pairing of single-stranded DNA to a homologous region in duplex DNA, a reaction thought to be fundamental to genetic recombination. This activity of recA protein probably contributes to DNA repair by promoting recombination between damaged DNA molecules. We have shown that recA protein also has a regulatory function, mediated by its ability to destroy repressors and possibly other proteins by proteolytic cleavage, leading to the induction of certain genes; these include recA itself, regulated by the lexA gene product, other genes probably involved in DNA repair, some of which are also regulated by the lexA gene product, and the early genes of temperate bacteriophages, which are regulated by their repressors, recA protein is activated to cleave repressors in vitro by interaction with ATP (or the ATP analogue ATP-gamma S) and a polynucleotide such as single-stranded DNA, probably the same interaction that initiates the strand-pairing reaction. We have proposed that recA protein is also activated to attack repressors in vivo when it interacts with single-stranded DNA; DNA-damaging treatments such as UV-ray irradiation would thereby invoke the recA-dependent functions of recombination, repair, mutagenesis and prophage induction. As further evidence that the proteolytic activity of recA protein is responsible for its regulatory function, we show here that the ability of two mutationally altered recA proteins to cleave phage lambda repressor correlates with the ability of the mutant cells to induce prophage.
Lysosomes are the stomachs of the cell-terminal organelles on the endocytic pathway where internalized macromolecules are degraded. Containing a wide range of hydrolytic enzymes, lysosomes depend on maintaining acidic luminal pH values for efficient function. Although acidification is mediated by a V-type proton ATPase, a parallel anion pathway is essential to allow bulk proton transport. The molecular identity of this anion transporter remains unknown. Recent results of knockout experiments raise the possibility that ClC-7, a member of the CLC family of anion channels and transporters, is a contributor to this pathway in an osteoclast lysosome-like compartment, with loss of ClC-7 function causing osteopetrosis. Several mammalian members of the CLC family have been characterized in detail; some (including ClC-0, ClC-1 and ClC-2) function as Cl--conducting ion channels, whereas others act as Cl-/H+antiporters (ClC-4 and ClC-5). However, previous attempts at heterologous expression of ClC-7 have failed to yield evidence of functional protein, so it is unclear whether ClC-7 has an important function in lysosomal biology, and also whether this protein functions as a Cl- channel, a Cl-/H+ antiporter, or as something else entirely. Here we directly demonstrate an anion transport pathway in lysosomes that has the defining characteristics of a CLC Cl-/H+ antiporter and show that this transporter is the predominant route for Cl- through the lysosomal membrane. Furthermore, knockdown of ClC-7 expression by short interfering RNA can essentially ablate this lysosomal Cl-/H+ antiport activity and can strongly diminish the ability of lysosomes to acidify in vivo, demonstrating that ClC-7 is a Cl-/H+ antiporter, that it constitutes the major Cl- permeability of lysosomes, and that it is important in lysosomal acidification.
In all organisms, the protein machinery responsible for the replication of DNA, the replisome, is faced with a directionality problem. The antiparallel nature of duplex DNA permits the leading-strand polymerase to advance in a continuous fashion, but forces the lagging-strand polymerase to synthesize in the opposite direction. By extending RNA primers, the lagging-strand polymerase restarts at short intervals and produces Okazaki fragments. At least in prokaryotic systems, this directionality problem is solved by the formation of a loop in the lagging strand of the replication fork to reorient the lagging-strand DNA polymerase so that it advances in parallel with the leading-strand polymerase. The replication loop grows and shrinks during each cycle of Okazaki fragment synthesis. Here we use single-molecule techniques to visualize, in real time, the formation and release of replication loops by individual replisomes of bacteriophage T7 supporting coordinated DNA replication. Analysis of the distributions of loop sizes and lag times between loops reveals that initiation of primer synthesis and the completion of an Okazaki fragment each serve as a trigger for loop release. The presence of two triggers may represent a fail-safe mechanism ensuring the timely reset of the replisome after the synthesis of every Okazaki fragment.
Tyrosine kinases and tyrosine phosphatases are abundant in central nervous system tissue, yet the role of these enzymes in the modulation of neuronal excitability is unknown. Patch-clamp studies of an Aplysia voltage-gated cation channel now demonstrate that a tyrosine phosphatase endogenous to excised patches determines both the gating mode of the channel and the response of the channel to protein kinase A. Moreover, a switch in gating modes similar to that triggered by the phosphatase occurs at the onset of a prolonged change in the excitability of Aplysia bag cell neurons.
A pseudo--half-knot can be formed by binding an oligonucleotide asymmetrically to an RNA hairpin loop. This binding motif was used to target the human immunodeficiency virus TAR element, an important viral RNA structure that is the receptor for Tat, the major viral transactivator protein. Oligonucleotides complementary to different halves of the TAR structure bound with greater affinity than molecules designed to bind symmetrically around the hairpin. The pseudo--half-knot--forming oligonucleotides altered the TAR structure so that specific recognition and binding of a Tat-derived peptide was disrupted. This general binding motif may be used to disrupt the structure of regulatory RNA hairpins.
Glycosyltransferases (GTs), an essential class of ubiquitous enzymes, are generally perceived as unidirectional catalysts. In contrast, we report that four glycosyltransferases from two distinct natural product biosynthetic pathways-calicheamicin and vancomycin-readily catalyze reversible reactions, allowing sugars and aglycons to be exchanged with ease. As proof of the broader applicability of these new reactions, more than 70 differentially glycosylated calicheamicin and vancomycin variants are reported. This study suggests the reversibility of GT-catalyzed reactions may be general and useful for generating exotic nucleotide sugars, establishing in vitro GT activity in complex systems, and enhancing natural product diversity.
Collagenase is a zinc-dependent endoproteinase and is a member of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of enzymes. The MMPs participate in connective tissue remodeling events and aberrant regulation has been associated with several pathologies. The 2.4 angstrom resolution structure of the inhibited enzyme revealed that, in addition to the catalytic zinc, there is a second zinc ion and a calcium ion which play a major role in stabilizing the tertiary structure of collagenase. Despite scant sequence homology, collagenase shares structural homology with two other endoproteinases, bacterial thermolysin and crayfish astacin. The detailed description of protein-inhibitor interactions present in the structure will aid in the design of compounds that selectively inhibit individual members of the MMP family. Such inhibitors will be useful in examining the function of MMPs in pathological processes.
Ubiquitin-like proteins (UBLs) are conjugated by dynamic E1-E2-E3 enzyme cascades. E1 enzymes activate UBLs by catalysing UBL carboxy-terminal adenylation, forming a covalent E1 throught UBL thioester intermediate, and generating a thioester-linked E2 throught UBL product, which must be released for subsequent reactions. Here we report the structural analysis of a trapped UBL activation complex for the human NEDD8 pathway, containing NEDD8's heterodimeric E1 (APPBP1-UBA3), two NEDD8s (one thioester-linked to E1, one noncovalently associated for adenylation), a catalytically inactive E2 (Ubc12), and MgATP. The results suggest that a thioester switch toggles E1-E2 affinities. Two E2 binding sites depend on NEDD8 being thioester-linked to E1. One is unmasked by a striking E1 conformational change. The other comes directly from the thioester-bound NEDD8. After NEDD8 transfer to E2, reversion to an alternate E1 conformation would facilitate release of the E2 throught NEDD8 thioester product. Thus, transferring the UBL's thioester linkage between successive conjugation enzymes can induce conformational changes and alter interaction networks to drive consecutive steps in UBL cascades.
Identification of the cellular proteins whose expression is regulated during the cell cycle in normal cells is essential for understanding the mechanisms involved in the control of cell proliferation. A nuclear protein called cyclin of relative molecular mass 36,000 (Mr 36K), whose synthesis correlates with the proliferative state of the cell, has been identified in several cell types of human, mouse, hamster and avian origin. The rate of cyclin synthesis is very low in quiescent cells and increases several fold after serum stimulation shortly before DNA synthesis. Immunofluorescence and autoradiography studies have shown that the nuclear staining patterns of cyclin during S phase have a sequential order of appearance and a clear correlation can be found between DNA synthesis and cyclin positive nuclei. The proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and cyclin have many common properties and it has been shown that these two are identical. Recently a protein which is required by DNA polymerase-delta for its catalytic activity with templates having low primer/template ratios has been isolated from calf thymus. We report here that cyclin and the auxiliary protein of DNA polymerase-delta are identical.
Replication and repair are essential processes that maintain the continuity of the genetic material. Dissection of simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA replication has resulted in the identification of many eukaryotic replication proteins, but the biochemistry of the multienzyme process of DNA excision repair is less well defined. One protein that is absolutely required for semiconservative replication of SV40 DNA in vitro is human single-stranded DNA-binding protein (SSB, also called RF-A and RP-A). SSB consists of three polypeptides of relative molecular mass 70,000, 34,000 and 13,000, and acts with T antigen and topoisomerases to unwind DNA, allowing the access of other replication proteins. Human SSB can also stimulate the activity of polymerases alpha and delta, suggesting a further role in elongation during DNA replication. We have now found a role for human SSB in DNA excision repair using a cell-free system that can carry out nucleotide excision repair in vitro. Monoclonal antibodies against human SSB caused extensive inhibition of DNA repair in plasmid molecules damaged by ultraviolet light or acetylaminofluorene. Addition of purified SSB reversed this inhibition and further stimulated repair synthesis by increasing the number of repair events. These results show that a mammalian DNA replication protein is also essential for repair.
Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) represent a diverse family of enzymes that exist as integral membrane and nonreceptor forms. The PTPs, with specific activities in vitro 10 to 1000 times greater than those of the protein tyrosine kinases would be expected to effectively control the amount of phosphotyrosine in the cell. They dephosphorylate tyrosyl residues in vivo and take part in signal transduction and cell cycle regulation. Most of the transmembrane forms, such as the leukocyte common antigen (CD45), contain two conserved intracellular catalytic domains; but their external segments are highly variable. The structural features of the transmembrane forms suggest that these receptor-linked PTPs are capable of transducing external signals; however, the ligands remain unidentified. A hypothesis is proposed explaining how phosphatases might act synergistically with the kinases to elicit a full physiological response, without regard to the state of phosphorylation of the target proteins.
Ribozymes use a number of the same catalytic strategies as protein enzymes. However, general base catalysis by a ribozyme has not been demonstrated. In the hepatitis delta virus antigenomic ribozyme, imidazole buffer rescued activity of a mutant with a cytosine-76 (C76) to uracil substitution. In addition, a C76 to adenine substitution reduced the apparent pKa (where Ka is the acid constant) of the self-cleavage reaction by an amount consistent with differences in the pKa values of these two side chains. These results suggest that, in the wild-type ribozyme, C76 acts as a general base. This finding has implications for potential catalytic functions of conserved cytosines and adenines in other ribozymes and in ribonuclear proteins with enzymatic activity.
The lactose repressor protein from Escherichia coli binds sugars, primarily galactosides, which modulate its interactions with operator DNA and thereby affect synthesis of the lac metabolic enzymes. The affinity of the repressor for operator DNA is decreased by binding inducer sugars and increased by binding anti-inducer sugars. Based on regions of the primary structure implicated by genetic methods to be involved in sugar binding, amino acid sequence homology between L-arabinose-binding protein (ABP) and lac repressor has recently been reported. The sugar-binding sites for these two proteins might be expected to have similar structural features, as both bind L-arabinose and D-galactose. The high resolution structure of ABP reported in the accompanying article provides complete definition of amino acids in the sugar-binding site. By identification of homologous residues in the lac repressor, we have now predicted the structure of the portion of the repressor sugar-binding site which accommodates the galactosyl moiety. This prediction provides the first potential view of the inducer/anti-inducer site in the repressor protein.
The guanine nucleotide-binding protein, Gi, which inhibits adenylyl cyclase, has recently been shown to have three subtypes of the alpha-subunit, termed Gi alpha-1, Gi alpha-2 and Gi alpha-3. They share 87-94% amino-acid sequence homology and so are difficult to separate from one another. Among other functions, purified preparations activate K+ channels but there is confusion over which of the subtypes activates the muscarinic K+ channels of the atrial muscle of the heart: Gi alpha-3, also termed Gk, has been shown to activate this channel but it is not clear whether Gi alpha-1 does or does not. To clarify this problem, we expressed the subtypes separately in Escherichia coli to eliminate contamination by other subtypes and tested the recombinant alpha- chains on atrial muscarinic K+ channels. Although we anticipated that only Gi alpha-3 would have Gk activity, to our surprise all three recombinant subtypes were active, from which we deduce that the Gi subtypes are multifunctional.
The avian acute leukemia virus E26 induces a mixed erythroid-myeloid leukemia in chickens and carries two distinct oncogenes, v-myb and v-ets. Recently, a novel gene named erg, closely related to the v-ets oncogene, was identified in human COLO 320 cells and the nucleotide sequence of its approximately 5.0-kilobase transcript, erg 1 was determined. In the present study, the nucleotide sequence of the alternatively spliced transcript, erg 2, was found to differ from erg 1 by a splicing event that causes a coding frameshift near the amino terminus, resulting in an additional 99-amino acid insertion at the amino-terminus. Expression of complementary DNAs for the two transcripts in vitro resulted in synthesis of polypeptides of approximately 41 and 52 kilodaltons, suggesting the use of alternative translation initiation codons in the case of erg proteins. The erg gene was localized by somatic cell genetic analysis to human chromosome 21. It is proposed that alternative sites of splicing and polyadenylation, together with alternative sites of translation initiation, allow the synthesis of two related polypeptides from a single erg gene transcriptional unit.
Cyclic nucleotides regulate axonal responses to a number of guidance cues through unknown molecular events. We report here that Drosophila nervy, a member of the myeloid translocation gene family of A kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs), regulates repulsive axon guidance by linking the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKA) to the Semaphorin 1a (Sema-1a) receptor Plexin A (PlexA). Nervy and PKA antagonize Sema-1a-PlexA-mediated repulsion, and the AKAP binding region of Nervy is critical for this effect. Thus, Nervy couples cAMP-PKA signaling to PlexA to regulate Sema-1a-mediated axonal repulsion, revealing a simple molecular mechanism that allows growing axons to integrate inputs from multiple guidance cues.
Gene duplication followed by adaptive evolution is one of the primary forces for the emergence of new gene function. Here we describe the recent proliferation, transposition and selection of a 20-kilobase (kb) duplicated segment throughout 15 Mb of the short arm of human chromosome 16. The dispersal of this segment was accompanied by considerable variation in chromosomal-map location and copy number among hominoid species. In humans, we identified a gene family (morpheus) within the duplicated segment. Comparison of putative protein-encoding exons revealed the most extreme case of positive selection among hominoids. The major episode of enhanced amino-acid replacement occurred after the separation of human and great-ape lineages from the orangutan. Positive selection continued to alter amino-acid composition after the divergence of human and chimpanzee lineages. The rapidity and bias for amino-acid-altering nucleotide changes suggest adaptive evolution of the morpheus gene family during the emergence of humans and African apes. Moreover, some genes emerge and evolve very rapidly, generating copies that bear little similarity to their ancestral precursors. Consequently, a small fraction of human genes may not possess discernible orthologues within the genomes of model organisms.
The chemical synthesis of biologically active peptides and polypeptides can be achieved by using a convergent strategy of condensing protected peptide segments to form the desired molecule. An oxime support increases the ease with which intermediate protected peptides can be synthesized and makes this approach useful for the synthesis of peptides in which secondary structural elements have been redesigned. The extension of these methods to large peptides and proteins, for which folding of secondary structures into functional tertiary structures is critical, is discussed. Models of apolipoproteins, the homeo domain from the developmental protein encoded by the Antennapedia gene of Drosophila, a part of the Cro repressor, and the enzyme ribonuclease T1 and a structural analog have been synthesized with this method.
Alzheimer's disease is associated with increased production and aggregation of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptides. Abeta peptides are derived from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by sequential proteolysis, catalysed by the aspartyl protease BACE, followed by presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase cleavage. Presenilin interacts with nicastrin, APH-1 and PEN-2 (ref. 6), all of which are required for gamma-secretase function. Presenilins also interact with alpha-catenin, beta-catenin and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), but a functional role for these proteins in gamma-secretase activity has not been established. Here we show that therapeutic concentrations of lithium, a GSK-3 inhibitor, block the production of Abeta peptides by interfering with APP cleavage at the gamma-secretase step, but do not inhibit Notch processing. Importantly, lithium also blocks the accumulation of Abeta peptides in the brains of mice that overproduce APP. The target of lithium in this setting is GSK-3alpha, which is required for maximal processing of APP. Since GSK-3 also phosphorylates tau protein, the principal component of neurofibrillary tangles, inhibition of GSK-3alpha offers a new approach to reduce the formation of both amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, two pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease.
CD8+ lymphocytes are believed to be important in host defence against the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1, inhibiting HIV-1 replication through both cytolytic and non-cytolytic pathways. The cytolytic pathway involves calcium-dependent exocytosis of perforin and granzyme proteases, as well as Fas-mediated programmed cell death, whereas the noncytolytic pathway involves the release of chemokines that prevent viral entry. Using granzyme A as a marker of cytolytic granule proteins, and macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha and RANTES as markers of HIV-1 inhibitory chemokines, we show that these two very different mediators of viral inhibition are both localized in the cytolytic granules of HIV-1-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL). Following antigen-specific activation, these mediators are secreted together, facilitating both lysis of virion-producing cells and the inhibition of free virus. In addition, RANTES, MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta are secreted by CTL as a macromolecular complex containing sulphated proteoglycans. This association appears to have a functional significance, because heparan sulphate facilitates RANTES inhibition of HIV-1 infection of monocytes.
The Caenorhabditis elegans anteroposterior axis is established in response to fertilization by sperm. Here we present evidence that RhoA, the guanine nucleotide-exchange factor ECT-2, and the Rho guanosine triphosphatase-activating protein CYK-4 modulate myosin light-chain activity to create a gradient of actomyosin, which establishes the anterior domain. CYK-4 is enriched within sperm, and paternally donated CYK-4 is required for polarity. These data suggest that CYK-4 provides a molecular link between fertilization and polarity establishment in the one-cell embryo. Orthologs of CYK-4 are expressed in sperm of other species, which suggests that this cue may be evolutionarily conserved.
Hsp70s are a ubiquitous family of molecular chaperones involved in many cellular processes. Two Hsp70s, Lhs1p and Kar2p, are required for protein biogenesis in the yeast endoplasmic reticulum. Here, we found that Lhs1p and Kar2p specifically interacted to couple, and coordinately regulate, their respective activities. Lhs1p stimulated Kar2p by providing a specific nucleotide exchange activity, whereas Kar2p reciprocally activated the Lhs1p adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase). The two ATPase activities are coupled, and their coordinated regulation is essential for normal function in vivo.
The circadian clock temporally coordinates metabolic homeostasis in mammals. Central to this is heme, an iron-containing porphyrin that serves as prosthetic group for enzymes involved in oxidative metabolism as well as transcription factors that regulate circadian rhythmicity. The circadian factor that integrates this dual function of heme is not known. We show that heme binds reversibly to the orphan nuclear receptor Rev-erbalpha, a critical negative component of the circadian core clock, and regulates its interaction with a nuclear receptor corepressor complex. Furthermore, heme suppresses hepatic gluconeogenic gene expression and glucose output through Rev-erbalpha-mediated gene repression. Thus, Rev-erbalpha serves as a heme sensor that coordinates the cellular clock, glucose homeostasis, and energy metabolism.
Tyrosine protein kinases are important both in the normal regulation of cellular proliferation and in the oncogenic transformation of cells by several tumour viruses. The LSTRA Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV)-induced thymoma cell line contains approximately 20-fold more phosphotyrosine in protein than do typical haematopoietic cell lines; this seems to result from the expression of an abnormally high level of a cellular tyrosine protein kinase termed p56tck (refs 3, 4). This kinase is normally expressed at low levels in most, but not all, murine T cells. The elevated levels of p56tck could contribute to the malignant properties of LSTRA cells. Therefore, we have isolated cloned complementary DNAs encoding the whole of p56tck. Sequence analysis shows it to be a novel cellular tyrosine protein kinase which is distinct from all others described to date. p56tck is encoded in LSTRA cells by a hybrid messenger RNA; approximately 200 nucleotides at the 5' end of the mRNA are identical to the 5' end of the genome of M-MuLV. The three- to ninefold transcriptional activation of the gene therefore results from retroviral promoter insertion.
The circadian clock is considered to be a universal feature of eucaryotic organisms, controlling the occurrence and rates of many different aspects of life, ranging from single enzymatic reactions and metabolism to complex behaviours such as activity and rest. Although the nature of the underlying cellular/biochemical oscillator is still unknown, many substances are known to influence either phase or period of circadian rhythms in different organisms. These include D2O, electrolytes and ion channel inhibitors, small organic molecules such as alcohols and aldehydes, inhibitors of protein synthesis and amino-acid analogues. Certain transmitter and neurochemical drugs also influence the circadian clock in higher animals. We report here that the period of free-running circadian rhythms in the unicellular marine alga Gonyaulax polyedra is shortened by extracts from mammalian cells. The effect is dose-dependent, accelerating the circadian clock by as much as 4 hours per day. The substance responsible for this effect has been isolated from bovine muscle and identified as creatine. Authentic creatine has identical biological effects at micromolar concentrations and is known in animal systems for its involvement in cellular energy metabolism. A period shortening substance with similar chemical properties is also present in extracts of Gonyaulax itself.
Tetrathiomolybdate (TM) is an orally active agent for treatment of disorders of copper metabolism. Here we describe how TM inhibits proteins that regulate copper physiology. Crystallographic results reveal that the surprising stability of the drug complex with the metallochaperone Atx1 arises from formation of a sulfur-bridged copper-molybdenum cluster reminiscent of those found in molybdenum and iron sulfur proteins. Spectroscopic studies indicate that this cluster is stable in solution and corresponds to physiological clusters isolated from TM-treated Wilson's disease animal models. Finally, mechanistic studies show that the drug-metallochaperone inhibits metal transfer functions between copper-trafficking proteins. The results are consistent with a model wherein TM can directly and reversibly down-regulate copper delivery to secreted metalloenzymes and suggest that proteins involved in metal regulation might be fruitful drug targets.
CDP-diacylglycerol synthase (CDS) is an enzyme required for the regeneration of the signalling molecule phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdlnsP2) from phosphatidic acid. A photo-receptor cell-specific isoform of CDS from Drosophila is a key regulator of phototransduction, a G-protein-coupled signalling cascade mediated by phospholipase C. cds mutants cannot sustain a light-activated current as a result of depletion of PtdlnsP2. Overexpression of CDS increases the amplitude of the light response, demonstrating that availability of PtdlnsP2 is a determinant in the gain of this pathway. cds mutants undergo light-dependent retinal degeneration which can be suppressed by a mutation in phospholipase C. Thus, enzymes involved in PtdlnsP2 metabolism regulate phosphoinositide-mediated signalling cascades in vivo.
The crystal structure of the adenine nucleotide exchange factor GrpE in complex with the adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) domain of Escherichia coli DnaK [heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70)] was determined at 2.8 angstrom resolution. A dimer of GrpE binds asymmetrically to a single molecule of DnaK. The structure of the nucleotide-free ATPase domain in complex with GrpE resembles closely that of the nucleotide-bound mammalian Hsp70 homolog, except for an outward rotation of one of the subdomains of the protein. This conformational change is not consistent with tight nucleotide binding. Two long alpha helices extend away from the GrpE dimer and suggest a role for GrpE in peptide release from DnaK.
Errors in the replication of DNA are a major source of spontaneous mutations, and a number of cellular functions are involved in correction of these errors to keep the frequency of spontaneous mutations very low. We report here a novel mechanism which prevents replicational errors by degrading a potent mutagenic substrate for DNA synthesis. This error-avoiding process is catalysed by a protein encoded by the mutT gene of Escherichia coli, mutations of which increase the occurrence of A.T----C.G transversions 100 to 10,000 times the level of the wild type. Spontaneous oxidation of dGTP forms 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-dGTP (8-oxodGTP), which is inserted opposite dA and dC residues of template DNA with almost equal efficiency, and the MutT protein specifically degrades 8-oxodGTP to the monophosphate. This indicates that elimination from the nucleotide pool of the oxidized form of guanine nucleotide is important for the high fidelity of DNA synthesis.
A point mutation in the simian virus 40 large-T gene, which was generated by mixed oligonucleotide mutagenesis and resulted in the conversion of Lys 128 to Thr, produced a large-T antigen that was detected in the cytoplasm but not the nucleus of cells. Deletions within the surrounding sequence Lys-128Lys-Lys-Arg-Lys-Val-Glu also produce cytoplasmic large-T and define a region of the protein involved in nuclear location.
Coiled-coil proteins of the golgin family have been implicated in intra-Golgi transport through tethering coat protein complex I (COPI) vesicles. The p115-golgin tether is the best studied, and here we characterize the golgin-84-CASP tether. The vesicles bound by this tether were strikingly different from those bound by the p115-golgin tether in that they lacked members of the p24 family of putative cargo receptors and contained enzymes instead of anterograde cargo. Microinjected golgin-84 or CASP also inhibited Golgi-enzyme transport to the endoplasmic reticulum, further implicating this tether in retrograde transport. These and other golgins may modulate the flow patterns within the Golgi stack.
Superoxide reductase from the hyperthermophilic anaerobe Pyrococcus furiosus uses electrons from reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, by way of rubredoxin and an oxidoreductase, to reduce superoxide to hydrogen peroxide, which is then reduced to water by peroxidases. Unlike superoxide dismutase, the enzyme that protects aerobes from the toxic effects of oxygen, SOR does not catalyze the production of oxygen from superoxide and therefore confers a selective advantage on anaerobes. Superoxide reductase and associated proteins are catalytically active 80 degrees C below the optimum growth temperature (100 degrees C) of P. furiosus, conditions under which the organism is likely to be exposed to oxygen.
Viral replication usually requires that innate intracellular lines of defence be overcome, a task usually accomplished by specialized viral gene products. The virion infectivity factor (Vif) protein of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is required during the late stages of viral production to counter the antiviral activity of APOBEC3G (apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G; also known as CEM15), a protein expressed notably in human T lymphocytes. When produced in the presence of APOBEC3G, vif-defective virus is non-infectious. APOBEC3G is closely related to APOBEC1, the central component of an RNA-editing complex that deaminates a cytosine residue in apoB messenger RNA. APOBEC family members also have potent DNA mutator activity through dC deamination; however, whether the editing potential of APOBEC3G has any relevance to HIV inhibition is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that it does, as APOBEC3G exerts its antiviral effect during reverse transcription to trigger G-to-A hypermutation in the nascent retroviral DNA. We also find that APOBEC3G can act on a broad range of retroviruses in addition to HIV, suggesting that hypermutation by editing is a general innate defence mechanism against this important group of pathogens.
Most flowering plants are hermaphroditic, having flowers with both male and female parts. Less than 4% of plant species are dioecious (with individuals of separate sexes), and many of these species have chromosome-mediated sex determination. The taxonomic distribution of separate sexes and chromosomal sex-determination systems in the flowering plants indicates that plant sex chromosomes have evolved recently through replicated, independent events, contrasting with the ancient origins of mammalian and insect sex chromosomes. Plant sex chromosomes, therefore, offer opportunities to study the most interesting early stages of the evolution of sex chromosomes. Here we show that a gene encoding a male-specific protein is linked to the X chromosome in the dioecious plant Silene latifolia, and that it has a degenerate homologue in the non-pairing region of the Y chromosome. The Y-linked locus has degenerated as a result of nucleotide deletion and the accumulation of repetitive sequences. We have identified both the first X-linked gene and the first pair of homologous sex-linked loci to be found in plants. The homology between the active X-linked locus and the degenerate Y-linked locus supports a common ancestry for these two loci.
Several classes of nucleic acid analogs have been reported, but no synthetic informational polymer has yet proven responsive to selection pressures under enzyme-free conditions. Here, we introduce an oligomer family that efficiently self-assembles by means of reversible covalent anchoring of nucleobase recognition units onto simple oligo-dipeptide backbones [thioester peptide nucleic acids (tPNAs)] and undergoes dynamic sequence modification in response to changing templates in solution. The oligomers specifically self-pair with complementary tPNA strands and cross-pair with RNA and DNA in Watson-Crick fashion. Thus, tPNA combines base-pairing interactions with the side-chain functionalities of typical peptides and proteins. These characteristics might prove advantageous for the design or selection of catalytic constructs or biomaterials that are capable of dynamic sequence repair and adaptation.
Particles with the morphology of type C virus have been identified from primate placentas by electron microscopy. A reverse transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase) was isolated and purified from microsomal pellets of two fresh placentas of rhesus monkeys in the early stages of gestation. This enzyme was biochemically similar yet immunologically distinct from the reverse transcriptases of known tumorigenic type C RNA viruses isolated from primates, but was immunologically related to a reverse transcriptase isolated from a type C virus obtained from normal baboon placenta. These particles may represent endogenous viruses and may function in the transfer of genetic information during embryogenesis.
The 7.8 angstrom crystal structure of the 70S ribosome reveals a discrete double-helical bridge (B4) that projects from the 50S subunit, making contact with the 30S subunit. Preliminary modeling studies localized its contact site, near the bottom of the platform, to the binding site for ribosomal protein S15. Directed hydroxyl radical probing from iron(II) tethered to S15 specifically cleaved nucleotides in the 715 loop of domain II of 23S ribosomal RNA, one of the known sites in 23S ribosomal RNA that are footprinted by the 30S subunit. Reconstitution studies show that protection of the 715 loop, but none of the other 30S-dependent protections, is correlated with the presence of S15 in the 30S subunit. The 715 loop is specifically protected by binding free S15 to 50S subunits. Moreover, the previously determined structure of a homologous stem-loop from U2 small nuclear RNA fits closely to the electron density of the bridge.
EBI2 (also called GPR183) is an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor that is highly expressed in spleen and upregulated upon Epstein-Barr-virus infection. Recent studies indicated that this receptor controls follicular B-cell migration and T-cell-dependent antibody production. Oxysterols elicit profound effects on immune and inflammatory responses as well as on cholesterol metabolism. The biological effects of oxysterols have largely been credited to the activation of nuclear hormone receptors. Here we isolate oxysterols from porcine spleen extracts and show that they are endogenous ligands for EBI2. The most potent ligand and activator is 7a,25-dihydroxycholesterol (OHC), with a dissociation constant of 450 pM for EBI2. In vitro, 7a,25-OHC stimulated the migration of EBI2-expressing mouse B and T cells with half-maximum effective concentration values around 500 pM, but had no effect on EBI2-deficient cells. In vivo, EBI2-deficient B cells or normal B cells desensitized by 7a,25-OHC pre-treatment showed reduced homing to follicular areas of the spleen. Blocking the synthesis of 7a,25-OHC in vivo with clotrimazole, a CYP7B1 inhibitor, reduced the content of 7a,25-OHC in the mouse spleen and promoted the migration of adoptively transferred pre-activated B cells to the T/B boundary (the boundary between the T-zone and B-zone in the spleen follicle), mimicking the phenotype of pre-activated B cells from EBI2-deficient mice. Our results show an unexpected causal link between EBI2, an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor controlling B-cell migration, and the known immunological effects of certain oxysterols, thus uncovering a previously unknown role for this class of molecules.
The mammalian adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a serine-threonine kinase protein complex that is a central regulator of cellular energy homeostasis. However, the mechanisms by which AMPK mediates cellular responses to metabolic stress remain unclear. We found that AMPK activates transcription through direct association with chromatin and phosphorylation of histone H2B at serine 36. AMPK recruitment and H2B Ser36 phosphorylation colocalized within genes activated by AMPK-dependent pathways, both in promoters and in transcribed regions. Ectopic expression of H2B in which Ser36 was substituted by alanine reduced transcription and RNA polymerase II association to AMPK-dependent genes, and lowered cell survival in response to stress. Our results place AMPK-dependent H2B Ser36 phosphorylation in a direct transcriptional and chromatin regulatory pathway leading to cellular adaptation to stress.
The bacterial protein CIpA, a member of the Hsp100 chaperone family, forms hexameric rings that bind to the free ends of the double-ring serine protease ClpP. ClpA directs the ATP-dependent degradation of substrate proteins bearing specific sequences, much as the 19S ATPase 'cap' of eukaryotic proteasomes functions in the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins. In isolation, ClpA and its relative ClpX can mediate the disassembly of oligomeric proteins; another similar eukaryotic protein, Hsp104, can dissociate low-order aggregates. ClpA has been proposed to destabilize protein structure, allowing passage of proteolysis substrates through a central channel into the ClpP proteolytic cylinder. Here we test the action of ClpA on a stable monomeric protein, the green fluorescent protein GFP, onto which has been added an 11-amino-acid carboxy-terminal recognition peptide, which is responsible for recruiting truncated proteins to ClpAP for degradation. Fluorescence studies both with and without a 'trap' version of the chaperonin GroEL, which binds non-native forms of GFP, and hydrogen-exchange experiments directly demonstrate that ClpA can unfold stable, native proteins in the presence of ATP.
A role for proto-oncogenes in the regulation and modulation of cell proliferation has been suggested by the findings that the B-chain of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is encoded by the proto-oncogene sis and that the erb-B oncogene product is a truncated form of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor. Furthermore, the product of the proto-oncogene fms (c-fms) may be related or identical to the receptor for macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF-1). v-fms is the transforming gene of the McDonough strain of feline sarcoma virus (SM-FeSV) and belongs to the family of src-related oncogenes which have tyrosine-specific kinase activity. Furthermore, nucleotide sequence analysis of the v-fms gene product revealed topological properties of a cell-surface receptor protein. To elucidate the features involved in the conversion of a normal cell-surface receptor gene into an oncogenic one, we have now determined the complete nucleotide sequence of a human c-fms complementary DNA. The 972-amino-acid c-fms protein has an extracellular domain, a membrane-spanning region, and a cytoplasmic tyrosine protein kinase domain. Comparison of the feline v-fms and human c-fms sequences reveals that the proteins share extensive homology but have different carboxyl termini.
The guanosine triphosphate-binding proteins (G proteins) found in a variety of tissues transduce signals generated by ligand binding to cell surface receptors into changes in intracellular metabolism. Amino acid sequences of peptides prepared by partial proteolysis of the alpha subunit of a bovine brain G protein and the alpha subunit of rod outer-segment transducin were determined. The two proteins show regions of sequence identity as well as regions of diversity. A portion of the amino-terminal peptide sequence of each protein is highly homologous with the corresponding region in the ras protein (a protooncogene product). These similarities suggest that G proteins and ras proteins may have analogous functions.
The structure of an RNA polymerase II-transcribing complex has been determined in the posttranslocation state, with a vacancy at the growing end of the RNA-DNA hybrid helix. At the opposite end of the hybrid helix, the RNA separates from the template DNA. This separation of nucleic acid strands is brought about by interaction with a set of proteins loops in a strand/loop network. Formation of the network must occur in the transition from abortive initiation to promoter escape.
Reactive oxygen species are involved in many cellular metabolic and signalling processes and are thought to have a role in disease, particularly in carcinogenesis and ageing. We have generated mice with targeted inactivation of Prdx1, a member of the peroxiredoxin family of antioxidant enzymes. Here we show that mice lacking Prdx1 are viable and fertile but have a shortened lifespan owing to the development beginning at about 9 months of severe haemolytic anaemia and several malignant cancers, both of which are also observed at increased frequency in heterozygotes. The haemolytic anaemia is characterized by an increase in erythrocyte reactive oxygen species, leading to protein oxidation, haemoglobin instability, Heinz body formation and decreased erythrocyte lifespan. The malignancies include lymphomas, sarcomas and carcinomas, and are frequently associated with loss of Prdx1 expression in heterozygotes, which suggests that this protein functions as a tumour suppressor. Prdx1-deficient fibroblasts show decreased proliferation and increased sensitivity to oxidative DNA damage, whereas Prdx1-null mice have abnormalities in numbers, phenotype and function of natural killer cells. Our results implicate Prdx1 as an important defence against oxidants in ageing mice.
Significant fractions of eukaryotic genomes give rise to RNA, much of which is unannotated and has reduced protein-coding potential. The genomic origins and the associations of human nuclear and cytosolic polyadenylated RNAs longer than 200 nucleotides (nt) and whole-cell RNAs less than 200 nt were investigated in this genome-wide study. Subcellular addresses for nucleotides present in detected RNAs were assigned, and their potential processing into short RNAs was investigated. Taken together, these observations suggest a novel role for some unannotated RNAs as primary transcripts for the production of short RNAs. Three potentially functional classes of RNAs have been identified, two of which are syntenically conserved and correlate with the expression state of protein-coding genes. These data support a highly interleaved organization of the human transcriptome.
Initiation of ribosomal RNA synthesis by RNA polymerase I requires the promoter selectivity factor SL1, which consists of the TATA-binding protein, TBP, and three associated factors, TAFIS 110, 63, and 48. Here the in vivo and in vitro assembly of functional SL1 complexes from recombinant TAFIS and TBP are reported. Complexes containing TBP and all three TAFIS were as active in supporting transcription from the human ribosomal RNA gene promoter as endogenous SL1, whereas partial complexes without TBP did not efficiently direct transcription in vitro. These results suggest that TAFIS 110, 63, and 48, together with TBP, are necessary and sufficient to reconstitute a transcriptionally active SL1 complex.
Epac proteins (exchange proteins directly activated by cAMP) are guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs) for the small GTP-binding proteins Rap1 and Rap2 that are directly regulated by the second messenger cyclic AMP and function in the control of diverse cellular processes, including cell adhesion and insulin secretion. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of full-length Epac2, a 110-kDa protein that contains an amino-terminal regulatory region with two cyclic-nucleotide-binding domains and a carboxy-terminal catalytic region. The structure was solved in the absence of cAMP and shows the auto-inhibited state of Epac. The regulatory region is positioned with respect to the catalytic region by a rigid, tripartite beta-sheet-like structure we refer to as the 'switchboard' and an ionic interaction we call the 'ionic latch'. As a consequence of this arrangement, the access of Rap to the catalytic site is sterically blocked. Mutational analysis suggests a model for cAMP-induced Epac activation with rigid body movement of the regulatory region, the features of which are universally conserved in cAMP-regulated proteins.
The fungicidal type I chitinases contribute to the defense response of plants against pathogens. Two tobacco chitinases represent a different class of hydroxyproline-containing proteins. Hydroxyproline-rich proteins are predominantly extracellular, structural glycoproteins proteins that lack enzymatic activity and contain many hydroxyproline residues. In contrast, type I chitinases are vacuolar enzymes. They are not glycosylated and contain a small number of hydroxyproline residues restricted to a single, short peptide sequence.
In contrast to stably repressive, constitutive heterochromatin and stably active, euchromatin, facultative heterochromatin has the capacity to alternate between repressive and activated states of transcription. As such, it is an instructive source to understand the molecular basis for changes in chromatin structure that correlate with transcriptional status. Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and suppressor of variegation 3-9 homologue 1 (SUV39H1) are amongst the enzymes responsible for chromatin modulations associated with facultative heterochromatin formation. SUV39H1 is the principal enzyme responsible for the accumulation of histone H3 containing a tri-methyl group at its lysine 9 position (H3K9me3) in regions of heterochromatin. SIRT1 is an NAD+-dependent deacetylase that targets histone H4 at lysine 16 (refs 3 and 4), and through an unknown mechanism facilitates increased levels of H3K9me3 (ref. 3). Here we show that the mammalian histone methyltransferase SUV39H1 is itself targeted by the histone deacetylase SIRT1 and that SUV39H1 activity is regulated by acetylation at lysine residue 266 in its catalytic SET domain. SIRT1 interacts directly with, recruits and deacetylates SUV39H1, and these activities independently contribute to elevated levels of SUV39H1 activity resulting in increased levels of the H3K9me3 modification. Loss of SIRT1 greatly affects SUV39H1-dependent H3K9me3 and impairs localization of heterochromatin protein 1. These findings demonstrate a functional link between the heterochromatin-related histone methyltransferase SUV39H1 and the histone deacetylase SIRT1.
MAP kinase (relative molecular mass, 42,000), a low abundance serine--threonine protein kinase, is transiently activated in many cell types by a variety of mitogens, including insulin, epidermal growth factor, and phorbol esters. In vitro, MAP kinase will phosphorylate and reactivate S6 kinase II previously inactivated by phosphatase treatment. Because many of the stimuli that activate MAP kinase are also stimulators of cell proliferation, and regulation of the cell cycle seems to involve a network of protein kinases, MAP kinase could be important in the transmission of stimuli eventually leading to the progression from G0 to G1 in the cell cycle. Activated MAP kinase contains both phosphotyrosine and phosphothreonine. We report here that MAP kinase can be deactivated completely by treatment with either phosphatase 2A, a protein phosphatase specific for phosphoserine and phosphothreonine, or CD45, a phosphotyrosine-specific protein phosphatase. We demonstrate that MAP kinase is only active when both tyrosyl and threonyl residues are phosphorylated and suggest therefore that the enzyme functions in vivo to integrate signals from two distinct transduction pathways.
The signal-recognition particle (SRP) and its receptor (SR) function in the co-translational targeting of nascent protein-ribosome complexes to the membrane translocation apparatus. The SRP protein subunit (termed Ffh in bacteria) that recognizes the signal sequence of nascent polypeptides is a GTPase, as is the SR-alpha subunit (termed FtsY). Ffh and FtsY interact directly, each stimulating the GTP hydrolysis activity of the other. The sequence of Ffh suggests three domains: an amino-terminal N domain of unknown function, a central GTPase G domain, and a methionine-rich M domain that binds both SRP RNA and signal peptides. Sequence conservation suggests that structurally similar N and G domains are present in FtsY. Here we report the structure of the nucleotide-free form of the NG fragment of Ffh. Consistent with a role for apo Ffh in protein targeting, the side chains of the empty active-site pocket form a tight network of interactions which may stabilize the nucleotide-free protein. The structural relationship between the two domains suggests that the N domain senses or controls the nucleotide occupancy of the GTPase domain. A structural subdomain unique to these evolutionarily conserved GTPases constitutes them as a distinct subfamily in the GTPase superfamily.
The insertion sequence (IS) elements, IS1 and IS2, present in multiple copies in the Escherichia coli chromosome, are transposable genetic elements of known nucleotide sequence. These elements can modulate gene expression, but it is not known whether they normally function in genetic control. To determine whether IS elements could exert control through specific RNA transcripts, we hybridised lambda NNC1857 r14 (carrying IS1) and pBR322 (carrying a portion of IS2) to Northern blots of E. coli RNA. Regions of homology between the IS elements and ribosomal RNA were observed. Computer analysis of reported nucleotide sequences detected large segments of homology between the IS elements and both 23S and 16S rRNA. Additional homologous sequences in phi X174 and a leader region of a ribosomal protein gene cluster were also detected. The homologous sequence between IS2 and 16S rTNA is the same sequence in phi X174 DNA which codes for the ends of the E and D gene and the start of J. The partial IS sequences may represent silent evolutionary remnants or they could modulate the expression of genes carrying these sequences.
GAL4 is a transcriptional activator found in yeast. Two distinct functions of the protein are required for its activity: one directs sequence-specific DNA binding, and another interacts with some other component of the transcriptional machinery, for example, RNA polymerase II or a TATA-binding protein. Two short regions of GAL4 function as 'activating sequences' when attached to the DNA-binding portion of GAL4 and these regions can be replaced by a large number of peptides encoded by Escherichia coli genomic DNA fragments or by a synthetic peptide designed to form an amphiphilic alpha-helix. All of these activating sequences, like that found in another yeast activator, GCN4 bear an excess negative charge. GAL4 and its derivatives that are active in yeast stimulate transcription in mammalian cells when GAL4 binding sites are introduced upstream of a mammalian gene; similarly, GAL4 activates transcription in Drosophila cells. Here we show that GAL4 derivatives stimulate gene expression in plant cells.
Argonaute proteins and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are the known signature components of the RNA interference effector complex RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). However, the identity of "Slicer," the enzyme that cleaves the messenger RNA (mRNA) as directed by the siRNA, has not been resolved. Here, we report the crystal structure of the Argonaute protein from Pyrococcus furiosus at 2.25 angstrom resolution. The structure reveals a crescent-shaped base made up of the amino-terminal, middle, and PIWI domains. The Piwi Argonaute Zwille (PAZ) domain is held above the base by a "stalk"-like region. The PIWI domain (named for the protein piwi) is similar to ribonuclease H, with a conserved active site aspartate-aspartate-glutamate motif, strongly implicating Argonaute as "Slicer." The architecture of the molecule and the placement of the PAZ and PIWI domains define a groove for substrate binding and suggest a mechanism for siRNA-guided mRNA cleavage.
Calorie restriction extends life-span in a wide variety of organisms. Although it has been suggested that calorie restriction may work by reducing the levels of reactive oxygen species produced during respiration, the mechanism by which this regimen slows aging is uncertain. Here, we mimicked calorie restriction in yeast by physiological or genetic means and showed a substantial extension in life-span. This extension was not observed in strains mutant for SIR2 (which encodes the silencing protein Sir2p) or NPT1 (a gene in a pathway in the synthesis of NAD, the oxidized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide). These findings suggest that the increased longevity induced by calorie restriction requires the activation of Sir2p by NAD.
DNA computing was proposed as a means of solving a class of intractable computational problems in which the computing time can grow exponentially with problem size (the 'NP-complete' or non-deterministic polynomial time complete problems). The principle of the technique has been demonstrated experimentally for a simple example of the hamiltonian path problem (in this case, finding an airline flight path between several cities, such that each city is visited only once). DNA computational approaches to the solution of other problems have also been investigated. One technique involves the immobilization and manipulation of combinatorial mixtures of DNA on a support. A set of DNA molecules encoding all candidate solutions to the computational problem of interest is synthesized and attached to the surface. Successive cycles of hybridization operations and exonuclease digestion are used to identify and eliminate those members of the set that are not solutions. Upon completion of all the multistep cycles, the solution to the computational problem is identified using a polymerase chain reaction to amplify the remaining molecules, which are then hybridized to an addressed array. The advantages of this approach are its scalability and potential to be automated (the use of solid-phase formats simplifies the complex repetitive chemical processes, as has been demonstrated in DNA and protein synthesis). Here we report the use of this method to solve a NP-complete problem. We consider a small example of the satisfiability problem (SAT), in which the values of a set of boolean variables satisfying certain logical constraints are determined.
Pre-mRNA splicing is a predominantly co-transcriptional event which involves a large number of essential splicing factors. Within the mammalian cell nucleus, most splicing factors are concentrated in 20-40 distinct domains called speckles. The function of speckles and the organization of cellular transcription and pre-mRNA splicing in vivo are not well understood. We have investigated the dynamic properties of splicing factors in nuclei of living cells. Here we show that speckles are highly dynamic structures that respond specifically to activation of nearby genes. These dynamic events are dependent on RNA polymerase II transcription, and are sensitive to inhibitors of protein kinases and Ser/Thr phosphatases. When single genes are transcriptionally activated in living cells, splicing factors leave speckles in peripheral extensions and accumulate at the new sites of transcription. We conclude that one function of speckles is to supply splicing factors to active genes. Our observations demonstrate that the interphase nucleus is far more dynamic in nature than previously assumed.
During receptor-mediated endocytosis, coated pits invaginate to form coated vesicles, clathrin and associated proteins dissociate from the vesicle membrane, and these proteins form new coated pits at the cell surface. As a means of elucidating molecular mechanisms that govern the function of coated pits, the assembly phase of this cycle was reconstituted by incubating purified membranes that were treated to remove endogenous coated pits with cytoplasm extracted from cultured cells. The in vitro assembly of coated pits on these membranes satisfactorily mimics many features of coated pit formation in the intact cell. These studies indicate that: the membranes contain a limited number of coated pit assembly sites that bind clathrin with high affinity; the half-time for assembly is 5 minutes both at 4 degrees C and 37 degrees C; during assembly, proteins with molecular sizes of 180, 110, and 36 kilodaltons are recruited to the plasma membrane; and assembly is not dependent on adenosine triphosphate, but this nucleotide triggers a temperature-dependent loss of coated pits that are assembled in the absence of adenosine triphosphate.
A unique feature of chemical catalysis mediated by enzymes is that the catalytically reactive atoms are embedded within a folded protein. Although current understanding of enzyme function has been focused on the chemical reactions and static three-dimensional structures, the dynamic nature of proteins has been proposed to have a function in catalysis. The concept of conformational substates has been described; however, the challenge is to unravel the intimate linkage between protein flexibility and enzymatic function. Here we show that the intrinsic plasticity of the protein is a key characteristic of catalysis. The dynamics of the prolyl cis-trans isomerase cyclophilin A (CypA) in its substrate-free state and during catalysis were characterized with NMR relaxation experiments. The characteristic enzyme motions detected during catalysis are already present in the free enzyme with frequencies corresponding to the catalytic turnover rates. This correlation suggests that the protein motions necessary for catalysis are an intrinsic property of the enzyme and may even limit the overall turnover rate. Motion is localized not only to the active site but also to a wider dynamic network. Whereas coupled networks in proteins have been proposed previously, we experimentally measured the collective nature of motions with the use of mutant forms of CypA. We propose that the pre-existence of collective dynamics in enzymes before catalysis is a common feature of biocatalysts and that proteins have evolved under synergistic pressure between structure and dynamics.
Insulin regulates the synthesis of several proteins in a variety of tissues. Before techniques were available to quantify the amount of specific mRNAs, insulin was thought to regulate the synthesis of proteins by influencing the rate of translation of a fixed amount of mRNA. A very different interpretation is called for by experiments which show that insulin alters the amount of several specific mRNAs, but little is known about the mechanism. Insulin decreases the rate of synthesis of the critical gluconeogenic enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) in both liver and H4IIE heptoma cells. We recently showed that insulin acts directly on H4IIE cells to decrease mRNAPEPCK activity without any other hormone intermediaries. This effect is mediated by the insulin receptor and occurs at insulin concentrations which are well within the physiological range range (10(-12)--10(-9) M). Here we extend these studies to show that insulin specifically inhibits transcription of the PEPCK gene. This inhibition results in a rapid decrease in the concentration of nuclear PEPCK transcripts which is followed, in turn, by a proportionate decline in cytoplasmic mRNAPEPCK and synthesis of the protein.
In many retroviruses the 5' end of the pol gene codes for a protease vital for the processing of the gag polyprotein into the separate core proteins. In some viruses this protease is encoded at the 3' end of the gag gene, or between the gag and pol genes in a different reading frame to either. A sequence, Asp-Thr-Gly, which is conserved in retroviral proteases is also conserved in the active sites of aspartic proteases, an observation which has led to the suggestion that the retroviral proteases could belong to this family. We have examined the sequences of the aspartic and retroviral protease families, using pattern-recognition, structure prediction and molecular modelling techniques, and conclude that the viral protease sequences probably correspond to a single domain of an aspartic protease and may function in a dimeric form. We have constructed a model of the pol-protease of human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) to test this hypothesis.
RNA interference (RNAi) is a mechanism by which double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) suppress specific transcripts in a sequence-dependent manner. dsRNAs are processed by Dicer to 21-24-nucleotide small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and then incorporated into the argonaute (Ago) proteins. Gene regulation by endogenous siRNAs has been observed only in organisms possessing RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP). In mammals, where no RdRP activity has been found, biogenesis and function of endogenous siRNAs remain largely unknown. Here we show, using mouse oocytes, that endogenous siRNAs are derived from naturally occurring dsRNAs and have roles in the regulation of gene expression. By means of deep sequencing, we identify a large number of both approximately 25-27-nucleotide Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) and approximately 21-nucleotide siRNAs corresponding to messenger RNAs or retrotransposons in growing oocytes. piRNAs are bound to Mili and have a role in the regulation of retrotransposons. siRNAs are exclusively mapped to retrotransposons or other genomic regions that produce transcripts capable of forming dsRNA structures. Inverted repeat structures, bidirectional transcription and antisense transcripts from various loci are sources of the dsRNAs. Some precursor transcripts of siRNAs are derived from expressed pseudogenes, indicating that one role of pseudogenes is to adjust the level of the founding source mRNA through RNAi. Loss of Dicer or Ago2 results in decreased levels of siRNAs and increased levels of retrotransposon and protein-coding transcripts complementary to the siRNAs. Thus, the RNAi pathway regulates both protein-coding transcripts and retrotransposons in mouse oocytes. Our results reveal a role for endogenous siRNAs in mammalian oocytes and show that organisms lacking RdRP activity can produce functional endogenous siRNAs from naturally occurring dsRNAs.
Defined transcription factors can induce epigenetic reprogramming of adult mammalian cells into induced pluripotent stem cells. Although DNA factors are integrated during some reprogramming methods, it is unknown whether the genome remains unchanged at the single nucleotide level. Here we show that 22 human induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cell lines reprogrammed using five different methods each contained an average of five protein-coding point mutations in the regions sampled (an estimated six protein-coding point mutations per exome). The majority of these mutations were non-synonymous, nonsense or splice variants, and were enriched in genes mutated or having causative effects in cancers. At least half of these reprogramming-associated mutations pre-existed in fibroblast progenitors at low frequencies, whereas the rest occurred during or after reprogramming. Thus, hiPS cells acquire genetic modifications in addition to epigenetic modifications. Extensive genetic screening should become a standard procedure to ensure hiPS cell safety before clinical use.
The three-dimensional structure of prostaglandin H2 synthase-1, an integral membrane protein, has been determined at 3.5 A resolution by X-ray crystallography. This bifunctional enzyme comprises three independent folding units: an epidermal growth factor domain, a membrane-binding motif and an enzymatic domain. Two adjacent but spatially distinct active sites were found for its haem-dependent peroxidase and cyclooxygenase activities. The cyclooxygenase active site is created by a long, hydrophobic channel that is the site of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug binding. The conformation of the membrane-binding motif strongly suggests that the enzyme integrates into only one leaflet of the lipid bilayer and is thus a monotopic membrane protein.
The three-dimensional molecular structure of DNA, specifically the shape of the backbone and grooves of genomic DNA, can be dramatically affected by nucleotide changes, which can cause differences in protein-binding affinity and phenotype. We developed an algorithm to measure constraint on the basis of similarity of DNA topography among multiple species, using hydroxyl radical cleavage patterns to interrogate the solvent-accessible surface area of DNA. This algorithm found that 12% of bases in the human genome are evolutionarily constrained-double the number detected by nucleotide sequence-based algorithms. Topography-informed constrained regions correlated with functional noncoding elements, including enhancers, better than did regions identified solely on the basis of nucleotide sequence. These results support the idea that the molecular shape of DNA is under selection and can identify evolutionary history.
The largest group of transposable elements in Drosophila melanogaster, copia-like elements, share some important structural features with and are intimately related in evolution to vertebrate retroviruses. To further clarify the relationship between retroviruses and copia-like transposable elements, we set out to determine the complete nucleotide sequence of the genome of 17.6, which has long terminal repeats homologous in nucleotide sequence to those of avian leukaemia-sarcoma virus. We report here that 17.6 contains three long open reading frames comparable with gag, pol and env genes in retrovirus. At the level of amino acid sequence, the longest open reading frame of 17.6 includes a coding sequence similar to that for reverse transcriptase, suggesting a role for this enzyme in the life cycle of some Drosophila copia-like elements, analogous to the situation in retrovirus.
Helicases are vital enzymes that carry out strand separation of duplex nucleic acids during replication, repair and recombination. Bacteriophage T7 gene product 4 is a model hexameric helicase that has been observed to use dTTP, but not ATP, to unwind double-stranded (ds)DNA as it translocates from 5' to 3' along single-stranded (ss)DNA. Whether and how different subunits of the helicase coordinate their chemo-mechanical activities and DNA binding during translocation is still under debate. Here we address this question using a single-molecule approach to monitor helicase unwinding. We found that T7 helicase does in fact unwind dsDNA in the presence of ATP and that the unwinding rate is even faster than that with dTTP. However, unwinding traces showed a remarkable sawtooth pattern where processive unwinding was repeatedly interrupted by sudden slippage events, ultimately preventing unwinding over a substantial distance. This behaviour was not observed with dTTP alone and was greatly reduced when ATP solution was supplemented with a small amount of dTTP. These findings presented an opportunity to use nucleotide mixtures to investigate helicase subunit coordination. We found that T7 helicase binds and hydrolyses ATP and dTTP by competitive kinetics such that the unwinding rate is dictated simply by their respective maximum rates V(max), Michaelis constants K(M) and concentrations. In contrast, processivity does not follow a simple competitive behaviour and shows a cooperative dependence on nucleotide concentrations. This does not agree with an uncoordinated mechanism where each subunit functions independently, but supports a model where nearly all subunits coordinate their chemo-mechanical activities and DNA binding. Our data indicate that only one subunit at a time can accept a nucleotide while other subunits are nucleotide-ligated and thus they interact with the DNA to ensure processivity. Such subunit coordination may be general to many ring-shaped helicases and reveals a potential mechanism for regulation of DNA unwinding during replication.
Previous studies have suggested that transcription elongation results in changes in chromatin structure. Here we present studies of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Spt6, a conserved protein implicated in both transcription elongation and chromatin structure. Our results show that, surprisingly, an spt6 mutant permits aberrant transcription initiation from within coding regions. Furthermore, transcribed chromatin in the spt6 mutant is hypersensitive to micrococcal nuclease, and this hypersensitivity is suppressed by mutational inactivation of RNA polymerase II. These results suggest that Spt6 plays a critical role in maintaining normal chromatin structure during transcription elongation, thereby repressing transcription initiation from cryptic promoters. Other elongation and chromatin factors, including Spt16 and histone H3, appear to contribute to this control.
As reticulocytes mature into erythrocytes, organelles and many enzymes are lost. Protein degradation during reticulocyte maturation was measured by monitoring the release of tyrosine from cell proteins. Proteolysis in rabbit red blood cells was directly proportional to the number of reticulocytes and was low in erythrocytes. This process was inhibited by blockers of cellular adenosine triphosphate production and by agents, such as o-phenanthroline, N-ethylmaleimide, and hemin, which inhibit the soluble adenosine triphosphate-dependent proteolytic system. The breakdown of endogenous proteins in reticulocyte extracts was also inhibited by these agents and required adenosine triphosphate. Inhibitors of lysosomal function, however, did not affect proteolysis. Thus, the proteolytic system that degrades abnormal proteins also catalyzes the elimination of proteins during red cell development.
Electrophoresis in polyacrylamide gel of homogenates of various organs from the mouse yields five major lactic dehydrogenase bands. If the gels are treated with beta-mercaptoethanol, subsequent electrophoresis produces 15 bands which show lactic dehydrogenase activity. This could be explained if one molecule of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (coenzyme) is attached to each of the monomeric subunits of lactic dehydrogenase and if mercaptoethanol can remove the coenzyme only from the muscle type. This is consistent with the hypothesis that intact lactic dehydrogenase is a tetramer.
The phosphorylation of proteins at tyrosine residues is critical in cellular signal transduction, neoplastic transformation and control of the mitotic cycle. These mechanisms are regulated by the activities of both protein-tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases). As in the PTKs, there are two classes of PTPases: membrane associated, receptor-like enzymes and soluble proteins. Here we report the isolation of a complementary DNA clone encoding a new form of soluble PTPase, PTP1C. The enzyme possesses a large noncatalytic region at the N terminus which unexpectedly contains two adjacent copies of the Src homology region 2 (the SH2 domain) found in various nonreceptor PTKs and other cytoplasmic signalling proteins. As with other SH2 sequences, the SH2 domains of PTP1C formed high-affinity complexes with the activated epidermal growth factor receptor and other phosphotyrosine-containing proteins. These results suggest that the SH2 regions in PTP1C may interact with other cellular components to modulate its own phosphatase activity against interacting substrates. PTPase activity may thus directly link growth factor receptors and other signalling proteins through protein-tyrosine phosphorylation.
A series of genomic and complementary DNA clones encoding new putative members of G protein-coupled receptors were isolated using homology cloning and low-stringency polymerase chain reaction. Among the unidentified receptors ('orphan receptors'), a human genomic clone (HGMP07) was characterized by the presence of its transcripts in the testis and by its belonging to a large subfamily of genes sharing extensive sequence similarities. Sequence comparison demonstrated that this gene subfamily is the human counterpart of the putative rat olfactory receptors cloned recently. Another 48 members of the family were cloned. Northern blotting further demonstrated the presence of olfactory receptor transcripts in germ cells. Our finding suggests that a common receptor gene family encodes olfactory receptors and sperm cell receptors that could be involved in chemotaxis during fertilization.
The presence of all five enzymes of the ornithine-urea cycle has been demonstrated in the liver of the African lungfish Protopterus aethiopicus. Levels of activity of the rate-limiting enzymes, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase and argininosuccinate synthetase, are similar to those in the premetamorphic tadpole of Rana catesbeiana and considerably lower than the levels reported for other ureotelic animals. They are thus consistent with the predominantly ammonotelic metabolism of the lungfish in an aquatic environment.
Electrostatic interactions are of considerable importance in protein structure and function, and in a variety of cellular and biochemical processes. Here we report three similar findings from highly refined atomic structures of periplasmic binding proteins. Hydrogen bonds, acting primarily through backbone peptide units, are mainly responsible for the involvement of the positively charged arginine 151 residue in the ligand site of the arabinose-binding protein, for the association between teh sulphate-binding protein and the completely buried sulphate dianion, and for the formation of the complex of the leucine/isoleucine/valine-binding protein with the leucine zwitterion. We propose a general mechanism in which the isolated charges on the various buried, desolvated ionic groups are stabilized by the polarized peptide units. This mechanism also has broad application to processes requiring binding of uncompensated ions and charged ligands and stabilization of enzyme reaction charged intermediates, as well as activation of catalytic residues.
Members of a family of murine octamer-binding proteins interact specifically with the octamer motif, a transcription regulatory element found in the promoter and enhancer regions of many genes. Oct-4 is a maternally expressed protein that is also present in the pre-implantation mouse embryo. Although many regulatory proteins are expressed in post-implantation embryos, transcription factors regulating pre-implantation processes have remained elusive. The Oct-4 gene is therefore a prime candidate for an early developmental control gene. Here we report the complementary DNA cloning of the mouse Oct-4 gene, and the characterization of the encoded protein(s) by sequential in vitro transcription, translation, DNA-binding and protease-clipping analysis. Deletion analysis shows that the DNA-binding activity is mediated by a POU domain encoded in an open reading frame corresponding to a 324-amino-acid protein. Sequence comparison with known POU domains reveals that Oct-4 is a novel member of the POU-family.
The apicomplexan Cryptosporidium parvum is an intestinal parasite that affects healthy humans and animals, and causes an unrelenting infection in immunocompromised individuals such as AIDS patients. We report the complete genome sequence of C. parvum, type II isolate. Genome analysis identifies extremely streamlined metabolic pathways and a reliance on the host for nutrients. In contrast to Plasmodium and Toxoplasma, the parasite lacks an apicoplast and its genome, and possesses a degenerate mitochondrion that has lost its genome. Several novel classes of cell-surface and secreted proteins with a potential role in host interactions and pathogenesis were also detected. Elucidation of the core metabolism, including enzymes with high similarities to bacterial and plant counterparts, opens new avenues for drug development.
Colonies of the Caribbean coral Montastraea cavernosa exhibit a solar-stimulated orange-red fluorescence that is spectrally similar to a variety of fluorescent proteins expressed by corals. The source of this fluorescence is phycoerythrin in unicellular, nonheterocystis, symbiotic cyanobacteria within the host cells of the coral. The cyanobacteria coexist with the symbiotic dinoflagellates (zooxanthellae) of the coral and express the nitrogen-fixing enzyme nitrogenase. The presence of this prokaryotic symbiont in a nitrogen-limited zooxanthellate coral suggests that nitrogen fixation may be an important source of this limiting element for the symbiotic association.
The activity of-phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase in mice of the C57Bl/Ka strain was determined after a 4 degrees C stress. The enzyme activity increased 1.2-fold at the end of 3 hours and by 1.4-fold by the end of 6 hours of the stress. The results are in contrast to those from other species with intact animals in which the enzyme changes only after several days of chronic stress. Cycloheximide prevents the rise in enzyme activity, suggesting the increase may be due to protein synthesis. The increase may provide a model system for studying regulation of catecholamine biosynthetic enzymes.
The nucleotide sequence of the oncogene of the Rasheed strain of rat sarcoma virus was determined. The oncogene (Ra-v-ras) encodes a 29,000-dalton (p29) transforming protein. This protein is distinct from the immunologically related 21,000-dalton protein (p21) of the Harvey murine sarcoma virus in its amino terminus and in having additional mutations in its carboxyl terminus. Although the functional significance of these changes is unknown, they appear to occur only in rat sarcoma virus.
The fundamental event in prion diseases seems to be a conformational change in cellular prion protein (PrPC) whereby it is converted into the pathologic isoform PrPSc. In fatal familial insomnia (FFI), the protease-resistant fragment of PrPSc after deglycosylation has a size of 19 kilodaltons, whereas that from other inherited and sporadic prion diseases is 21 kilodaltons. Extracts from the brains of FFI patients transmitted disease to transgenic mice expressing a chimeric human-mouse PrP gene about 200 days after inoculation and induced formation of the 19-kilodalton PrPSc fragment, whereas extracts from the brains of familial and sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease patients produced the 21-kilodalton PrPSc fragment in these mice. The results presented indicate that the conformation of PrPSc functions as a template in directing the formation of nascent PrPSc and suggest a mechanism to explain strains of prions where diversity is encrypted in the conformation of PrPSc.
In transcription initiation, the DNA strands must be separated to expose the template to RNA polymerase. As the closed initiation complex is converted to an open one, specific protein-DNA interactions involving bases of the nontemplate strand form and stabilize the promoter complex in the region of unwinding. Specific interaction between RNA polymerase and the promoter in Escherichia coli was detected and quantified as the binding affinity of nontemplate oligonucleotide sequences. The RNA polymerase subunit sigma factor 70 contacted the bases of the nontemplate DNA strand through its conserved region 2; a mutation that affected promoter function altered the binding affinity of the oligonucleotide to the enzyme.
The trans-splicing reaction occurring in trypanosomes and related species as well as in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans involves the transfer of a 5' exon from a spliced leader transcript (SL RNA) to a precursor messenger RNA transcript with a 3' splice acceptor site. This seems to take place in the same nuclear compartment as normal cis splicing and proceeds through Y-branched intermediates analogous to the lariats formed in cis splicing. The cellular machinery catalysing cis and trans splicing might therefore be expected to share some components, particularly in the nematode where some mRNAs are produced by both cis and trans splicing. We generated possible secondary structures for the SL RNAs of several species and found they were remarkably similar although neither nucleotide sequence nor length is conserved. Each contained three stem-loops; strikingly the 5' splice site is adjacent to the turn of the most 5' loop and an Sm-binding consensus sequence is found between the second and third stem-loops. Sm is an antigen associated with small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs). When incubated in HeLa cell nuclear extracts, SL RNAs become immunoprecipitable by anti-Sm, but not by other autoantibodies directed against proteins of mammalian snRNPs. We propose that SL RNAs have a dual function in the trans splicing process: they consist of a 5' exon covalently linked to an snRNA-like sequence and seem likely to exist as Sm snRNP particles (SL snRNPs) within the cell. Just as the RNA in the U1 snRNP base-pairs with the 5' splice site, rendering it susceptible to attack in the cis-splicing reaction, so might the SL snRNP autonomously activate its own 5' splice site and thereby eliminate the need for a U1-like snRNP in the trans-splicing machinery.
The many different cellular functions so far shown to involve actin and to be regulated by specific actin binding proteins are located primarily, if not exclusively, in the cytoplasm. Actin is also found in the nucleus of various cells, but because of the problems of cell fractionation the significance of nuclear actin has remained unclear. The large amphibian oocyte nucleus (germinal vesicle), however, can be isolated manually with little cytoplasmic contamination. This nucleus contains high concentrations (4-6 mg ml-1) of mostly soluble, although polymerization-competent beta- and gamma-actin, which exists in a nucleocytoplasmic exchange pool. The findings that drastic effects on transcription and chromosome morphology are caused by the injection of actin antibodies or actin binding proteins into germinal vesicles, and that a factor required for accurate transcription by RNA polymerase II is actin, suggest that nuclear actin is involved in specific nuclear functions. We have recently identified two main components in Xenopus laevis oocytes with actin binding activities; one of these activities is Ca2+-dependent, is located predominantly, if not exclusively, in the cytoplasm and is attributable to gelsolin. Here we report that the second component, having a Ca2+-independent activity, is a heterodimeric acting binding protein; this protein is markedly enriched in the nuclei of oocytes and somatic cells of amphibia, but also occurs in nuclei of other vertebrate cells.
The enzymatic machinery that carries out RNA synthesis provides the cell with the means to adjust the patterns of transcription in response to environmental and developmental signals. In eukaryotes, this regulation is mediated in part by promoter-specific transcription factors, which are DNA-binding proteins with the ability to discriminate between distinctive DNA sequence elements found in the promoter regions of different genes. The presence of these factors bound to DNA enables other components of the transcriptional machinery, including the RNA polymerase, to initiate transcription with selectivity and accuracy.
Platelet lysates obtained from blood of humans, dogs, and rats catalyzed the transamination of 4-aminobutyrate with 2-oxoglutarate as cosubstrate. Human platelet 4-aminobutyrate:2-oxoglutarate aminotransferase (36.5 +/- 3.2 picomoles per minute per milligram of platelet protein) resembled the brain enzyme in kinetic properties and in response to cofactors and inhibitors.
Eubacterial leucyl/phenylalanyl-tRNA protein transferase (LF-transferase) catalyses peptide-bond formation by using Leu-tRNA(Leu) (or Phe-tRNA(Phe)) and an amino-terminal Arg (or Lys) of a protein, as donor and acceptor substrates, respectively. However, the catalytic mechanism of peptide-bond formation by LF-transferase remained obscure. Here we determine the structures of complexes of LF-transferase and phenylalanyl adenosine, with and without a short peptide bearing an N-terminal Arg. Combining the two separate structures into one structure as well as mutation studies reveal the mechanism for peptide-bond formation by LF-transferase. The electron relay from Asp 186 to Gln 188 helps Gln 188 to attract a proton from the alpha-amino group of the N-terminal Arg of the acceptor peptide. This generates the attacking nucleophile for the carbonyl carbon of the aminoacyl bond of the aminoacyl-tRNA, thus facilitating peptide-bond formation. The protein-based mechanism for peptide-bond formation by LF-transferase is similar to the reverse reaction of the acylation step observed in the peptide hydrolysis reaction by serine proteases.
The aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor (AHR) mediates many carcinogenic and teratogenic effects of environmentally toxic chemicals such as dioxin. An AHR-deficient (Ahr-/-) mouse line was constructed by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. Almost half of the mice died shortly after birth, whereas survivors reached maturity and were fertile. The Ahr-/- mice showed decreased accumulation of lymphocytes in the spleen and lymph nodes, but not in the thymus. The livers of Ahr-/- mice were reduced in size by 50 percent and showed bile duct fibrosis Ahr-/- mice were also nonresponsive with regard to dioxin-mediated induction of genes encoding enzymes that catalyze the metabolism of foreign compounds. Thus, the AHR plays an important role in the development of the liver and the immune system.
Calcium channels mediate the generation of action potentials, pacemaking, excitation-contraction coupling, and secretion and signal integration in muscle, secretory, and neuronal cells. The physiological regulation of the L-type calcium channel is thought to be mediated primarily by guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins). A low molecular weight endogenous peptide has been isolated and purified from rat brain. This peptide regulates up and down the cardiac and neuronal calcium channels, respectively. In cardiac myocytes, the peptide-induced enhancement of the L-type calcium current had a slow onset (half-time approximately 75 seconds), occurred via a G protein-independent mechanism, and could not be inhibited by alpha 1-adrenergic, beta-adrenergic, or angiotensin II blockers. In neuronal cells, on the other hand, the negative effect had a rapid onset (half-time less than 500 milliseconds) and was observed on both T-type and L-type calcium channels.
In eukaryotes, transcription of genes by RNA polymerase II yields messenger RNA intermediates from which protein products are synthesized. Transcriptional enhancers are discrete DNA elements that contain specific sequence motifs with which DNA-binding proteins interact and transmit molecular signals to genes. Here, current models regarding the role of enhancers in the regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II are presented.
Mandelate racemase and muconate lactonizing enzyme are structurally homologous but catalyze different reactions, each initiated by proton abstraction from carbon. The structural similarity to mandelate racemase of a previously unidentified gene product was used to deduce its function as a galactonate dehydratase. In this enzyme superfamily that has evolved to catalyze proton abstraction from carbon, three variations of homologous active site architectures are now represented: lysine and histidine bases in the active site of mandelate racemase, only a lysine base in the active site of muconate lactonizing enzyme, and only a histidine base in the active site of galactonate dehydratase. This discovery supports the hypothesis that new enzymatic activities evolve by recruitment of a protein catalyzing the same type of chemical reaction.
Fluorine substituents have become a widespread and important drug component, their introduction facilitated by the development of safe and selective fluorinating agents. Organofluorine affects nearly all physical and adsorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion properties of a lead compound. Its inductive effects are relatively well understood, enhancing bioavailability, for example, by reducing the basicity of neighboring amines. In contrast, exploration of the specific influence of carbon-fluorine single bonds on docking interactions, whether through direct contact with the protein or through stereoelectronic effects on molecular conformation of the drug, has only recently begun. Here, we review experimental progress in this vein and add complementary analysis based on comprehensive searches in the Cambridge Structural Database and the Protein Data Bank.
Polyglutamine (polyQ) diseases are a class of dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorders caused by the expansion of a CAG repeat encoding glutamine within the coding region of the respective genes. The molecular and cellular pathways underlying polyQ-induced neurodegeneration are the focus of much research, and it is widely considered that toxic activities of the protein, resulting from the abnormally long polyQ tract, cause pathogenesis. Here we provide evidence for a pathogenic role of the CAG repeat RNA in polyQ toxicity using Drosophila. In a Drosophila screen for modifiers of polyQ degeneration induced by the spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) protein ataxin-3, we isolated an upregulation allele of muscleblind (mbl), a gene implicated in the RNA toxicity of CUG expansion diseases. Further analysis indicated that there may be a toxic role of the RNA in polyQ-induced degeneration. We tested the role of the RNA by altering the CAG repeat sequence to an interrupted CAACAG repeat within the polyQ-encoding region; this dramatically mitigated toxicity. In addition, expression of an untranslated CAG repeat of pathogenic length conferred neuronal degeneration. These studies reveal a role for the RNA in polyQ toxicity, highlighting common components in RNA-based and polyQ-protein-based trinucleotide repeat expansion diseases.
Proper coordination of cholesterol biosynthesis and trafficking is essential to human health. The sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs) are key transcription regulators of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis and uptake. We show here that microRNAs (miR-33a/b) embedded within introns of the SREBP genes target the adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1), an important regulator of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) synthesis and reverse cholesterol transport, for posttranscriptional repression. Antisense inhibition of miR-33 in mouse and human cell lines causes up-regulation of ABCA1 expression and increased cholesterol efflux, and injection of mice on a western-type diet with locked nucleic acid-antisense oligonucleotides results in elevated plasma HDL. Our findings indicate that miR-33 acts in concert with the SREBP host genes to control cholesterol homeostasis and suggest that miR-33 may represent a therapeutic target for ameliorating cardiometabolic diseases.
Guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved in exocytosis, endocytosis, and recycling of vesicles in yeast and mammalian secretory cells. However, little is known about their contribution to fast synaptic transmission. We loaded guanine nucleotide analogs directly into a giant nerve terminal in rat brainstem slices. Inhibition of G-protein activity had no effect on basal synaptic transmission, but augmented synaptic depression and significantly slowed recovery from depression. A nonhydrolyzable GTP analog blocked recovery of transmission from activity-dependent depression. Neither effect was accompanied by a change in presynaptic calcium currents. Thus, G proteins contribute to fast synaptic transmission by refilling synaptic vesicles depleted after massive exocytosis.
Class switch recombination (CSR) is a region-specific DNA recombination reaction that replaces one immunoglobulin heavy-chain constant region (Ch) gene with another. This enables a single variable (V) region gene to be used in conjunction with different downstream Ch genes, each having a unique biological activity. The molecular mechanisms that mediate CSR have not been defined, but activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), a putative RNA-editing enzyme, is required for this reaction. Here we report that the Nijmegen breakage syndrome protein (Nbs1) and phosphorylated H2A histone family member X (gamma-H2AX, also known as gamma-H2afx), which facilitate DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair, form nuclear foci at the Ch region in the G1 phase of the cell cycle in cells undergoing CSR, and that switching is impaired in H2AX-/- mice. Localization of Nbs1 and gamma-H2AX to the Igh locus during CSR is dependent on AID. In addition, AID is required for induction of switch region (S mu)-specific DNA lesions that precede CSR. These results place AID function upstream of the DNA modifications that initiate CSR.
A transfer RNA (tRNA) binding protein present in HeLa cell nuclear extracts was purified and identified as the glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). Studies with mutant tRNAs indicated that GAPDH recognizes both sequence and structural features in the RNA. GAPDH discriminated between wild-type tRNA and two tRNA mutants that are defective in nuclear export, which suggests that the protein may participate in RNA export. The cofactor nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide disrupted complex formation between tRNA and GAPDH and thus may share a common binding site with the RNA. Indirect immunofluorescence experiments showed that GAPDH is present in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm.
In taste chemoreception, cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) appears to be one of the intracellular messengers coupling reception of stimulus to the generation of the response. The recent finding that sweet agents cause a GTP-dependent generation of cAMP poses the question of how this cytosolic messenger acts at the membrane of taste receptor cells. We have shown that cAMP causes a substantial depolarization in these cells. Here we show with whole-cell recordings and inside-out membrane patches that the depolarization caused by cAMP is accounted for by the action of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which inactivates potassium channels predominantly of 44 pS conductance. Thus, intracellular signalling of the gustatory cells differs from that of olfactory and photoreceptor cells, where cyclic nucleotides control unspecific channels by binding to them rather than by inducing their phosphorylation.
Adiponectin is an anti-diabetic adipokine. Its receptors possess a seven-transmembrane topology with the amino terminus located intracellularly, which is the opposite of G-protein-coupled receptors. Here we provide evidence that adiponectin induces extracellular Ca(2+) influx by adiponectin receptor 1 (AdipoR1), which was necessary for subsequent activation of Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase beta (CaMKKbeta), AMPK and SIRT1, increased expression and decreased acetylation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), and increased mitochondria in myocytes. Moreover, muscle-specific disruption of AdipoR1 suppressed the adiponectin-mediated increase in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration, and decreased the activation of CaMKK, AMPK and SIRT1 by adiponectin. Suppression of AdipoR1 also resulted in decreased PGC-1alpha expression and deacetylation, decreased mitochondrial content and enzymes, decreased oxidative type I myofibres, and decreased oxidative stress-detoxifying enzymes in skeletal muscle, which were associated with insulin resistance and decreased exercise endurance. Decreased levels of adiponectin and AdipoR1 in obesity may have causal roles in mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance seen in diabetes.
A wide variety of membrane transformations important in intracellular transport are inhibited by the fungal metabolite brefeldin A (refs 1-4), implying that the target for this drug is central to the formation and maintenance of subcellular compartments. Brefeldin A added to cells causes the rapid and reversible dissociation of a Golgi-associated peripheral membrane protein (M(r) 110,000) which was found to be identical to one of the subunits of the coat of Golgi-derived (non-clathrin) coated vesicles, beta-COP, implying that brefeldin A prevents transport by blocking the assembly of coats and thus the budding of enclosed vesicles. In addition to the coatomer (a cytosol-derived complex of seven polypeptide chains, one of which is beta-COP), the non-clathrin (COP) coat of Golgi-derived vesicles contains stoichiometric amounts of a small (M(r) approximately 20,000) GTP-binding protein, the ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF). Binding of ARF to Golgi membranes is necessary before coatomer/beta-COP can bind these membranes (ref. 12; and D. J. Palmer et al., manuscript submitted), so the primary effect of brefeldin A seems to be on the reaction responsible for ARF binding. Indeed, like beta-COP, ARF is dissociated from the Golgi complex by treatment with brefeldin A and brefeldin A prevents ARF from associating in vitro, but the mechanism of this action by brefeldin A has been unclear. Here we report the discovery of an enzyme in a Golgi-enriched fraction that catalyses guanine nucleotide (GDP-GTP) exchange on ARF-1 protein, and which is inhibited by brefeldin A. We suggest that activation of ARF proteins for membrane localization by compartmentalized exchange enzymes is in general the first committed step in membrane transformation pathways.
Granule membrane protein-140 (GMP-140), a membrane glycoprotein of platelet and endothelial cell secretory granules, is rapidly redistributed to the plasma membrane during cellular activation and degranulation. Also known as PADGEM protein, GMP-140 is structurally related to two molecules involved in leukocyte adhesion to vascular endothelium: ELAM-1, a cytokine-inducible endothelial cell receptor for neutrophils, and the MEL-14 lymphocyte homing receptor. These three proteins define a new gene family, termed selectins, each of which contains an N-terminal lectin domain, followed by an epidermal growth factor-like module, a variable number of repeating units related to those in complement-binding proteins, a transmembrane domain, and a short cytoplasmic tail. Here we demonstrate that GMP-140 can mediate leukocyte adhesion, thus establishing a functional similarity with the other selectins. Human neutrophils and promyelocytic HL-60 cells bind specifically to COS cells transfected with GMP-140 complementary DNA and to microtitre wells coated with purified GMP-140. Cell binding does not require active neutrophil metabolism but is dependent on extracellular Ca2+. Within minutes after stimulation with phorbol esters or histamine, human endothelial cells become adhesive for neutrophils; this interaction is inhibited by antibodies to GMP-140. Thus, GMP-140 expressed by activated endothelium might promote rapid neutrophil targeting to sites of acute inflammation.
A phosphorylation-initiated mechanism of local protein refolding activates yeast glycogen phosphorylase (GP). Refolding of the phosphorylated amino-terminus was shown to create a hydrophobic cluster that wedges into the subunit interface of the enzyme to trigger activation. The phosphorylated threonine is buried in the allosteric site. The mechanism implicates glucose 6-phosphate, the allosteric inhibitor, in facilitating dephosphorylation by dislodging the buried covalent phosphate through binding competition. Thus, protein phosphorylation-dephosphorylation may also be controlled through regulation of the accessibility of the phosphorylation site to kinases and phosphatases. In mammalian glycogen phosphorylase, phosphorylation occurs at a distinct locus. The corresponding allosteric site binds a ligand activator, adenosine monophosphate, which triggers activation by a mechanism analogous to that of phosphorylation in the yeast enzyme.
The single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) binding protein gp32 from bacteriophage T4 is essential for T4 DNA replication, recombination and repair. In vivo gp32 binds ssDNA as the replication fork advances and stimulates replisome processivity and accuracy by a factor of several hundred. Gp32 binding affects nearly every major aspect of DNA metabolism. Among its important functions are: (1) configuring ssDNA templates for efficient use by the replisome including DNA polymerase; (2) melting out adventitious secondary structures; (3) protecting exposed ssDNA from nucleases; and (4) facilitating homologous recombination by binding ssDNA during strand displacement. We have determined the crystal structure of the gp32 DNA binding domain complexed to ssDNA at 2.2 A resolution. The ssDNA binding cleft comprises regions from three structural subdomains and includes a positively charged surface that runs parallel to a series of hydrophobic pockets formed by clusters of aromatic side chains. Although only weak electron density is seen for the ssDNA, it indicates that the phosphate backbone contacts an electropositive cleft of the protein, placing the bases in contact with the hydrophobic pockets. The DNA mobility implied by the weak electron density may reflect the role of gp32 as a sequence-independent ssDNA chaperone allowing the largely unstructured ssDNA to slide freely through the cleft.
Photosynthetic organisms adopt two different strategies for the reduction of the C17 = C18 double bond of protochlorophyllide (Pchlide) to form chlorophyllide a, the direct precursor of chlorophyll a (refs 1-4). The first involves the activity of the light-dependent Pchlide oxidoreductase, and the second involves the light-independent (dark-operative) Pchlide oxidoreductase (DPOR). DPOR is a nitrogenase-like enzyme consisting of two components, L-protein (a BchL dimer) and NB-protein (a BchN-BchB heterotetramer), which are structurally related to nitrogenase Fe protein and MoFe protein, respectively. Here we report the crystal structure of the NB-protein of DPOR from Rhodobacter capsulatus at a resolution of 2.3A. As expected, the overall structure is similar to that of nitrogenase MoFe protein: each catalytic BchN-BchB unit contains one Pchlide and one iron-sulphur cluster (NB-cluster) coordinated uniquely by one aspartate and three cysteines. Unique aspartate ligation is not necessarily needed for the cluster assembly but is essential for the catalytic activity. Specific Pchlide-binding accompanies the partial unwinding of an alpha-helix that belongs to the next catalytic BchN-BchB unit. We propose a unique trans-specific reduction mechanism in which the distorted C17-propionate of Pchlide and an aspartate from BchB serve as proton donors for C18 and C17 of Pchlide, respectively. Intriguingly, the spatial arrangement of the NB-cluster and Pchlide is almost identical to that of the P-cluster and FeMo-cofactor in nitrogenase MoFe-protein, illustrating that a common architecture exists to reduce chemically stable multibonds of porphyrin and dinitrogen.
The recognition that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), rather than the mitochondria, is the main organelle regulating the cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration in non-muscle cells supports the notion that an alternative physiological role of mitochondrial Ca transport is the modulation of Ca-sensitive mitochondrial enzymes through small (micromolar) fluctuations in the concentration of mitochondrial matrix Ca2+. The latter mechanism could operate only if the mitochondrial Ca concentration were low, as it is in muscle and retinal rods, below the levels saturating the regulated enzymes. In contrast, if the ER serves as an intracellular Ca store, its Ca content would be expected to be high. In view of the major metabolic function of the liver, the question of whether hepatic mitochondrial matrix Ca2+ regulates metabolism is particularly important, but the range of Ca concentrations reported for isolated liver mitochondria is too wide to provide a conclusive answer. Therefore, we have used electron probe X-ray microanalysis (EPMA) to measure the subcellular distribution of Ca in liver snap-frozen in vivo, and report here that the endoplasmic reticulum is a major intracellular store of Ca, while the concentration of Ca in mitochondria is low and compatible with the regulation of mitochondrial enzymes.
The completion of the genome sequence for Plasmodium falciparum, the species responsible for most malaria human deaths, has the potential to reveal hundreds of new drug targets and proteins involved in pathogenesis. However, only approximately 35% of the genes code for proteins with an identifiable function. The absence of routine genetic tools for studying Plasmodium parasites suggests that this number is unlikely to change quickly if conventional serial methods are used to characterize encoded proteins. Here, we use a high-density oligonucleotide array to generate expression profiles of human and mosquito stages of the malaria parasite's life cycle. Genes with highly correlated levels and temporal patterns of expression were often involved in similar functions or cellular processes.
An RNA-containing endonuclease that catalyzes the excision and maturation of the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) from the rRNA primary transcript (pre-rRNA) in the hyperthermophilic archaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius has been characterized. The ribonucleoprotein was inactivated by micrococcal nuclease treatment and inactivation was reversed by reconstitution with bulk RNA. A 159-nucleotide RNA with sequence and structural similarity to U3 small nucleolar RNAs of eukaryotes copurified with the endonuclease activity. Oligonucleotide-targeted ribonuclease H inactivation of the U3-like RNA component also abolished processing activity. A motif within the U3 homolog is complementary to the region around the three cleavage sites in the pre-RNA substrate. Thus, U3-mediated processing of pre-rRNA is not specific to eukaryotes; its origin predates the divergence of archaea and eukaryotes.
The citric acid cycle is central to the regulation of energy homeostasis and cell metabolism. Mutations in enzymes that catalyse steps in the citric acid cycle result in human diseases with various clinical presentations. The intermediates of the citric acid cycle are present at micromolar concentration in blood and are regulated by respiration, metabolism and renal reabsorption/extrusion. Here we show that GPR91 (ref. 3), a previously orphan G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), functions as a receptor for the citric acid cycle intermediate succinate. We also report that GPR99 (ref. 4), a close relative of GPR91, responds to alpha-ketoglutarate, another intermediate in the citric acid cycle. Thus by acting as ligands for GPCRs, succinate and alpha-ketoglutarate are found to have unexpected signalling functions beyond their traditional roles. Furthermore, we show that succinate increases blood pressure in animals. The succinate-induced hypertensive effect involves the renin-angiotensin system and is abolished in GPR91-deficient mice. Our results indicate a possible role for GPR91 in renovascular hypertension, a disease closely linked to atherosclerosis, diabetes and renal failure.
The inhibitor-of-apoptosis (IAP) family of genes has an evolutionarily conserved role in regulating programmed cell death in animals ranging from insects to humans. Ectopic expression of human IAP proteins can suppress cell death induced by a variety of stimuli, but the mechanism of this inhibition was previously unknown. Here we show that human X-chromosome-linked IAP directly inhibits at least two members of the caspase family of cell-death proteases, caspase-3 and caspase-7. As the caspases are highly conserved throughout the animal kingdom and are the principal effectors of apoptosis, our findings suggest how IAPs might inhibit cell death, providing evidence for a mechanism of action for these mammalian cell-death suppressors.
The crystal structure of T7 RNA polymerase reveals a molecule organized around a cleft that can accommodate a double-stranded DNA template. A portion (approximately 45%) of the molecule displays extensive structural homology to the polymerase domain of Klenow fragment and more limited homology to the human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. A comparison of the structures and sequences of these polymerases identifies structural elements that may be responsible for discriminating between ribonucleotide and deoxyribonucleotide substrates, and RNA and DNA templates. The relative locations of the catalytic site and a specific promoter recognition residue allow the orientation of the polymerase on the template to be defined.
Most archaeal groups and deeply branching bacterial lineages harbour thermophilic organisms with a chemolithoautotrophic metabolism. They live at high temperatures in volcanic habitats at the expense of inorganic substances, often under anoxic conditions. These autotrophic organisms use diverse carbon dioxide fixation mechanisms generating acetyl-coenzyme A, from which gluconeogenesis must start. Here we show that virtually all archaeal groups as well as the deeply branching bacterial lineages contain a bifunctional fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) aldolase/phosphatase with both FBP aldolase and FBP phosphatase activity. This enzyme is missing in most other Bacteria and in Eukaryota, and is heat-stabile even in mesophilic marine Crenarchaeota. Its bifunctionality ensures that heat-labile triosephosphates are quickly removed and trapped in stabile fructose 6-phosphate, rendering gluconeogenesis unidirectional. We propose that this highly conserved, heat-stabile and bifunctional FBP aldolase/phosphatase represents the pace-making ancestral gluconeogenic enzyme, and that in evolution gluconeogenesis preceded glycolysis.
The mouse mutant mnd2 (motor neuron degeneration 2) exhibits muscle wasting, neurodegeneration, involution of the spleen and thymus, and death by 40 days of age. Degeneration of striatal neurons, with astrogliosis and microglia activation, begins at around 3 weeks of age, and other neurons are affected at later stages. Here we have identified the mnd2 mutation as the missense mutation Ser276Cys in the protease domain of the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial serine protease Omi (also known as HtrA2 or Prss25). Protease activity of Omi is greatly reduced in tissues of mnd2 mice but is restored in mice rescued by a bacterial artificial chromosome transgene containing the wild-type Omi gene. Deletion of the PDZ domain partially restores protease activity to the inactive recombinant Omi protein carrying the Ser276Cys mutation, suggesting that the mutation impairs substrate access or binding to the active site pocket. Loss of Omi protease activity increases the susceptibility of mitochondria to induction of the permeability transition, and increases the sensitivity of mouse embryonic fibroblasts to stress-induced cell death. The neurodegeneration and juvenile lethality in mnd2 mice result from this defect in mitochondrial Omi protease.
The essential yeast proteins Yra1 and Sub2 are messenger RNA export factors that have conserved counterparts in metazoans, designated Aly and UAP56, respectively. These factors couple the machineries that function in splicing and export of mRNA. Here we show that both Yra1 and Sub2 are stoichiometrically associated with the heterotetrameric THO complex, which functions in transcription in yeast. We also show that Sub2 and Yra1 interact genetically with all four components of the THO complex (Tho2, Hpr1, Mft1 and Thp2). Moreover, these components operate in the export of bulk poly(A)(+) RNA as well as of mRNA derived from intronless genes. Both Aly and UAP56 associate with human counterparts of the THO complex. Together, these data define a conserved complex, designated the TREX ('transcription/export') complex. The TREX complex is specifically recruited to activated genes during transcription and travels the entire length of the gene with RNA polymerase II. Our data indicate that the TREX complex has a conserved role in coupling transcription to mRNA export.
Cyclic adenosine diphosphoribose (cADPR), a recently discovered metabolite of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), is a potent calcium-releasing agent postulated to be a new second messenger. An enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of cADPR from NAD and the hydrolysis of cADPR to ADP-ribose (ADPR) was purified to homogeneity from canine spleen microsomes. The net conversion of NAD to ADPR categorizes this enzyme as an NAD glycohydrolase. NAD glycohydrolases are ubiquitous membrane-bound enzymes that have been known for many years but whose function has not been identified. The results presented here suggest that these enzymes may function in the regulation of calcium homeostasis by the ability to synthesize and degrade cADPR.
An enzyme that forms adrenaline from p- and m-sympathol and dopamine from p- and m-tyramine is localized in the microsomes of rabbit liver and requires the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. The enzyme is nonspecific and can form catechols from the following normally occurring and foreign phenols: p- and m-octopamine, p-hydroxyephedrine, phenol, stilbestrol, N-acetyl-p-aminophenol, estradiol and N-acetylserotonin.
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter proteins carry diverse substrates across cell membranes. Whereas clinically relevant ABC exporters are implicated in various diseases or cause multidrug resistance of cancer cells, bacterial ABC importers are essential for the uptake of nutrients, including rare elements such as molybdenum. A detailed understanding of their mechanisms requires direct visualization at high resolution and in distinct conformations. Our recent structure of the multidrug ABC exporter Sav1866 has revealed an outward-facing conformation of the transmembrane domains coupled to a closed conformation of the nucleotide-binding domains, reflecting the ATP-bound state. Here we present the 3.1 A crystal structure of a putative molybdate transporter (ModB2C2) from Archaeoglobus fulgidus in complex with its binding protein (ModA). Twelve transmembrane helices of the ModB subunits provide an inward-facing conformation, with a closed gate near the external membrane boundary. The ATP-hydrolysing ModC subunits reveal a nucleotide-free, open conformation, whereas the attached binding protein aligns the substrate-binding cleft with the entrance to the presumed translocation pathway. Structural comparison of ModB2C2A with Sav1866 suggests a common alternating access and release mechanism, with binding of ATP promoting an outward-facing conformation and dissociation of the hydrolysis products promoting an inward-facing conformation.
Oxygen-evolving photosynthetic organisms regulate carbon metabolism through a light-dependent redox signalling pathway. Electrons are shuttled from photosystem I by means of ferredoxin (Fdx) to ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase (FTR), which catalyses the two-electron-reduction of chloroplast thioredoxins (Trxs). These modify target enzyme activities by reduction, regulating carbon flow. FTR is unique in its use of a [4Fe-4S] cluster and a proximal disulphide bridge in the conversion of a light signal into a thiol signal. We determined the structures of FTR in both its one- and its two-electron-reduced intermediate states and of four complexes in the pathway, including the ternary Fdx-FTR-Trx complex. Here we show that, in the first complex (Fdx-FTR) of the pathway, the Fdx [2Fe-2S] cluster is positioned suitably for electron transfer to the FTR [4Fe-4S] centre. After the transfer of one electron, an intermediate is formed in which one sulphur atom of the FTR active site is free to attack a disulphide bridge in Trx and the other sulphur atom forms a fifth ligand for an iron atom in the FTR [4Fe-4S] centre--a unique structure in biology. Fdx then delivers a second electron that cleaves the FTR-Trx heterodisulphide bond, which occurs in the Fdx-FTR-Trx complex. In this structure, the redox centres of the three proteins are aligned to maximize the efficiency of electron transfer from the Fdx [2Fe-2S] cluster to the active-site disulphide of Trxs. These results provide a structural framework for understanding the mechanism of disulphide reduction by an iron-sulphur enzyme and describe previously unknown interaction networks for both Fdx and Trx (refs 4-6).
A primary response to many growth factor-induced transmembrane signals is the rapid activation of transcription of the proto-oncogene c-fos and other early-response genes, including the beta-actin gene. The c-raf gene encodes a cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinase, raf-1, whose activity is also responsive to transmembrane signals and which in mutant form can transform cells. Here we show that in transient assays, the v-raf protein, which is a constitutively activated oncogenic counterpart of raf-1, can transactivate transcription from two early-response promoters, including the c-fos promoter from human and murine cells and the human beta-actin gene promoter. Multiple elements of the human fos promoter, including the dyad symmetry element necessary for growth-factor induction, an octanucleotide direct repeat element, and the region spanning the sequence from nucleotides -225 to -99 can all serve as targets for raf induction. The c-myc promoter and two adenovirus-2 early promoters are not induced. These findings indicate that raf kinase, when activated by a transmembrane signal or by mutation of a regulatory domain, can phosphorylate a factor(s) capable of regulating transcription of the c-fos and actin genes. The oncogenic form of raf may transform by constitutively activating early response protooncogenes such as c-fos.
In contrast to microRNAs and Piwi-associated RNAs, short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are seemingly dispensable for host-directed gene regulation in Drosophila. This notion is based on the fact that mutants lacking the core siRNA-generating enzyme Dicer-2 or the predominant siRNA effector Argonaute 2 are viable, fertile and of relatively normal morphology. Moreover, endogenous Drosophila siRNAs have not yet been identified. Here we report that siRNAs derived from long hairpin RNA genes (hpRNAs) programme Slicer complexes that can repress endogenous target transcripts. The Drosophila hpRNA pathway is a hybrid mechanism that combines canonical RNA interference factors (Dicer-2, Hen1 (known as CG12367) and Argonaute 2) with a canonical microRNA factor (Loquacious) to generate approximately 21-nucleotide siRNAs. These novel regulatory RNAs reveal unexpected complexity in the sorting of small RNAs, and open a window onto the biological usage of endogenous RNA interference in Drosophila.
We report the cloning of a novel gene (E5-1) encoded on chromosome 1 which has substantial nucleotide and amino-acid sequence similarity to the S182 gene on chromosome 14q24.3. Mutations, including three new missense mutations in the S182 gene, are associated with the AD3 subtype of early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease (AD). Both the E5-1 and the S182 proteins are predicted to be integral membrane proteins with seven membrane-spanning domains, and a large exposed loop between the sixth and seventh transmembrane domains. Analysis of the nucleotide sequence of the open reading frame (ORF) of the E5-1 gene led to the discovery of two missense substitutions at conserved amino-acid residues in affected members of pedigrees with a form of familial AD that has a later age of onset than the AD3 subtype (50-70 years versus 30-60 years for AD3). These observations imply that the E5-1 gene on chromosome 1 and the S182 gene on chromosome 14q24.3 are members of a family of genes (presenilins) with related functions, and indicates that mutations in conserved residues of E5-1 could also play a role in the genesis of AD. Our results also indicate that still other AD susceptibility genes exist.
The structure of a complex between a peptide inhibitor with the sequence N-acetyl-Thr-Ile-Nle-psi[CH2-NH]-Nle-Gln-Arg.amide (Nle, norleucine) with chemically synthesized HIV-1 (human immunodeficiency virus 1) protease was determined at 2.3 A resolution (R factor of 0.176). Despite the symmetric nature of the unliganded enzyme, the asymmetric inhibitor lies in a single orientation and makes extensive interactions at the interface between the two subunits of the homodimeric protein. Compared with the unliganded enzyme, the protein molecule underwent substantial changes, particularly in an extended region corresponding to the "flaps" (residues 35 to 57 in each chain), where backbone movements as large as 7 A are observed.
The transduction of many cellular stimuli results in oscillations in the intracellular concentration of calcium ions (Ca2+). Although information is thought to be encoded in the frequency of such oscillations, no frequency decoder has been identified. Rapid superfusion of immobilized Ca2+- and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaM kinase II) in vitro showed that the enzyme can decode the frequency of Ca2+ spikes into distinct amounts of kinase activity. The frequency response of CaM kinase II was modulated by several factors, including the amplitude and duration of individual spikes as well as the subunit composition and previous state of activation of the kinase. These features should provide specificity in the activation of this multifunctional enzyme by distinct cellular stimuli and may underlie its pivotal role in activity-dependent forms of synaptic plasticity.
PolyADP-ribose-polymerase 1 is activated in neurons that mediate several forms of long-term memory in Aplysia. Because polyADP-ribosylation of nuclear proteins is a response to DNA damage in virtually all eukaryotic cells, it is surprising that activation of the polymerase occurs during learning and is required for long-term memory. We suggest that fast and transient decondensation of chromatin structure by polyADP-ribosylation enables the transcription needed to form long-term memory without strand breaks in DNA.
The X-linked prune (pn) eye-colour mutation of Drosophila melanogaster has a highly specific, complementary lethal interaction with the conditional dominant Killer of prune (awdK-pn) mutation. Although awdK-pn flies have no apparent phenotype on their own, pn awdK-pn double mutants die as second or third larval instars. The awd locus encodes a nucleoside diphosphate kinase, an enzyme that catalyses the transfer of high-energy phosphate bonds between nucleoside diphosphates and nucleoside triphosphates, which is essential for the normal development of Drosophila. Analysis of the pn locus has suggested that the complementary DNA, TcD37, encodes a putative pn+ product. Here we report the nucleotide sequence of TcD37 and the similarity of its deduced protein product to the catalytic domain of mammalian GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs); GAPs stimulate the GTPase activity of Ras (ref. 6), which are plasma membrane-bound proteins involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation. These results suggest that the Drosophila TcD37 protein participates in a biochemical pathway similar to that of Ras and GAPs in mammals and yeast. We propose that the interaction between pn and awd is due to a neomorphic mutation that enhances the ability of AwdK-pn nucleoside diphosphate kinase to induce a regulatory GTPase into a GTP-bound 'on' state, whereas Pn modulates the activity of this GTPase either by switching it to a GDP-bound 'off' state or by interfering with its effector function.
Allosteric regulation is used as a very efficient mechanism to control protein activity in most biological processes, including signal transduction, metabolism, catalysis and gene regulation. Allosteric proteins can exist in several conformational states with distinct binding or enzymatic activity. Effectors are considered to function in a purely structural manner by selectively stabilizing a specific conformational state, thereby regulating protein activity. Here we show that allosteric proteins can be regulated predominantly by changes in their structural dynamics. We have used NMR spectroscopy and isothermal titration calorimetry to characterize cyclic AMP (cAMP) binding to the catabolite activator protein (CAP), a transcriptional activator that has been a prototype for understanding effector-mediated allosteric control of protein activity. cAMP switches CAP from the 'off' state (inactive), which binds DNA weakly and non-specifically, to the 'on' state (active), which binds DNA strongly and specifically. In contrast, cAMP binding to a single CAP mutant, CAP-S62F, fails to elicit the active conformation; yet, cAMP binding to CAP-S62F strongly activates the protein for DNA binding. NMR and thermodynamic analyses show that despite the fact that CAP-S62F-cAMP(2) adopts the inactive conformation, its strong binding to DNA is driven by a large conformational entropy originating in enhanced protein motions induced by DNA binding. The results provide strong evidence that changes in protein motions may activate allosteric proteins that are otherwise structurally inactive.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a life-threatening systemic illness of abrupt onset and unknown cause. Proteolysis of the blood-clotting protein von Willebrand factor (VWF) observed in normal plasma is decreased in TTP patients. However, the identity of the responsible protease and its role in the pathophysiology of TTP remain unknown. We performed genome-wide linkage analysis in four pedigrees of humans with congenital TTP and mapped the responsible genetic locus to chromosome 9q34. A predicted gene in the identified interval corresponds to a segment of a much larger transcript, identifying a new member of the ADAMTS family of zinc metalloproteinase genes (ADAMTS13). Analysis of patients' genomic DNA identified 12 mutations in the ADAMTS13 gene, accounting for 14 of the 15 disease alleles studied. We show that deficiency of ADAMTS13 is the molecular mechanism responsible for TTP, and suggest that physiologic proteolysis of VWF and/or other ADAMTS13 substrates is required for normal vascular homeostasis.
The int-2 proto-oncogene encodes several products related to the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family. FGFs have been associated with mesoderm induction in the amphibian embryo and int-2 has a distinct pattern of expression throughout development in vertebrates. But evidence for a function of int-2 in embryo-genesis has been lacking. In the mouse embryo, int-2 transcripts have been detected in the rhombencephalon at a developmental stage where classical experiments showed that the induction of the inner ear occurs. This raises the possibility that int-2 may constitute a signal for the induction of the otic vesicle, the primordium of the inner ear. We provide direct evidence for this view by showing that (1) the formation of the otic vesicle is inhibited by antisense oligonucleotides targeted to the secreted form of int-2, and by antibodies against int-2 oncoproteins, and (2) basic FGF (bFGF) can mimic the inductive signal in the absence of the rhombencephalon.
The structure of the MAP kinase ERK2, a ubiquitous protein kinase target for regulation by Ras and Raf, has been solved in its unphosphorylated low-activity conformation to a resolution of 2.3 A. The two domains of unphosphorylated ERK2 are farther apart than in the active conformation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase and the peptide-binding site is blocked by tyrosine 185, one of the two residues that are phosphorylated in the active enzyme. Activation of ERK2 is thus likely to involve both global and local conformational changes.
PIK3CA, one of the two most frequently mutated oncogenes in human tumors, codes for p110alpha, the catalytic subunit of a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, isoform alpha (PI3Kalpha, p110alpha/p85). Here, we report a 3.0 angstrom resolution structure of a complex between p110alpha and a polypeptide containing the p110alpha-binding domains of p85alpha, a protein required for its enzymatic activity. The structure shows that many of the mutations occur at residues lying at the interfaces between p110alpha and p85alpha or between the kinase domain of p110alpha and other domains within the catalytic subunit. Disruptions of these interactions are likely to affect the regulation of kinase activity by p85 or the catalytic activity of the enzyme, respectively. In addition to providing new insights about the structure of PI3Kalpha, these results suggest specific mechanisms for the effect of oncogenic mutations in p110alpha and p85alpha.
The complete nucleotide sequence of the diphtheria tox228 gene encoding the nontoxic serologically related protein CRM228 has been determined. A comparison of the predicted amino acid sequence with the available amino acid sequences from the wild-type toxin made it possible to deduce essentially the entire nucleotide sequence of the wild-type tox gene. The signal peptide of pro-diphtheria toxin and the putative tox promoter have been identified, a highly symmetrical nucleotide sequence downstream of the toxin gene has been detected; this region may be the corynebacteriophage beta attachment site (attP). The cloned toxin gene was expressed at a low level in Escherichia coli.
Glycogen phosphorylase (E.C.2.4.1.1) was the first enzyme shown to be regulated by allosteric effectors and by protein phosphorylation. Transcriptional control of bacterial phosphorylases further extends the range of regulatory mechanisms by which phosphorylases contribute to the control of carbohydrate metabolism. Despite their regulatory differences, all known phosphorylases share catalytic and structural properties and a strongly conserved pyridoxal-5'-phosphate binding site; this makes phosphorylases highly attractive for investigations into the evolution of regulatory mechanisms. The primary and tertiary structure of rabbit muscle phosphorylase has been determined completely. Recently, comparable amino acid sequences from plants and bacteria have been resolved. Here we report the sequence of 687 amino acids of Escherichia coli maltodextrin phosphorylase, deduced from a cloned malP gene sequence. Alignment of animal and bacterial phosphorylase sequences shows strong homology (48%) throughout 91% of the polypeptide chain enclosing the extrinsic catalytic region. Within this region, structural homology identifies a presumed phosphate-binding site from which the allosteric 5' AMP binding site of rabbit muscle phosphorylase might have developed. From the decreased alignment at the N-terminus and the presence of additional residues compared with bacterial phosphorylases, we conclude that the regulatory sequences that also carry the phosphorylation site in the muscle enzyme were joined to a presumed ancestral precursor gene by gene fusion after separation of the eukaryotic and prokaryotic lines of descent.
A transforming gene isolated from T24 human bladder carcinoma cells is closely related to the BALB murine sarcoma virus (MSV) onc gene (v-bas). This transforming gene is localized to a 4.6 kilobase pair (kbp) region and is expressed as a 1.2-kbp polyadenylated transcript, which contains v-bas related sequences. Moreover, antisera known to detect the immunologically related onc gene products of BALB- and Harvey-MSVs recognized elevated levels of a related protein in T24 cells. The normal human homologue of v-bas was found to be indistinguishable from the T24 oncogene by heteroduplex and restriction enzyme analysis. These results imply that rather subtle genetic alterations have led to the activation of the normal human homologue of v-bas as a human transforming gene.
The transfer of insoluble cholesteryl esters among lipoprotein particles is a vital step in normal cholesterol homeostasis and may be involved in the development of atherosclerosis. Extrahepatic tissues lack the enzymes required for the degradation of sterols to the excretable form of bile acids. Cholesterol synthesized in these tissues in excess of that needed for the synthesis of cell membranes or steroid hormones must accordingly be returned through the plasma to the liver for catabolism. The series of reactions involved has been termed reverse cholesterol transport. Catalysed steps of this pathway are believed to include an efflux from peripheral cells, which generates a diffusion gradient between these membranes and extracellular fluid; esterification of this cholesterol by lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) (phosphatidylcholine-sterol acyltransferase) acting on species of high-density lipoproteins; transfer of the cholesteryl esters formed (largely to low- and very low-density lipoproteins) (LDL and VLDL) by a cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP); and removal of these lipoproteins, together with their cholesteryl ester content, by the liver through receptor-mediated and nonspecific endocytosis. Of these steps, the CETP reaction is the least characterized. Several laboratories have reported the purification from human plasma of proteins active on cholesteryl ester transfer between lipoprotein particles and possibly between cells and plasma. However, the reported relative molecular mass (Mr), abundance and specificity of the purified activities have differed considerably. We have recently described the preparation of a highly active CETP of Mr 74,000 purified about 100,000-fold from human plasma, which may represent the functional component of earlier preparations. Using a partial amino-acid sequence from this purified protein, CETP complementary DNA derived from human liver DNA has been cloned and sequenced and the cloned DNA used to detect CETP messenger RNA in a number of human tissues.
Covalent intermediates between topoisomerase I and DNA can become dead-end complexes that lead to cell death. Here, the isolation of the gene for an enzyme that can hydrolyze the bond between this protein and DNA is described. Enzyme-defective mutants of yeast are hypersensitive to treatments that increase the amount of covalent complexes, indicative of enzyme involvement in repair. The gene is conserved in eukaryotes and identifies a family of enzymes that has not been previously recognized. The presence of this gene in humans may have implications for the effectiveness of topoisomerase I poisons, such as the camptothecins, in chemotherapy.
Paired basic residues have been observed as sites of proteolytic processing of prohormones in a wide range of eukaryotic species. This strongly suggests that proteases exhibiting specificity towards paired basic residues may be involved in prohormone processing, but candidate enzymes have not so far been identified. Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae alpha-cells synthesize and secrete alpha-mating factor, a peptide of 13 amino acids, the processing of which from a larger precursor involves cleavage at paired basic residues (-Lys-Arg-). We have therefore used them as a simple model system for the study of prohormone processing and report here the identification, in cell lysates, of a novel protease which specifically recognizes and cleaves the peptide bonds between consecutive basic residues. The purified enzyme, which we have called propheromone -convertase Y, has a molecular weight (MW) of around 43,000. It cleaves various peptide substrates at paired basic residues, but not at single basic residues, implying it is distinct from trypsin-like proteases. Its unique substrate specificity suggests the enzyme may be involved in propheromone processing in vivo.
A reversible block to RNA polymerase II transcriptional elongation has been created with a lac operator sequence in the intron of the SV40 large T-antigen gene. When this transcription unit is injected into rabbit kidney cells expressing Escherichia coli lac repressor, T-antigen expression is reduced. This effect is not observed in cells lacking repressor or in the absence of the operator, and it is reversed by an inducer of the lac operon, namely isopropyl thiogalactoside (IPTG). In an extract of HeLa nuclei supplemented with lac repressor, this and similar constructs give rise to shortened transcripts that map to the 5' boundary of the repressor-operator complex. These shorter RNAs are also sensitive to IPTG induction. This model system shows that a protein-DNA complex can block the passage of RNA polymerase II, and offers some insight into the control of eukaryotic gene expression during transcription elongation, a phenomenon observed in a variety of systems.
Mitosis comprises a complex set of overlapping motile events, many of which involve microtubule-dependent motor enzymes. Here we describe a new member of the kinesin superfamily. The protein was originally identified as a spindle antigen by the CHO1 monoclonal antibody and shown to be required for mitotic progression. We have cloned the gene that encodes this antigen and found that its sequence contains a domain with strong sequence similarity to the motor domain of kinesin-like proteins. The product of this gene, expressed in bacteria, can cross-bridge antiparallel microtubules in vitro, and in the presence of Mg-ATP, microtubules slide over one another in a fashion reminiscent of microtubule movements during spindle elongation.
Large granular lymphocytes and cytolytic T-lymphocytes (CTL) contain numerous cytoplasmic granules thought to be responsible, at least in part, for the cytolytic activity of these effector cells. Isolated granules are lytic for a variety of target cells and the granule proteins are specifically released upon target-cell interaction. Major proteins in mouse CTL granules are a family of seven serine proteases designated granzymes A to G, and a pore-forming protein called perforin (cytolysin). Purified perforin is cytolytic in the presence of Ca2+ and shows ultrastructural, immunological and amino-acid sequence similarities to complement component C9. Despite these similarities, perforin and C9 are clearly distinct in their mode of target-cell recognition. Whereas C9 insertion is absolutely dependent on a receptor moiety assembled from the complement proteins C5b, C6, C7, and C8 on the target-cell membrane, no requirement for a receptor molecule has been reported for perforin. Here, we demonstrate that phosphorylcholine acts as a specific, Ca2+-dependent receptor molecule for perforin.
The announcement by Kasahara and Kato of a new redox-cofactor vitamin for mammals, pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ), was based on their claim that an enzyme, predicted to be involved in mouse lysine metabolism, is a PQQ-dependent dehydrogenase. However, this claim was dependent on a sequence analysis using databases that inappropriately label beta-propeller sequences as PQQ-binding motifs. What the evidence actually suggests is that the enzyme is an interesting novel protein that has a seven-bladed beta-propeller structure, but there is nothing to indicate that it is a PQQ-dependent dehydrogenase.
Cohesins keep sister chromatids associated from the time of their replication in S phase until the onset of anaphase. In vertebrate cells, two distinct pathways dissociate cohesins, one acts on chromosome arms and the other on centromeres. Here, we describe a third pathway that acts on telomeres. Knockdown of tankyrase 1, a telomeric poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase caused mitotic arrest. Chromosomes aligned normally on the metaphase plate but were unable to segregate. Sister chromatids separated at centromeres and arms but remained associated at telomeres, apparently through proteinaceous bridges. Thus, telomeres may require a unique tankyrase 1-dependent mechanism for sister chromatid resolution before anaphase.
The glandular kallikrein gene family comprises 25-30 highly homologous genes that encode specific proteases involved in the processing of biologically active peptides. In the mouse all the members of this family are closely linked on chromosome 7. The 9.5-kilobase nucleotide sequence of a mouse genomic clone contains one complete kallikrein gene (mGK-1), which is expressed in the male mouse submaxillary gland, and the 3' end of another (mGK-2). Differences in the coding potential of these genes and the amino acid sequences of other known kallikreins seem to be functionally related to the substrate specificity of the different enzymes.
Although lysosomal enzymes are implicated in the processes of tumor invasion and metastasis, their cellular origin within the tumor is unclear. The activity of the lysosomal proteinase cathepsin B is significantly elevated in a variant of the B16 melanoma with high metastatic potential. The cathepsin B activity is localized to the lysosomes of the tumor cells.
MauG is a diheme enzyme responsible for the posttranslational modification of two tryptophan residues to form the tryptophan tryptophylquinone (TTQ) cofactor of methylamine dehydrogenase (MADH). MauG converts preMADH, containing monohydroxylated betaTrp57, to fully functional MADH by catalyzing the insertion of a second oxygen atom into the indole ring and covalently linking betaTrp57 to betaTrp108. We have solved the x-ray crystal structure of MauG complexed with preMADH to 2.1 angstroms. The c-type heme irons and the nascent TTQ site are separated by long distances over which electron transfer must occur to achieve catalysis. In addition, one of the hemes has an atypical His-Tyr axial ligation. The crystalline protein complex is catalytically competent; upon addition of hydrogen peroxide, MauG-dependent TTQ synthesis occurs.
Human CD4 is the receptor for the gp120 envelope glycoprotein of human immunodeficiency virus and is essential for virus entry into the host cell. Sequence analysis of CD4 has suggested an evolutionary origin from a structure with four immunoglobulin-related domains. Only the two NH2-terminal domains are required to mediate gp120 binding. The extracellular segment of murine CD4 has an overall 50% identity with its human counterpart at the amino-acid level, but fails to bind gp120. To define those residues of human CD4 critical for gp120 binding, we have taken advantage of this species difference and substituted all non-conserved murine for human CD4 residues between amino-acid positions 27-167. We used oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis to create each of 16 individual mutant human CD4 molecules containing from 1-4 amino-acid substitutions. Introduction of as few as three amino acids into corresponding positions of human CD4 abrogates gp120 binding. Furthermore, these critical residues are located in domain I with a contribution from domain II. Modelling studies using the three-dimensional coordinates of the V kappa Bence-Jones REI homodimer localize the site in domain I to the C" beta strand within CDR2 but projecting away from the homologues of principle antigen-binding regions CDR 1 and 3.
Expression of the human T cell receptor (TCR) alpha gene is regulated by a T cell-specific transcriptional enhancer that is located 4.5 kilobases (kb) 3' to the C alpha gene segment. The core enhancer contains two nuclear protein binding sites, T alpha 1 and T alpha 2, which are essential for full enhancer activity. T alpha 1 contains a consensus cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element (CRE) and binds a set of ubiquitously expressed CRE binding proteins. In contrast, the transcription factors that interact with the T alpha 2 site have not been defined. In this report, a lambda gt11 expression protocol was used to isolate a complementary DNA (cDNA) that programs the expression of a T alpha 2 binding protein. DNA sequence analysis demonstrated that this clone encodes the human ets-1 proto-oncogene. Lysogen extracts produced with this cDNA clone contained a beta-galactosidase-Ets-1 fusion protein that bound specifically to a synthetic T alpha 2 oligonucleotide. The Ets-1 binding site was localized to a 17-base pair (bp) region from the 3' end of T alpha 2. Mutation of five nucleotides within this sequence abolished both Ets-1 binding and the activity of the TCR alpha enhancer in T cells. These results demonstrate that Ets-1 binds in a sequence-specific fashion to the human TCR alpha enhancer and suggest that this developmentally regulated proto-oncogene functions in regulating TCR alpha gene expression.
The 2.2 A crystal structure of activated rod transducin, Gt alpha.GTP gamma S, shows the bound GTP gamma S molecule occluded deep in a cleft between a domain structurally homologous to small GTPases and a helical domain unique to heterotrimeric G proteins. The structure, when combined with biochemical and genetic studies, suggests: how an activated receptor might open this cleft to allow nucleotide exchange; a mechanism for GTP-induced changes in effector and receptor binding surfaces; and a mechanism for GTPase activity not evident from previous data.
To elucidate critical steps in the transcription initiation process, we have devised a protocol for obtaining information about DNA structure and DNA-protein interactions at nucleotide level resolution from intact yeast cells. Our procedure combines the ultraviolet light 'footprinting' method developed by Becker and Wang with the 'genomic sequencing' technique described by Church and Gilbert. Using this approach we were able to detect the binding of GAL 4 protein at sites within the upstream activating sequence (UASG) previously mapped using other in vivo and in vitro foot-printing procedures. We also observed transcription-dependent changes in sensitivity of DNA to ultraviolet-induced covalent modification at several positions between the upstream activating sequence and the transcription initiation sites of the GAL 1 and GAL 10 genes. The most prominent of these changes occurs at a common site within the putative 'TATA' boxes of the two genes. Ultraviolet modification at this site is enhanced only in transcriptionally active promoters.
Cdc2 is the cyclin-dependent kinase that controls entry of cells into mitosis. Phosphorylation of Cdc2 on threonine-14 and tyrosine-15 inhibits the activity of the enzyme and prevents premature initiation of mitosis. Although Wee1 has been identified as the kinase that phosphorylates tyrosine-15 in various organisms, the threonine-14-specific kinase has not been isolated. A complementary DNA was cloned from Xenopus that encodes Myt1, a member of the Wee1 family that was discovered to phosphorylate Cdc2 efficiently on both threonine-14 and tyrosine-15. Myt1 is a membrane-associated protein that contains a putative transmembrane segment. Immunodepletion studies suggested that Myt1 is the predominant threonine-14-specific kinase in Xenopus egg extracts. Myt1 activity is highly regulated during the cell cycle, suggesting that this relative of Wee1 plays a role in mitotic control.
Most plasmalemmal proteins organize in submicrometer-sized clusters whose architecture and dynamics are still enigmatic. With syntaxin 1 as an example, we applied a combination of far-field optical nanoscopy, biochemistry, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) analysis, and simulations to show that clustering can be explained by self-organization based on simple physical principles. On average, the syntaxin clusters exhibit a diameter of 50 to 60 nanometers and contain 75 densely crowded syntaxins that dynamically exchange with freely diffusing molecules. Self-association depends on weak homophilic protein-protein interactions. Simulations suggest that clustering immobilizes and conformationally constrains the molecules. Moreover, a balance between self-association and crowding-induced steric repulsions is sufficient to explain both the size and dynamics of syntaxin clusters and likely of many oligomerizing membrane proteins that form supramolecular structures.
Transforming growth factors (TGFs) are mitogenic polypeptides produced most conspicuously by transformed cells and conferring on normal cells several phenotypic alterations associated with transformation. TGFs comprise two distinct sets of molecules: TGF-alpha s are structurally similar to epidermal growth factor (EGF), binding to and inducing the tyrosine phosphorylation of the EGF receptor in a manner indistinguishable from that of EGF. In addition, the 50-amino acid rat TGF-alpha has 33 and 44% homologies with mouse and human EGFs, respectively, and shares with EGFs a conserved pattern of three disulphide bridges. Thus, it has been proposed that TGF-alpha s belong to a family of EGF-like polypeptides. TGF-beta s, on the other hand, display no measurable binding to EGF receptors, but potentiate the growth-stimulating activities of TGF-alpha. Here we report the isolation of a complementary DNA clone encoding rat TGF-alpha. This cDNA hybridizes to a 4.5-kilobase (kb) messenger RNA that is 30 times larger than necessary to code for a 50-amino acid polypeptide and is present not only in retrovirus-transformed rat cells but also at lower levels in normal rat tissues. The nucleotide sequence of the cDNA predicts that TGF-alpha is synthesized as a larger product and that the larger form may exist as a transmembrane protein. However, unlike many polypeptide hormones (including EGF), cleavage of the 50-amino acid TGF-alpha from the larger form does not occur at paired basic residues, but rather between alanine and valine residues, suggesting the role of a novel protease.
The tyrosine kinase activity of c-Src is stimulated during mitosis by dephosphorylation of its regulatory tyrosine residue. This is associated with increased accessibility of its Src homology-2 (SH2) domain for binding a phosphotyrosine-containing peptide. But physiological targets of activated c-Src in mitosis have not yet been identified. Here we report that a 68K protein (p68) becomes tyrosine-phosphorylated and physically associates with Src during mitosis in mouse fibroblasts. p68 independently binds the Src SH2 and SH3 domains in vitro and both domains are required for p68 phosphorylation and binding in vivo. p68 is closely related to the p62 protein that is associated with the Ras GTPase-activating protein (GAP) and selectively binds, directly or indirectly, polyribonucleotides. Because the Src SH3 domain also binds heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K, these results raise the intriguing possibility that c-Src may regulate the processing, trafficking or translation of RNA in a cell-cycle-dependent manner.
p60src, the transforming protein of Rous sarcoma virus (RSV), is a protein kinase that has a strict specificity for tyrosine. The phosphorylation of cellular proteins by p60src (ref. 4) results in transformation. Recently, Barker and Dayhoff discovered that residues 259-485 of p60src have 22% sequence identity with residues 33-258 of the catalytic subunit of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, an enzyme that has a specificity for serine. Because it was necessary to introduce eight gaps to align the two proteins, the question remained as to whether this apparent homology reflected a common evolutionary origin. We demonstrate here that the ATP analogue p-fluorosulphonylbenzoyl 5'-adenosine (FSBA) inactivates the tyrosine protein kinase activity of p60src by reacting with lysine 295. When aligned for maximum sequence identity, lysine 295 of p60src and the lysine in the catalytic subunit which also reacts specifically with FSBA are superimposed precisely. This functional homology is strong evidence that the protein kinases, irrespective of amino acid substrate specificity, comprise a single divergent gene family.
The three-dimensional structure of spinach ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase (NADP+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) has been determined by x-ray diffraction at 2.6 angstroms (A) resolution and initially refined to an R factor of 0.226 at 2.2 A resolution. The model includes the flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD) prosthetic group and the protein chain from residue 19 through the carboxyl terminus at residue 314 and is composed of two domains. The FAD binding domain (residues 19 to 161) has an antiparallel beta barrel core and a single alpha helix for binding the pyrophosphate of FAD. The NADP binding domain (residues 162 to 314) has a central five-strand parallel beta sheet and six surrounding helices. Binding of the competitive inhibitor 2'-phospho-AMP (AMP, adenosine monophosphate) places the NADP binding site at the carboxyl-terminal edge of the sheet in a manner similar to the nucleotide binding of the dehydrogenase family. The structures reveal the key residues that function in cofactor binding and the catalytic center. With these key residues as a guide, conclusive evidence is presented that the ferredoxin reductase structure is a prototype for the nicotinamide dinucleotide and FAD binding domains of the enzymes NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase, NADPH-sulfite reductase, NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase, and NADH-nitrate reductase. Thus this structure provides a structural framework for the NADH- or NADPH-dependent flavoenzyme parts of five distinct enzymes involved in photosynthesis, in the assimilation of inorganic nitrogen and sulfur, in fatty-acid oxidation, in the reduction of methemoglobin, and in the metabolism of many pesticides, drugs, and carcinogens.
When the Mg2+ ion in the catalytic center of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (RNAP) is replaced with Fe2+, hydroxyl radicals are generated. In the promoter complex, such radicals cleave template DNA near the transcription start site, whereas the beta' subunit is cleaved at a conserved motif NADFDGD (Asn-Ala-Asp-Phe-Asp-Gly-Asp). Substitution of the three aspartate residues with alanine creates a dominant lethal mutation. The mutant RNAP is catalytically inactive but can bind promoters and form an open complex. The mutant fails to support Fe2+-induced cleavage of DNA or protein. Thus, the NAD-FDGD motif is involved in chelation of the active center Mg2+.
Approximately 80 percent of all human sera that react with antigens of HTLV-III, the etiologic agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), recognize protein bands at 66 and 51 kilodaltons. A mouse hybridoma was produced that was specific to these proteins. Repeated cloning of the hybridoma did not separate the two reactivities. The p66/p51 was purified from HTLV-III lysates by immunoaffinity chromatography and subjected to NH2-terminal Edman degradation. Single amino acid residues were obtained in 17 successive degradation cycles. The sequence determined was a perfect translation of the nucleotide sequence of a portion of the HTLV-III pol gene. The purified p66/51 had reverse transcriptase activity and the monoclonal immunoglobulin G specifically removed the enzyme activity from crude viral extract as well as purified enzyme.
The human intestinal microbiota is composed of 10(13) to 10(14) microorganisms whose collective genome ("microbiome") contains at least 100 times as many genes as our own genome. We analyzed approximately 78 million base pairs of unique DNA sequence and 2062 polymerase chain reaction-amplified 16S ribosomal DNA sequences obtained from the fecal DNAs of two healthy adults. Using metabolic function analyses of identified genes, we compared our human genome with the average content of previously sequenced microbial genomes. Our microbiome has significantly enriched metabolism of glycans, amino acids, and xenobiotics; methanogenesis; and 2-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway-mediated biosynthesis of vitamins and isoprenoids. Thus, humans are superorganisms whose metabolism represents an amalgamation of microbial and human attributes.
The DNA polymerase V (pol V) and RecA proteins are essential components of a mutagenic translesion synthesis pathway in Escherichia coli designed to cope with DNA damage. Previously, it has been assumed that RecA binds to the DNA template strand being copied. Here we show, however, that pol-V-catalysed translesion synthesis, in the presence or absence of the beta-processivity-clamp, occurs only when RecA nucleoprotein filaments assemble or RecA protomers bind on separate single-stranded (ss)DNA molecules in trans. A 3'-proximal RecA filament end on trans DNA is essential for stimulation; however, synthesis is strengthened by further pol V-RecA interactions occurring elsewhere along a trans nucleoprotein filament. We suggest that trans-stimulation of pol V by RecA bound to ssDNA reflects a distinctive regulatory mechanism of mutation that resolves the paradox of RecA filaments assembled in cis on a damaged template strand obstructing translesion DNA synthesis despite the absolute requirement of RecA for SOS mutagenesis.
The tetrameric enzyme lactate dehydrogenase dissociates into its constituent monomeric subunits in a high ion to protein concentration ratio, in certain ionic environments when frozen, and at extreme dilution. Dissociation by dilution involves changes in tertiary conformation which inactivate the enzyme. The dissociation is strongly inhibited by homologous native proteins, but only slightly by denatured or unrelated proteins.
Sendai virus-infected mouse cells can be lysed by mouse cytolytic thymus-dependent lymphocytes (CTL) directed specifically against the infected cells. The CTL is known to recognise the H-2 antigens on the target cells together with structure(s) including at least the two viral surface glycoproteins also found on purified virus. We report here that anti-Sendai CTL can be stimulated in vitro by detergent-solubilised viral haemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN), either as the isolated protein or coupled to agarose beads. We further show stimulation by the hydrophilic portion of a protein removed from the virus by the protease subtilisin BPN', and we demonstrate that cyanogen bromide- (CNBr-) cleaved viral peptides also produce such stimulation.
Among the factors that can govern the relative rates of mitochondrial oxidation of isocitrate by means of the isocitrate dehydrogenases linked to diphospho-and triphosphopyridine nucleotides are the intramitochondrial concentrations of these nucleotides. Yeast mitochondria contain enzymes that can alter the ratio of these pyridine nucleotides by interconverting them. A diphosphopyridine nucleotide kinase catalyzes the formation of triphosphopyridine nucleotide from diphosphopyridine nucleotide and adenosine triphosphate; a phosphatase converts triphosphopyridine nucleotide to diphosphopyridine nucleotide. Both reactions are more active with the reduced forms of the pyridine nucleotide coenzymes. These studies suggest that the activity of the mitochondrial triphosphopyridine-nucleotide-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase may be regulated by a cyclic system of pyridine-nucleotide interconversions involving triphosphopyridine nucleotide synthesis and breakdown.
Niemann-Pick type C (NP-C) disease, a fatal neurovisceral disorder, is characterized by lysosomal accumulation of low density lipoprotein (LDL)-derived cholesterol. By positional cloning methods, a gene (NPC1) with insertion, deletion, and missense mutations has been identified in NP-C patients. Transfection of NP-C fibroblasts with wild-type NPC1 cDNA resulted in correction of their excessive lysosomal storage of LDL cholesterol, thereby defining the critical role of NPC1 in regulation of intracellular cholesterol trafficking. The 1278-amino acid NPC1 protein has sequence similarity to the morphogen receptor PATCHED and the putative sterol-sensing regions of SREBP cleavage-activating protein (SCAP) and 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase.
Allelic deletions involving chromosome 18q occur in more than 70 percent of colorectal cancers. Such deletions are thought to signal the existence of a tumor suppressor gene in the affected region, but until now a candidate suppressor gene on this chromosomal arm had not been identified. A contiguous stretch of DNA comprising 370 kilobase pairs (kb) has now been cloned from a region of chromosome 18q suspected to reside near this gene. Potential exons in the 370-kb region were defined by human-rodent sequence identities, and the expression of potential exons was assessed by an "exon-connection" strategy based on the polymerase chain reaction. Expressed exons were used as probes for cDNA screening to obtain clones that encoded a portion of a gene termed DCC; this cDNA was encoded by at least eight exons within the 370-kb genomic region. The predicted amino acid sequence of the cDNA specified a protein with sequence similarity to neural cell adhesion molecules and other related cell surface glycoproteins. While the DCC gene was expressed in most normal tissues, including colonic mucosa, its expression was greatly reduced or absent in most colorectal carcinomas tested. Somatic mutations within the DCC gene observed in colorectal cancers included a homozygous deletion of the 5' end of the gene, a point mutation within one of the introns, and ten examples of DNA insertions within a 0.17-kb fragment immediately downstream of one of the exons. The DCC gene may play a role in the pathogenesis of human colorectal neoplasia, perhaps through alteration of the normal cell-cell interactions controlling growth.
Theory predicts the existence of barrierless protein folding. Without barriers, folding should be noncooperative and the degree of native structure should be coupled to overall protein stability. We investigated the thermal unfolding of the peripheral subunit binding domain from Escherichia coli's 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex (termed BBL) with a combination of spectroscopic techniques and calorimetry. Each technique probed a different feature of protein structure. BBL has a defined three-dimensional structure at low temperatures. However, each technique showed a distinct unfolding transition. Global analysis with a statistical mechanical model identified BBL as a downhill-folding protein. Because of BBL's biological function, we propose that downhill folders may be molecular rheostats, in which effects could be modulated by altering the distribution of an ensemble of structures.
Acting as a signal, hydrogen peroxide circumvents antioxidant defense by overoxidizing peroxiredoxins (Prxs), the enzymes that metabolize peroxides. We show that sestrins, a family of proteins whose expression is modulated by p53, are required for regeneration of Prxs containing Cys-SO(2)H, thus reestablishing the antioxidant firewall. Sestrins contain a predicted redox-active domain homologous to AhpD, the enzyme catalyzing the reduction of a bacterial Prx, AhpC. Purified Hi95 (sestrin 2) protein supports adenosine triphosphate-dependent reduction of overoxidized PrxI in vitro, indicating that unlike AhpD, which is a disulfide reductase, sestrins are cysteine sulfinyl reductases. As modulators of peroxide signaling and antioxidant defense, sestrins constitute potential therapeutic targets.
The correct attachment of amino acids to their corresponding (cognate) transfer RNA catalysed by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases is a key factor in ensuring the fidelity of protein biosynthesis. Previous studies have demonstrated that the interaction of Escherichia coli tRNA(Gln) with glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase (GlnRS) provides an excellent system to study this highly specific recognition process, also referred to as 'tRNA identity'. Accurate acylation of tRNA depends mainly on two principles: a set of nucleotides in the tRNA molecule (identity elements) responsible for proper discrimination by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and competition between different synthetases for tRNAs. Elements of glutamine identity are located in the anticodon and in the acceptor stem region, including the discriminator base. We report here the production of more than 20 tRNA(2Gln) mutants at positions likely to be involved in tRNA discrimination by the enzyme. Unmodified tRNA, containing the wild-type anticodon and U or G at its 5'-terminus, can be aminocylated by GlnRS with similar kinetic parameters to native tRNA(2Gln). By in vitro aminoacylation the mutant tRNAs showed decreases of up to 3 x 10(5)-fold in the specificity constant (kcat/KM)14 with the major contribution of kcat. Despite these large changes, some of these mutant tRNAs are efficient amber suppressors in vivo. Our results show that strong elements for glutamine identity reside in the anticodon region and in positions 2 and 3 of the acceptor stem, and that the contribution of different identity elements to the overall discrimination varies significantly. We discuss our data in the light of the crystal structure of the GlnRS:tRNA(Gln) complex.
Pharmacological studies support the idea that nitric oxide (NO) serves as a retrograde messenger during long-term potentiation (LTP) in area CA1 of the hippocampus. Mice with a defective form of the gene for neuronal NO synthase (nNOS), however, exhibit normal LTP. The myristoyl protein endothelial NOS (eNOS) is present in the dendrites of CA1 neurons. Recombinant adenovirus vectors containing either a truncated eNOS (a putative dominant negative) or an eNOS fused to a transmembrane protein were used to demonstrate that membrane-targeted eNOS is required for LTP. The membrane localization of eNOS may optimally position the enzyme both to respond to Ca2+ influx and to release NO into the extracellular space during LTP induction.
Relatively high concentrations of dopa and dopamnine were found in Glusulase, an enzyme preparation widely used in studies on catecholamine metabolism. This contamination may be a source of error in some studies, particularly in those measuring the endogenous concentrations of these catechols and their metabolic products.
The vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) are major angiogenic regulators and are involved in several aspects of endothelial cell physiology. However, the detailed role of VEGF-B in blood vessel function has remained unclear. Here we show that VEGF-B has an unexpected role in endothelial targeting of lipids to peripheral tissues. Dietary lipids present in circulation have to be transported through the vascular endothelium to be metabolized by tissue cells, a mechanism that is poorly understood. Bioinformatic analysis showed that Vegfb was tightly co-expressed with nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes across a large variety of physiological conditions in mice, pointing to a role for VEGF-B in metabolism. VEGF-B specifically controlled endothelial uptake of fatty acids via transcriptional regulation of vascular fatty acid transport proteins. As a consequence, Vegfb(-/-) mice showed less uptake and accumulation of lipids in muscle, heart and brown adipose tissue, and instead shunted lipids to white adipose tissue. This regulation was mediated by VEGF receptor 1 and neuropilin 1 expressed by the endothelium. The co-expression of VEGF-B and mitochondrial proteins introduces a novel regulatory mechanism, whereby endothelial lipid uptake and mitochondrial lipid use are tightly coordinated. The involvement of VEGF-B in lipid uptake may open up the possibility for novel strategies to modulate pathological lipid accumulation in diabetes, obesity and cardiovascular diseases.
Swi2/Snf2-type ATPases regulate genome-associated processes such as transcription, replication and repair by catalysing the disruption, assembly or remodelling of nucleosomes or other protein-DNA complexes. It has been suggested that ATP-driven motor activity along DNA disrupts target protein-DNA interactions in the remodelling reaction. However, the complex and highly specific remodelling reactions are poorly understood, mostly because of a lack of high-resolution structural information about how remodellers bind to their substrate proteins. Mot1 (modifier of transcription 1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, denoted BTAF1 in humans) is a Swi2/Snf2 enzyme that specifically displaces the TATA box binding protein (TBP) from the promoter DNA and regulates transcription globally by generating a highly dynamic TBP pool in the cell. As a Swi2/Snf2 enzyme that functions as a single polypeptide and interacts with a relatively simple substrate, Mot1 offers an ideal system from which to gain a better understanding of this important enzyme family. To reveal how Mot1 specifically disrupts TBP-DNA complexes, we combined crystal and electron microscopy structures of Mot1-TBP from Encephalitozoon cuniculi with biochemical studies. Here we show that Mot1 wraps around TBP and seems to act like a bottle opener: a spring-like array of 16 HEAT (huntingtin, elongation factor 3, protein phosphatase 2A and lipid kinase TOR) repeats grips the DNA-distal side of TBP via loop insertions, and the Swi2/Snf2 domain binds to upstream DNA, positioned to weaken the TBP-DNA interaction by DNA translocation. A 'latch' subsequently blocks the DNA-binding groove of TBP, acting as a chaperone to prevent DNA re-association and ensure efficient promoter clearance. This work shows how a remodelling enzyme can combine both motor and chaperone activities to achieve functional specificity using a conserved Swi2/Snf2 translocase.
Most eukaryotic pre-messenger RNAs are processed at their 3' ends by endonucleolytic cleavage and polyadenylation. In yeast, this processing requires polyadenylate [poly(A)] polymerase (PAP) and other proteins that have not yet been characterized. Here, mutations in the PAP1 gene were shown to be synergistically lethal with previously identified mutations in the RNA14 and RNA15 genes, which suggests that their encoded proteins participate in 3'-end processing. Indeed, extracts from ma14 and rna15 mutants were shown to be deficient in both steps of processing. Biochemical complementation experiments and reconstitution of both activities with partially purified cleavage factor I (CF I) validated the genetic prediction.
The gene expression profile of the aging process was analyzed in skeletal muscle of mice. Use of high-density oligonucleotide arrays representing 6347 genes revealed that aging resulted in a differential gene expression pattern indicative of a marked stress response and lower expression of metabolic and biosynthetic genes. Most alterations were either completely or partially prevented by caloric restriction, the only intervention known to retard aging in mammals. Transcriptional patterns of calorie-restricted animals suggest that caloric restriction retards the aging process by causing a metabolic shift toward increased protein turnover and decreased macromolecular damage.
Phosphodiesterases (PDEs) are a superfamily of enzymes that degrade the intracellular second messengers cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP. As essential regulators of cyclic nucleotide signalling with diverse physiological functions, PDEs are drug targets for the treatment of various diseases, including heart failure, depression, asthma, inflammation and erectile dysfunction. Of the 12 PDE gene families, cGMP-specific PDE5 carries out the principal cGMP-hydrolysing activity in human corpus cavernosum tissue. It is well known as the target of sildenafil citrate (Viagra) and other similar drugs for the treatment of erectile dysfunction. Despite the pressing need to develop selective PDE inhibitors as therapeutic drugs, only the cAMP-specific PDE4 structures are currently available. Here we present the three-dimensional structures of the catalytic domain (residues 537-860) of human PDE5 complexed with the three drug molecules sildenafil, tadalafil (Cialis) and vardenafil (Levitra). These structures will provide opportunities to design potent and selective PDE inhibitors with improved pharmacological profiles.
Although differences among species in enzyme maximal activity or concentration are often interpreted as adaptive and important for regulating metabolism, these differences may simply reflect phylogenetic divergence. Phylogenetic analysis of the expression of the glycolytic enzymes among 15 taxa of a North American fish genus (Fundulus) indicated that most variation in enzyme concentration is due to evolutionary distance and may be nonadaptive. However, three enzymes' maximal activities covary with environmental temperature and have adaptive value. Additionally, two pairs of enzymes covary, indicating coevolution. Thus, metabolic flux may be modulated by many different enzymes rather than by a single rate-limiting enzyme.
Redox proteins catalyse the reactions of a wide variety of otherwise intractable substrates, such as dinitrogen, alkanes, arenes, terpenes and steroids. Two major factors impede the utilization of these enzymes--the inefficient electron transfer between the enzyme and electrode, and the properties often, but not inevitably, associated with enzymes, such as instability, complexity, and expense. We have now shown that the former can be overcome and that proteins can be coupled, via electrodes, to a number of energy sources; the latter is the subject of much effort elsewhere. We demonstrated previously that certain redox proteins can be reduced very efficiently electrochemically (Fig. 1a). Light and hydrogen are the two other convenient energy sources that could be used for such reductions, and we now report the reduction of cytochrome c by these means.
Sequential expression of variant surface glycoproteins (VSGs) enables the parasitic protozoan Trypanosoma brucei to evade the immune response of its mammalian hosts. Studies of several VSGs, which have been isolated as soluble molecules following disruption of cells in the absence of detergent, have indicated extensive amino acid diversity and the absence of a hydrophobic segment which might serve to anchor the carboxy terminus to the membrane. The carboxy-terminal tryptic peptides of six VSGs have recently been characterized and shown to be glycosylated. Three of these VSGs terminated with a glycosylated aspartate or asparagine residue (Asx), suggesting that the VSG was cleaved following synthesis and glycosylation and before characterization. We present here nucleotide sequence data which suggest that the primary translation product of one VSG gene contains a hydrophobic tail at the carboxy terminus which is not found on the isolated, mature glycoprotein. The data also predict that the glycosylated residue is aspartic acid rather than the anticipated asparagine.
A 6.8-kilobase DNA fragment containing the sequence coding for the constant region of the mouse immunoglobulin gamma1 heavy chain was cloned from total cellular DNA. Electron microscopic and nucleotide sequencing studies showed that the three protein domains and the hinge region are encoded in separate DNA segments.
Effective methods are needed to identify and isolate those genes that are differentially expressed in various cells or under altered conditions. This report describes a method to separate and clone individual messenger RNAs (mRNAs) by means of the polymerase chain reaction. The key element is to use a set of oligonucleotide primers, one being anchored to the polyadenylate tail of a subset of mRNAs, the other being short and arbitrary in sequence so that it anneals at different positions relative to the first primer. The mRNA subpopulations defined by these primer pairs were amplified after reverse transcription and resolved on a DNA sequencing gel. When multiple primer sets were used, reproducible patterns of amplified complementary DNA fragments were obtained that showed strong dependence on sequence specificity of either primer.
Bacteria living within eukaryotic cells can be essential for the survival or reproduction of the host but in other cases are among the most successful pathogens. Environmental Chlamydiae, including strain UWE25, thrive as obligate intracellular symbionts within protozoa; are recently discovered relatives of major bacterial pathogens of humans; and also infect human cells. Genome analysis of UWE25 predicted that this symbiont is unable to synthesize the universal electron carrier nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+). Compensation of limited biosynthetic capacity in intracellular bacteria is usually achieved by import of primary metabolites. Here, we report the identification of a candidate transporter protein from UWE25 that is highly specific for import of NAD+ when synthesized heterologously in Escherichia coli. The discovery of this candidate NAD+/ADP exchanger demonstrates that intact NAD+ molecules can be transported through cytoplasmic membranes. This protein acts together with a newly discovered nucleotide transporter and an ATP/ADP translocase, and allows UWE25 to exploit its host cell by means of a sophisticated metabolic parasitism.
Small GTP-binding (G) proteins are activated by GDP/GTP nucleotide exchange stimulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). Nucleotide dissociation from small G protein-GEF complexes involves transient GDP-bound intermediates whose structures have never been described. In the case of Arf proteins, small G proteins that regulate membrane traffic in eukaryotic cells, such intermediates can be trapped either by the natural inhibitor brefeldin A or by charge reversal at the catalytic glutamate of the Sec7 domain of their GEFs. Here we report the crystal structures of these intermediates that show that membrane recruitment of Arf and nucleotide dissociation are separate reactions stimulated by Sec7. The reactions proceed through sequential rotations of the Arf.GDP core towards the Sec7 catalytic site, and are blocked by interfacial binding of brefeldin A and unproductive stabilization of GDP by charge reversal. The structural characteristics of the reaction and its modes of inhibition reveal unexplored ways in which to inhibit the activation of small G proteins.
After observations that Macaca nemestrina were exceptionally susceptible to simian immunodeficiency virus and human immunodeficiency virus type-2 (HIV-2), studies of HIV-1 replication were initiated. Several strains of HIV-1, including a recent patient isolate, replicated in vitro in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and in CD4-positive M. nemestrina lymphocytes in a CD4-dependent fashion. Eight animals were subsequently inoculated with either cell-associated or cell-free suspensions of HIV-1. All animals had HIV-1 isolated by cocultivation, had HIV-1 DNA in their PBMCs as shown by polymerase chain reaction, and experienced sustained seroconversion to a broad spectrum of HIV-1 proteins. Macaca nemestrina is an animal model of HIV-1 infections that provides opportunities for evaluating the pathogenesis of acute HIV-1 replication and candidate vaccines and therapies.
Distinct and evolutionarily conserved signal transduction cascades mediate survival or death in response to developmental and environmental cues. The stress-activated protein kinases, or Jun N-terminal kinases (SAPKs/JNKs), are activated in response to a variety of cellular stresses such as changes in osmolarity and metabolism, DNA damage, heat shock, ischaemia, or inflammatory cytokines. Sek1 (JNKK/MKK4) is a direct activator of SAPKs/JNKs in response to environmental stresses or mitogenic factors. Here we investigate the role of Sek1 in development and apoptosis by deleting sek1 in embryonic stem (ES) cells by homologous recombination. We provide genetic evidence that different stresses utilize distinct signalling pathways for SAPK/JNK activation. sek1(-/-) rag2(-/-) chimaeric mice have normal numbers of mature T cells but fewer immature CD4+CD8+ thymocytes. The sek1 mutation did not affect the induction of apoptosis in response to environmental stresses in ES and T cells: instead, sek1 protected thymocytes from CD95 (Fas)- and CD3-mediated apoptosis. These data indicate that SEK1 mediates survival signals in T-cell development.
Vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR) is the target of warfarin, the most widely prescribed anticoagulant for thromboembolic disorders. Although estimated to prevent twenty strokes per induced bleeding episode, warfarin is under-used because of the difficulty of controlling dosage and the fear of inducing bleeding. Although identified in 1974 (ref. 2), the enzyme has yet to be purified or its gene identified. A positional cloning approach has become possible after the mapping of warfarin resistance to rat chromosome 1 (ref. 3) and of vitamin K-dependent protein deficiencies to the syntenic region of human chromosome 16 (ref. 4). Localization of VKOR to 190 genes within human chromosome 16p12-q21 narrowed the search to 13 genes encoding candidate transmembrane proteins, and we used short interfering RNA (siRNA) pools against individual genes to test their ability to inhibit VKOR activity in human cells. Here, we report the identification of the gene for VKOR based on specific inhibition of VKOR activity by a single siRNA pool. We confirmed that MGC11276 messenger RNA encodes VKOR through its expression in insect cells and sensitivity to warfarin. The expressed enzyme is 163 amino acids long, with at least one transmembrane domain. Identification of the VKOR gene extends our understanding of blood clotting, and should facilitate development of new anticoagulant drugs.
The crystalline complex of pancreatic ribonuclease (RNase) with oligomers of d(pA)4 has been solved by x-ray diffraction methods and refined by standard procedures to a conventional crystallographic R factor of 0.22 at 2.5 angstrom resolution. The asymmetric unit is a complex of one RNase molecule associated with four d(pA)4 oligomers. Although the DNA in this complex is segmented, and therefore shows some discontinuities, it nevertheless traces a continuous path 12 nucleotides in length that passes through the active site cleft of the enzyme and over the surface of the protein. The DNA makes a series of eight to nine electrostatic bonds between its phosphate groups and lysine and arginine residues on the protein, as well as specific chemical interactions at the active site. The path described by the sequence of nucleotides is likely to be that taken by an extended polynucleotide chain when it is bound by the enzyme.
Sequences coding for the bean seed protein phaseolin were inserted into transferred DNA regions of tumor-inducing plasmids. Constructions were devised in which the coding region of phaseolin was fused in the correct reading frame with the coding region of octopine synthase and placed under the transcriptional control of the octopine synthase promoter. Other plasmids were prepared to permit expression of the phaseolin-encoding sequences from the flanking phaseolin promoter region. The RNA transcribed in sunflower cells transformed with these constructions was characterized by hybridization procedures, SI nuclease mapping, and by translation in vitro of extracted RNA. These tests showed that the genomic intervening sequences were correctly excised. Immunoreactive phaseolin polypeptides were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and by antibody hybridization to electrophoretically separated protein extracts of sunflower tissues isolated from crown gall tumors and of transformed sunflower cells grown in tissue culture. These results demonstrate the expression of a plant gene after transfer to a taxonomically distinct botanical family.
A synthetic RNA-DNA bubble duplex construct intended to mimic the nucleic acid framework of a functional transcription elongation complex was designed and assembled. The construct consisted of a double-stranded DNA duplex of variable length (the template and nontemplate strands) containing an internal noncomplementary DNA "bubble" sequence. The 3' end of an RNA oligonucleotide that is partially complementary to the template DNA strand was hybridized within the DNA bubble to form an RNA-DNA duplex with a non-complementary 5'-terminal RNA tail. The addition of either Escherichia coli or T7 RNA polymerase to this construct formed a complex that synthesized RNA with good efficiency from the hybridized RNA primer in a template-directed and processive manner, and displayed other features of a normal promoter-initiated transcription elongation complex. Other such constructs can be designed to examine many of the functional and regulatory properties of transcription systems.
Complementary DNAs (cDNAs) encoding androgen receptors were obtained from human testis and rat ventral prostate cDNA libraries. The amino acid sequence deduced from the nucleotide sequences of the cDNAs indicated the presence of a cysteine-rich DNA-binding domain that is highly conserved in all steroid receptors. The human cDNA was transcribed and the RNA product was translated in cell-free systems to yield a 76-kilodalton protein. The protein was immunoprecipitable by human autoimmune antibodies to the androgen receptor. The protein bound androgens specifically and with high affinity.
Symplekin (Pta1 in yeast) is a scaffold in the large protein complex that is required for 3'-end cleavage and polyadenylation of eukaryotic messenger RNA precursors (pre-mRNAs); it also participates in transcription initiation and termination by RNA polymerase II (Pol II). Symplekin mediates interactions between many different proteins in this machinery, although the molecular basis for its function is not known. Here we report the crystal structure at 2.4 A resolution of the amino-terminal domain (residues 30-340) of human symplekin in a ternary complex with the Pol II carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) Ser 5 phosphatase Ssu72 (refs 7, 10-17) and a CTD Ser 5 phosphopeptide. The N-terminal domain of symplekin has the ARM or HEAT fold, with seven pairs of antiparallel a-helices arranged in the shape of an arc. The structure of Ssu72 has some similarity to that of low-molecular-mass phosphotyrosine protein phosphatase, although Ssu72 has a unique active-site landscape as well as extra structural features at the C terminus that are important for interaction with symplekin. Ssu72 is bound to the concave face of symplekin, and engineered mutations in this interface can abolish interactions between the two proteins. The CTD peptide is bound in the active site of Ssu72, with the pSer 5-Pro 6 peptide bond in the cis configuration, which contrasts with all other known CTD peptide conformations. Although the active site of Ssu72 is about 25 A from the interface with symplekin, we found that the symplekin N-terminal domain stimulates Ssu72 CTD phosphatase activity in vitro. Furthermore, the N-terminal domain of symplekin inhibits polyadenylation in vitro, but only when coupled to transcription. Because catalytically active Ssu72 overcomes this inhibition, our results show a role for mammalian Ssu72 in transcription-coupled pre-mRNA 3'-end processing.
Magnaporthe grisea is the most destructive pathogen of rice worldwide and the principal model organism for elucidating the molecular basis of fungal disease of plants. Here, we report the draft sequence of the M. grisea genome. Analysis of the gene set provides an insight into the adaptations required by a fungus to cause disease. The genome encodes a large and diverse set of secreted proteins, including those defined by unusual carbohydrate-binding domains. This fungus also possesses an expanded family of G-protein-coupled receptors, several new virulence-associated genes and large suites of enzymes involved in secondary metabolism. Consistent with a role in fungal pathogenesis, the expression of several of these genes is upregulated during the early stages of infection-related development. The M. grisea genome has been subject to invasion and proliferation of active transposable elements, reflecting the clonal nature of this fungus imposed by widespread rice cultivation.
Images of entire cells are preceding atomic structures of the separate molecular machines that they contain. The resulting gap in knowledge can be partly bridged by protein-protein interactions, bioinformatics, and electron microscopy. Here we use interactions of known three-dimensional structure to model a large set of yeast complexes, which we also screen by electron microscopy. For 54 of 102 complexes, we obtain at least partial models of interacting subunits. For 29, including the exosome, the chaperonin containing TCP-1, a 3'-messenger RNA degradation complex, and RNA polymerase II, the process suggests atomic details not easily seen by homology, involving the combination of two or more known structures. We also consider interactions between complexes (cross-talk) and use these to construct a structure-based network of molecular machines in the cell.
The 18-base-pair sequence element AGGTCGACCAGTACTCCG (the Sal box) signals termination of mouse ribosomal gene transcription. This sequence is recognized by a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein, TTF I, which mediates the termination of transcription by RNA polymerase I (pol I). Subsequently, the ends of the primary transcripts are trimmed by 10 nucleotides in a sequence-dependent 3'-terminal processing reaction. We have now investigated whether TTF I bound to its target sequence will block elongation by any RNA polymerase by steric hindrance, or whether it is specific for elongation by pol I. The results demonstrate that TTF I directs transcription termination with RNA polymerase I from species as divergent as mouse and yeast, but fails to affect elongation by heterologous polymerases (eukaryotic RNA polymerases II and III, Escherichia coli or bacteriophage T3 RNA polymerase). By contrast, purified lac repressor bound to its operator sequence stops elongation by both RNA polymerase I and II.
Biomimetic functional models of the mononuclear copper enzyme galactose oxidase are presented that catalytically oxidize benzylic and allylic alcohols to aldehydes with O2 under mild conditions. The mechanistic fidelity between the models and the natural system is pronounced. Modest structural mimicry proves sufficient to transfer an unusual ligand-based radical mechanism, previously unprecedented outside the protein matrix, to a simple chemical system.
The crystal structure of the recA protein from Escherichia coli at 2.3-A resolution reveals a major domain that binds ADP and probably single- and double-stranded DNA. Two smaller subdomains at the N and C termini protrude from the protein and respectively stabilize a 6(1) helical polymer of protein subunits and interpolymer bundles. This polymer structure closely resembles that of recA/DNA filaments determined by electron microscopy. Mutations in recA protein that enhance coprotease, DNA-binding and/or strand-exchange activity can be explained if the interpolymer interactions in the crystal reflect a regulatory mechanism in vivo.
Light causes both depolarization and adaptation to light in Limulus ventral photoreceptors. Both visual excitation and adaptation were blocked by guanosine 5'-O-(2-thiodiphosphate) (GDP-beta-S), a metabolically stable analog of guanosine 5'-diphosphate (GDP). However, GDP-beta-S did not block the excitation caused by injection of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate into the cell. These results suggest a molecular cascade of visual excitation and adaptation: Light isomerizes the visual pigment rhodopsin, which in turn activates a guanyl nucleotide-binding protein. The binding protein then stimulates production of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, which causes release of calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum.
Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) is an evolutionarily highly conserved molecular chaperone that promotes the survival of stressed cells by inhibiting lysosomal membrane permeabilization, a hallmark of stress-induced cell death. Clues to its molecular mechanism of action may lay in the recently reported stress- and cancer-associated translocation of a small portion of Hsp70 to the lysosomal compartment. Here we show that Hsp70 stabilizes lysosomes by binding to an endolysosomal anionic phospholipid bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate (BMP), an essential co-factor for lysosomal sphingomyelin metabolism. In acidic environments Hsp70 binds with high affinity and specificity to BMP, thereby facilitating the BMP binding and activity of acid sphingomyelinase (ASM). The inhibition of the Hsp70-BMP interaction by BMP antibodies or a point mutation in Hsp70 (Trp90Phe), as well as the pharmacological and genetic inhibition of ASM, effectively revert the Hsp70-mediated stabilization of lysosomes. Notably, the reduced ASM activity in cells from patients with Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) A and B-severe lysosomal storage disorders caused by mutations in the sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1 gene (SMPD1) encoding for ASM-is also associated with a marked decrease in lysosomal stability, and this phenotype can be effectively corrected by treatment with recombinant Hsp70. Taken together, these data open exciting possibilities for the development of new treatments for lysosomal storage disorders and cancer with compounds that enter the lysosomal lumen by the endocytic delivery pathway.
Type II topoisomerases help regulate DNA topology during transcription, replication and recombination by catalysing DNA strand transfer through transient double-stranded breaks. All type II topoisomerases described so far are members of a single protein family. We have cloned and sequenced the genes encoding the A and B subunits of topoisomerase II from the archaeon Sulfolobus shibatae. This enzyme is the first of a new family. It has no similarity with other type II topoisomerases, except for three motifs in the B subunit probably involved in ATP binding and hydrolysis. We also found these motifs in proteins of the Hsp90 and MutL families. The A subunit has similarities with four proteins of unknown function. One of them, the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Spo11 protein, is required for the initiation of meiotic recombination. Mutagenesis, performed on SPO11, of the single tyrosine conserved between the five homologues shows that this amino acid is essential for Spo11 activity. By analogy with the mechanism of action of known type II topoisomerases, we suggest that Spo11 catalyses the formation of double-strand breaks that initiate meiotic recombination in S. cerevisiae.
The Saccharomyces cerevisiae AXL1 gene product Axl1p shares homology with the insulin-degrading enzyme family of endoproteases. Yeast axl1 mutants showed a defect in a-factor pheromone secretion, and a probable site of processing by Axl1p was identified within the a-factor precursor. In addition, Axl1p appears to function as a morphogenetic determinant for axial bud site selection. Amino acid substitutions within the presumptive active site of Axl1p caused defects in propheromone processing but failed to perturb bud site selection. Thus, Axl1p has been shown to participate in the dual regulation of distinct signaling pathways, and a member of the insulinase family has been implicated in propeptide processing.
With the escalation of obesity-related disease, there is great interest in defining the mechanisms that control appetite and body weight. We have identified a link between anabolic energy metabolism and appetite control. Both systemic and intracerebroventricular treatment of mice with fatty acid synthase (FAS) inhibitors (cerulenin and a synthetic compound C75) led to inhibition of feeding and dramatic weight loss. C75 inhibited expression of the prophagic signal neuropeptide Y in the hypothalamus and acted in a leptin-independent manner that appears to be mediated by malonyl-coenzyme A. Thus, FAS may represent an important link in feeding regulation and may be a potential therapeutic target.
How instructive cues present on the cell surface have their precise effects on the actin cytoskeleton is poorly understood. Semaphorins are one of the largest families of these instructive cues and are widely studied for their effects on cell movement, navigation, angiogenesis, immunology and cancer. Semaphorins/collapsins were characterized in part on the basis of their ability to drastically alter actin cytoskeletal dynamics in neuronal processes, but despite considerable progress in the identification of semaphorin receptors and their signalling pathways, the molecules linking them to the precise control of cytoskeletal elements remain unknown. Recently, highly unusual proteins of the Mical family of enzymes have been found to associate with the cytoplasmic portion of plexins, which are large cell-surface semaphorin receptors, and to mediate axon guidance, synaptogenesis, dendritic pruning and other cell morphological changes. Mical enzymes perform reduction-oxidation (redox) enzymatic reactions and also contain domains found in proteins that regulate cell morphology. However, nothing is known of the role of Mical or its redox activity in mediating morphological changes. Here we report that Mical directly links semaphorins and their plexin receptors to the precise control of actin filament (F-actin) dynamics. We found that Mical is both necessary and sufficient for semaphorin-plexin-mediated F-actin reorganization in vivo. Likewise, we purified Mical protein and found that it directly binds F-actin and disassembles both individual and bundled actin filaments. We also found that Mical utilizes its redox activity to alter F-actin dynamics in vivo and in vitro, indicating a previously unknown role for specific redox signalling events in actin cytoskeletal regulation. Mical therefore is a novel F-actin-disassembly factor that provides a molecular conduit through which actin reorganization-a hallmark of cell morphological changes including axon navigation-can be precisely achieved spatiotemporally in response to semaphorins.
DNA has been successfully isolated from both fossilized plant and animal tissues. The oldest material, dated as 25-40 million years old (Tertiary), was obtained from amber-entombed bees and termites. Tissues from both these insects yielded DNA of good quality, which could be amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and subsequently sequenced, including the genes encoding 18S ribosomal RNA and 16S rRNA. We report here the extraction of DNA from a 120-135-million-year-old weevil (Nemonychidae, Coleoptera) found in Lebanese amber, PCR amplification of segments of the 18S rRNA gene and the internal transcribed spacer, and the corresponding nucleotide sequences of their 315- and 226-base-pair fragments, respectively. These sequences were used for preliminary phylogenetic analysis of the nemonychid's sequence with three extant coleopterans: Lecontellus pinicola (Nemonychidae), Hypera brunneipennis (Curculionidae) and the mealworm Tenebrio molitor (Tenebrionidae), and two extant dipterans: the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster (Drosophilidae) and mosquito Aedes albopictus (Culicidae) for the purpose of ascertaining the origin of the extracted and amplified DNA. The results revealed that the PCR-amplified material is that of the extinct nemonychid weevil. This represents the oldest fossil DNA ever extracted and sequenced, extending by 80 million years the age of any previously reported DNA.
Protein-interacting modules help determine the specificity of signal transduction events, and protein phosphorylation can modulate the assembly of such modules into specific signaling complexes. Although phosphotyrosine-binding modules have been well-characterized, phosphoserine- or phosphothreonine-binding modules have not been described. WW domains are small protein modules found in various proteins that participate in cell signaling or regulation. WW domains of the essential mitotic prolyl isomerase Pin1 and the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 bound to phosphoproteins, including physiological substrates of enzymes, in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. The Pin1 WW domain functioned as a phosphoserine- or phosphothreonine-binding module, with properties similar to those of SRC homology 2 domains. Phosphoserine- or phosphothreonine-binding activity was required for Pin1 to interact with its substrates in vitro and to perform its essential function in vivo.
Blood-feeding arthropods secrete special salivary proteins that suppress the defensive reaction they induce in their hosts. This is in contrast to herbivores, which are thought to be helpless victims of plant defences elicited by their oral secretions. On the basis of the finding that caterpillar regurgitant can reduce the amount of toxic nicotine released by the tobacco plant Nicotiana tabacum, we investigate here whether specific salivary components from the caterpillar Helicoverpa zea might be responsible for this suppression. We find that the enzyme glucose oxidase counteracts the production of nicotine induced by the caterpillar feeding on the plant.
During sporulation in Bacillus subtilis, expression of developmental genes spoIVCB and cotD is induced in the mother cell compartment of the sporangium at morphological stages IV and V, respectively. A 27-kilodalton RNA polymerase sigma factor called sigma K (or sigma 27) has been found that causes weak transcription of spoIVCB and strong transcription of cotD. A 14-kD protein was also discovered that changes the specificity of sigma K-containing RNA polymerase, greatly stimulating spoIVCB transcription and markedly repressing cotD transcription. Both sigma K and the 14-kD protein are products of genes known to be required for expression of specific genes in the mother cell. Thus, sigma K directs gene expression in the mother cell and it is proposed that inactivation or sequestering of the 14-kD protein switches the temporal pattern of gene expression during the transition from stages IV to V of development.
The bacteria causing diphtheria, whooping cough, cholera and other diseases secrete mono-ADP-ribosylating toxins that modify intracellular proteins. Here, we describe four structures of a catalytically active complex between a fragment of Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A (ETA) and its protein substrate, translation elongation factor 2 (eEF2). The target residue in eEF2, diphthamide (a modified histidine), spans across a cleft and faces the two phosphates and a ribose of the non-hydrolysable NAD+ analogue, betaTAD. This suggests that the diphthamide is involved in triggering NAD+ cleavage and interacting with the proposed oxacarbenium intermediate during the nucleophilic substitution reaction, explaining the requirement of diphthamide for ADP ribosylation. Diphtheria toxin may recognize eEF2 in a manner similar to ETA. Notably, the toxin-bound betaTAD phosphates mimic the phosphate backbone of two nucleotides in a conformational switch of 18S rRNA, thereby achieving universal recognition of eEF2 by ETA.
One of the molecular mechanisms capable of regulating the physiological properties of neurones is the phosphorylation of ion channels and other cellular components by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. Another protein kinase present in high concentrations in the mammalian brain is protein kinase C (a calcium/phosphatidylserine/diacylglycerol-dependent protein kinase), but there is no direct evidence, as yet, for the involvement of this enzyme in the control of neuronal excitability. We now present evidence that activation of endogenous protein kinase C by the tumour-promoting phorbol ester TPA (12-O-tetradecanoyl- phorbol-13-acetate), or intracellular injection of the purified enzyme, enhances the voltage-sensitive calcium current in bag cell neurones of the mollusc Aplysia.
The Lyme disease spirochaete, Borrelia burgdorferi s.l., is the only Borrelia known to infect both mammals and birds. The main vertebrate reservoirs of B. burgdorferi are thought to be various small and intermediate size mammals, but the importance of birds as a reservoir has not been thoroughly explored. In the Northern and Southern Hemispheres the seabird tick, Ixodes uriae, is prevalent and closely associated with many species of colony-nesting marine birds. Here we report the presence of spirochaetes, demonstrated by immunofluorescent assay, by polymerase chain reaction and in culture, in I. uriae infesting razorbills on an island in the Baltic Sea. This island is free from mammals. The protein profile of the spirochaetes and the sequences of their flagellin and ospA genes are identical to those of the Lyme disease spirochaete, Borrelia burgdorferi s.l., previously isolated from I. ricinus on a nearby island. In biopsies from the foot web of razorbills, B. burgdorferi-specific DNA was detected after amplification by polymerase chain reaction. Our results suggest that birds play an important part in the maintenance of B. burgdorferi and that mammals may not be a prerequisite for its life cycle.
Evidence from several model systems suggests that nonhistone chromosomal proteins may regulate gene expression in eukaryotic cells. The data indicate that the synthesis of new species of nonhistone chromosomal proteins as well as modifications of preexisting nonhistone chromosomal proteins are involved in the control of transcription. However, from the vast number of proteins included in this class, it is apparent that, in addition to regulating the transcription of defined genome loci, the nonhistone chromosomal proteins include enzymes that have a general function, proteins that are involved in determining the structure of chromatin, as well as proteins that serve as recognition sites for binding of regulatory macromolecules. The presence of a nucleoplasmic pool of nonhistone chromosomal proteins which may exchange with the chromatin has also been reported (89). While it is clear that the nonhistone chromosomal proteins play a key role in the regulation of gene expression, the exact manner in which they interact with the genome to initiate, modify, or augment the transcription of specific RNA molecules remains to be resolved.
5-Cytosine-DNA-methyltransferases, which are found in many organisms ranging from bacteriophages to mammals, transfer a methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine to the carbon-5 of a cytosine residue in specific DNA target sequences. Some phage-encoded methyltransferases methylate more than one sequence: these enzymes contain several independent target-recognizing domains each responsible for recognizing a different site. The amino-acid sequences of these multispecific methyltransferases reveal that some enzymes in addition carry domains that do not contribute to the enzymes' methylation potential, but strongly resemble previously identified target-recognizing domains. Here we show that introducing defined amino-acid alterations into these inactive domains endows these enzymes with additional methylation specificities. Gel retardation analysis demonstrates that these novel methylation specificities correlate with the acquisition of additional DNA-binding potential of the proteins.
Transcription factor IID (TFIID) recognizes the TATA element of promoters transcribed by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and serves as the base for subsequent association by other general transcription factors and RNAPII. The carboxyl-terminal domain of TFIID is highly conserved and contains an imperfect repetition of a 60-amino acid sequence. These repeats are separated by a region rich in basic amino acids. Mutagenesis of the lysines in this region resulted in a conditioned phenotype in vivo, and the mutant proteins were defective for interactions with transcription factor IIA in vitro. Binding of TFIID to DNA was unaffected. These results suggest that the basic domain of TFIID is important for protein-protein interactions.
In adult animals, template-independent (or N) nucleotides are frequently added during the rearrangement of variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) segments of lymphocyte receptor genes, greatly enhancing junctional diversity. Receptor genes from adult mice carrying a mutation in the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) gene have few N nucleotides, providing proof that this enzyme is essential for creating diversity. Unlike those from normal adults, receptor genes from adult mutant mice show extensive evidence of homology-directed recombination, suggesting that TdT blocks this process. Thus, switch-on of the TdT gene during the first week after birth provokes an even greater expansion of lymphocyte receptor diversity than had previously been thought.
The Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitors (GDIs) negatively regulate Rho-family GTPases. The inhibitory activity of GDI derives both from an ability to bind the carboxy-terminal isoprene of Rho family members and extract them from membranes, and from inhibition of GTPase cycling between the GTP- and GDP-bound states. Here we demonstrate that these binding and inhibitory functions of rhoGDI can be attributed to two structurally distinct regions of the protein. A carboxy-terminal folded domain of relative molecular mass 16,000 (M[r] 16K) binds strongly to the Rho-family member Cdc42, yet has little effect on the rate of nucleotide dissociation from the GTPase. The solution structure of this domain shows a beta-sandwich motif with a narrow hydrophobic cleft that binds isoprenes, and an exposed surface that interacts with the protein portion of Cdc42. The amino-terminal region of rhoGDI is unstructured in the absence of target and contributes little to binding, but is necessary to inhibit nucleotide dissociation from Cdc42. These results lead to a model of rhoGDI function in which the carboxy-terminal binding domain targets the amino-terminal inhibitory region to GTPases, resulting in membrane extraction and inhibition of nucleotide cycling.
Profilin is generally thought to regulate actin polymerization, but the observation that acidic phospholipids dissociate the complex of profilin and actin raised the possibility that profilin might also regulate lipid metabolism. Profilin isolated from platelets binds with high affinity to small clusters of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) molecules in micelles and also in bilayers with other phospholipids. The molar ratio of the complex of profilin with PIP2 is 1:7 in micelles of pure PIP2 and 1:5 in bilayers composed largely of other phospholipids. Profilin competes efficiently with platelet cytosolic phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C for interaction with the PIP2 substrate and thereby inhibits PIP2 hydrolysis by this enzyme. The cellular concentrations and binding characteristics of these molecules are consistent with profilin being a negative regulator of the phosphoinositide signaling pathway in addition to its established function as an inhibitor of actin polymerization.
Eubacterial messenger RNAs are synthesized and translated simultaneously; moreover the speed of ribosomes usually matches that of RNA polymerase. We report here that when in Escherichia coli the host RNA polymerase is replaced by the eightfold faster bacteriophage T7 enzyme for the transcription of the lacZ gene, the beta-galactosidase yield per transcript is depressed 100-fold. But the overexpression of DEAD-box proteins greatly improves this low yield by stabilizing the corresponding transcripts. More generally, it stabilizes inefficiently translated E. coli mRNAs. Ribosome-free mRNA regions, such as those lying behind the fast T7 enzyme or between successive ribosomes on inefficiently translated transcripts, are often unstable and we propose that DEAD-box proteins protect them from endonucleases. These results pinpoint the importance of transcription-translation synchronization for mRNA stability, and reveal an undocumented property of DEAD-box RNA helicases. These proteins have been implicated in a variety of processes involving RNA but not mRNA stability.
Little is known of the fate of viruses involved in long-term obligatory associations with eukaryotes. For example, many species of parasitoid wasps have symbiotic viruses to manipulate host defenses and to allow development of parasitoid larvae. The complete nucleotide sequence of the DNA enclosed in the virus particles injected by a parasitoid wasp revealed a complex organization, resembling a eukaryote genomic region more than a viral genome. Although endocellular symbiont genomes have undergone a dramatic loss of genes, the evolution of symbiotic viruses appears to be characterized by extensive duplication of virulence genes coding for truncated versions of cellular proteins.
Discrete voltage fluctuations that occur spontaneously or in response to dim lights can be recorded from the ventral photoreceptors of Limulus. The injection of vanadate or the hydrolysis-resistant analog of guanosine triphosphate, GTP-gamma-S, into ventral photoreceptors induces the production of discrete waves in the dark. The chemically induced discrete waves are similar to those induced by light. Ventral photoreceptors may contain a guanyl nucleotide binding protein whose activation by vanadate or GTP-gamma-S induces the discrete waves.
Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene (VHL) predispose individuals to a variety of tumors, including renal carcinoma, hemangioblastoma of the central nervous system, and pheochromocytoma. Here, a cellular transcription factor, Elongin (SIII), is identified as a functional target of the VHL protein. Elongin (SIII) is a heterotrimer consisting of a transcriptionally active subunit (A) and two regulatory subunits (B and C) that activate transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II. The VHL protein was shown to bind tightly and specifically to the Elongin B and C subunits and to inhibit Elongin (SIII) transcriptional activity in vitro. These findings reveal a potentially important transcriptional regulatory network in which the VHL protein may play a key role.
A long-standing challenge is to understand at the atomic level how protein dynamics contribute to enzyme catalysis. X-ray crystallography can provide snapshots of conformational substates sampled during enzymatic reactions, while NMR relaxation methods reveal the rates of interconversion between substates and the corresponding relative populations. However, these current methods cannot simultaneously reveal the detailed atomic structures of the rare states and rationalize the finding that intrinsic motions in the free enzyme occur on a timescale similar to the catalytic turnover rate. Here we introduce dual strategies of ambient-temperature X-ray crystallographic data collection and automated electron-density sampling to structurally unravel interconverting substates of the human proline isomerase, cyclophilin A (CYPA, also known as PPIA). A conservative mutation outside the active site was designed to stabilize features of the previously hidden minor conformation. This mutation not only inverts the equilibrium between the substates, but also causes large, parallel reductions in the conformational interconversion rates and the catalytic rate. These studies introduce crystallographic approaches to define functional minor protein conformations and, in combination with NMR analysis of the enzyme dynamics in solution, show how collective motions directly contribute to the catalytic power of an enzyme.
DCoH, the dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1, stimulates gene expression by associating with specific DNA binding proteins and also catalyzes the dehydration of the biopterin cofactor of phenylalanine hydroxylase. The x-ray crystal structure determined at 3 angstrom resolution reveals that DCoH forms a tetramer containing two saddle-shaped grooves that comprise likely macromolecule binding sites. Two equivalent enzyme active sites flank each saddle, suggesting that there is a spatial connection between the catalytic and binding activities. Structural similarities between the DCoH fold and nucleic acid-binding proteins argue that the saddle motif has evolved to bind diverse ligands or that DCoH unexpectedly may bind nucleic acids.
The discovery of RNA-mediated gene-silencing pathways, including RNA interference, highlights a fundamental role of short RNAs in eukaryotic gene regulation and antiviral defence. Members of the Dicer and Argonaute protein families are essential components of these RNA-silencing pathways. Notably, these two families possess an evolutionarily conserved PAZ (Piwi/Argonaute/Zwille) domain whose biochemical function is unknown. Here we report the nuclear magnetic resonance solution structure of the PAZ domain from Drosophila melanogaster Argonaute 1 (Ago1). The structure consists of a left-handed, six-stranded beta-barrel capped at one end by two alpha-helices and wrapped on one side by a distinctive appendage, which comprises a long beta-hairpin and a short alpha-helix. Using structural and biochemical analyses, we demonstrate that the PAZ domain binds a 5-nucleotide RNA with 1:1 stoichiometry. We map the RNA-binding surface to the open face of the beta-barrel, which contains amino acids conserved within the PAZ domain family, and we define the 5'-to-3' orientation of single-stranded RNA bound within that site. Furthermore, we show that PAZ domains from different human Argonaute proteins also bind RNA, establishing a conserved function for this domain.
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription through nucleosomes is facilitated in vitro by the protein complex FACT (Facilitates Chromatin Transcription). Here we show that FACT is associated with actively transcribed Pol II genes on Drosophila polytene chromosomes. FACT displays kinetics of recruitment and of chromosome tracking in vivo similar to Pol II and elongation factors Spt5 and Spt6. Interestingly, FACT does not colocalize with Pol III-transcribed genes, which are known to undergo nucleosome transfer rather than disassembly in vitro. Our observations are consistent with FACT being restricted to transcription that involves nucleosome disassembly mechanisms.
Deproteinized skeletal muscle extracts free of major nucleotides from control and insulin-treated rats were fractionated and assayed for inhibition of protein phosphorylation by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-dependent and -independent protein kinases. A differential effect of insulin on a particular fraction was observed on cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase but not on cyclic AMP-independent protein kinases. This fraction that inhibited cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase also stimulated glycogen synthase phosphoprotein phosphatase. It is proposed that this fraction may contain a mediator substance generateed in the presence of insulin.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the progressive accumulation in selected neurons of protein inclusions containing alpha-synuclein and ubiquitin. Rare inherited forms of PD are caused by autosomal dominant mutations in alpha-synuclein or by autosomal recessive mutations in parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. We hypothesized that these two gene products interact functionally, namely, that parkin ubiquitinates alpha-synuclein normally and that this process is altered in autosomal recessive PD. We have now identified a protein complex in normal human brain that includes parkin as the E3 ubiquitin ligase, UbcH7 as its associated E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme, and a new 22-kilodalton glycosylated form of alpha-synuclein (alphaSp22) as its substrate. In contrast to normal parkin, mutant parkin associated with autosomal recessive PD failed to bind alphaSp22. In an in vitro ubiquitination assay, alphaSp22 was modified by normal but not mutant parkin into polyubiquitinated, high molecular weight species. Accordingly, alphaSp22 accumulated in a non-ubiquitinated form in parkin-deficient PD brains. We conclude that alphaSp22 is a substrate for parkin's ubiquitin ligase activity in normal human brain and that loss of parkin function causes pathological alphaSp22 accumulation. These findings demonstrate a critical biochemical reaction between the two PD-linked gene products and suggest that this reaction underlies the accumulation of ubiquitinated alpha-synuclein in conventional PD.
The Golgi-localized, gamma-ear-containing, adenosine diphosphate ribosylation factor-binding proteins (GGAs) are multidomain proteins that bind mannose 6-phosphate receptors (MPRs) in the Golgi and have an essential role in lysosomal enzyme sorting. Here the GGAs and the coat protein adaptor protein-1 (AP-1) were shown to colocalize in clathrin-coated buds of the trans-Golgi networks of mouse L cells and human HeLa cells. Binding studies revealed a direct interaction between the hinge domains of the GGAs and the gamma-ear domain of AP-1. Further, AP-1 contained bound casein kinase-2 that phosphorylated GGA1 and GGA3, thereby causing autoinhibition. This could induce the directed transfer of the MPRs from GGAs to AP-1. MPRs that are defective in binding to GGAs are poorly incorporated into AP-1-containing clathrin-coated vesicles. Thus, the GGAs and AP-1 interact to package MPRs into AP-1-containing coated vesicles.
Posttranslational protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane of yeast requires a seven-component transmembrane complex (the Sec complex) in collaboration with the lumenal Kar2 protein (Kar2p). A translocation substrate was initially bound to the cytosolic face of the purified Sec complex in a signal-sequence-dependent but Kar2p- and nucleotide-independent manner. In a subsequent reaction, in which Kar2p interacted with the lumenal face of the Sec complex and hydrolyzed adenosine triphosphate, the substrate moved through a channel formed by the Sec complex and was released at the lumenal end. Movement through the channel occurred in detergent solution in the absence of a lipid bilayer.
Earth is over 4,500 million years old. Massive bombardment of the planet took place for the first 500-700 million years, and the largest impacts would have been capable of sterilizing the planet. Probably until 4,000 million years ago or later, occasional impacts might have heated the ocean over 100 degrees C. Life on Earth dates from before about 3,800 million years ago, and is likely to have gone through one or more hot-ocean 'bottlenecks'. Only hyperthermophiles (organisms optimally living in water at 80-110 degrees C) would have survived. It is possible that early life diversified near hydrothermal vents, but hypotheses that life first occupied other pre-bottleneck habitats are tenable (including transfer from Mars on ejecta from impacts there). Early hyperthermophile life, probably near hydrothermal systems, may have been non-photosynthetic, and many housekeeping proteins and biochemical processes may have an original hydrothermal heritage. The development of anoxygenic and then oxygenic photosynthesis would have allowed life to escape the hydrothermal setting. By about 3,500 million years ago, most of the principal biochemical pathways that sustain the modern biosphere had evolved, and were global in scope.
The initiation sites of bidirectional synthesis at the DNA replication origin located at the 3' end of the human lamin B2 gene were investigated. RNA-primed nascent DNA molecules were subjected to second-strand synthesis with appropriate primers, amplified by ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction, and size fractionated. Evidence for precise start sites was obtained. Exploration of close to 1 kilobase, coupled to inhibition of Okazaki fragment synthesis, demonstrates that the leading strands initiate at precise nucleotides on either helix, overlapping by three base pairs, within the area bound to a protein complex possibly analogous to the prereplicative complex of yeast.
Single-molecule observation and manipulation have come of age. With the advent of optical tweezers and other methods for probing and imaging single molecules, investigators have circumvented the model-dependent extrapolation from ensemble assays that has been the hallmark of classical biochemistry and biophysics. In recent years, there have been important advances in the understanding of how motor proteins work. The range of these technologies has also started to expand into areas such as DNA transcription and protein folding. Here, recent experiments with rotary motors, linear motors, RNA polymerase, and titin are described.
The U6 small nuclear (sn)RNA gene (SNR6) from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is transcribed by RNA polymerase III in vivo. This gene is unusual in having a TATA box at position -30, and an essential B-block element located downstream of the T-rich termination signal. The B block is one of the two intragenic promoter elements of transfer RNA genes that are recognized by transcription factor (TF)IIIC (ref. 4). But accurate in vitro transcription of yeast U6 snRNA gene by PolIII in a purified system requires only TFIIIB components, including the TATA-box binding protein TBP. Here we report that, after nucleosome reconstitution or chromatin assembly, U6 snRNA synthesis becomes dependent on TFIIIC and on the integrity of the B-block element. This observation resolves an apparent paradox between in vitro and in vivo results concerning the necessity of the downstream B-block element and sheds light on a new role of TFIIIC in gene activation.
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) was identified nearly 80 years ago as the anti-pernicious anaemia factor in liver, and its importance in human health and disease has resulted in much work on its uptake, cellular transport and utilization. Plants do not contain cobalamin because they have no cobalamin-dependent enzymes. Deficiencies are therefore common in strict vegetarians, and in the elderly, who are susceptible to an autoimmune disorder that prevents its efficient uptake. In contrast, many algae are rich in vitamin B12, with some species, such as Porphyra yezoensis (Nori), containing as much cobalamin as liver. Despite this, the role of the cofactor in algal metabolism remains unknown, as does the source of the vitamin for these organisms. A survey of 326 algal species revealed that 171 species require exogenous vitamin B12 for growth, implying that more than half of the algal kingdom are cobalamin auxotrophs. Here we show that the role of vitamin B12 in algal metabolism is primarily as a cofactor for vitamin B12-dependent methionine synthase, and that cobalamin auxotrophy has arisen numerous times throughout evolution, probably owing to the loss of the vitamin B12-independent form of the enzyme. The source of cobalamin seems to be bacteria, indicating an important and unsuspected symbiosis.
A novel approach to the control of enzyme catalysis is presented in which a disulfide bond engineered into the active-site cleft of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme is capable of switching the activity on and off. Two cysteines (Thr21----Cys and Thr142----Cys) were introduced by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis into the active-site cleft. These cysteines spontaneously formed a disulfide bond under oxidative conditions in vitro, and the catalytic activity of the oxidized (cross-linked) T4 lysozyme was completely lost. On exposure to reducing agent, however, the disulfide bond was rapidly broken, and the reduced (non-cross-linked) lysozyme was restored to full activity. Thus an enzyme has been engineered such that redox potential can be used to control catalytic activity.
In Drosophila, members of the frizzled family of tissue-polarity genes encode proteins that are likely to function as cell-surface receptors of the type known as Wnt receptors, and to initiate signal transduction across the cell membrane, although how they do this is unclear. We show here that the rat protein Frizzled-2 causes an increase in the release of intracellular calcium which is enhanced by Xwnt-5a, a member of the Wnt family. This release of intracellular calcium is suppressed by an inhibitor of the enzyme inositol monophosphatase and hence of the phosphatidylinositol signalling pathway; this suppression can be rescued by injection of the compound myo-inositol, which overcomes the decrease in this intermediate caused by the inhibitor. Agents that inhibit specific G-protein subunits, pertussis toxin, GDP-beta-S and alpha-transducin also inhibit the calcium release triggered by Xwnt-5a and rat Frizzled-2. Our results indicate that some Wnt proteins work through specific Frizzled homologues to stimulate the phosphatidylinositol signalling pathway via heterotrimeric G-protein subunits.
A highly specific Diels-Alder protein catalyst was made by manipulating the antibody repertoire of the immune system. The catalytic antibody 13G5 catalyzes a disfavored exo Diels-Alder transformation in a reaction for which there is no natural enzyme counterpart and that yields a single regioisomer in high enantiomeric excess. The crystal structure of the antibody Fab in complex with a ferrocenyl inhibitor containing the essential haptenic core that elicited 13G5 was determined at 1.95 angstrom resolution. Three key antibody residues appear to be responsible for the observed catalysis and product control. Tyrosine-L36 acts as a Lewis acid activating the dienophile for nucleophilic attack, and asparagine-L91 and aspartic acid-H50 form hydrogen bonds to the carboxylate side chain that substitutes for the carbamate diene substrate. This hydrogen-bonding scheme leads to rate acceleration and also pronounced stereoselectivity. Docking experiments with the four possible ortho transition states of the reaction explain the specific exo effect and suggest that the (3R,4R)-exo stereoisomer is the preferred product.
In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, PAS genes are essential for the biogenesis and proliferation of peroxisomes. Recently, the first two genes, PAS1 (ref. 3) and PAS3 (ref. 4), have been characterized. Here we report the cloning and sequencing of the PAS2 gene. It encodes a new member of the ubiquitin-conjugating (UBC) protein family and is the first member associated with peroxisomes. The proposed function of the Pas2 protein as a UBC enzyme (UBC10) is supported by the fact that site-directed mutagenesis of a strictly conserved and functionally essential cysteine residue of UBC proteins leads to mutant Pas2 proteins unable to complement pas2 mutant strains. Ubiquitination of proteins is known to play an important part in DNA repair, sporulation, cell cycle control and degradation of abnormal proteins. We provide evidence for a crucial role of the ubiquitin-conjugation pathway in organelle formation.
The influenza C virus (INF-C) hemagglutinin recognizes 9-O-acetyl-N-acetylneuraminic acid. The same protein contains the receptor-destroying enzyme (RDE), which is a 9-O-acetyl-esterase. The RDE was inactivated by the serine esterase inhibitor di-isopropyl fluorophosphate (DFP). [3H]DFP-labeling localized the active site to the heavy chain of the glycoprotein. DFP did not alter the hemagglutination or fusion properties of the protein, but markedly decreased infectivity of the virus, demonstrating that the RDE is important for primary infection. Finally, DFP-treated INF-C bound specifically and irreversibly to cells expressing 9-O-acetylated sialic acids. This provides a probe for a molecule that was hitherto very difficult to study.
Cyclosporin A, a potent immunosuppressive agent, has been widely used to treat patients with solid organ transplants. Although its precise mechanism of action is unknown, it appears to inhibit subsets of T lymphocytes at an early stage in cell activation. Fluorescent, fully active derivatives of cyclosporin A and calmodulin, a protein that binds calcium and is therefore essential to normal cell function, were utilized to demonstrate that cyclosporin A binds to calmodulin. Flow cytometry showed that the calmodulin inhibitors R24571 and W-7 competitively inhibited binding of cyclosporin A to cloned T lymphocytes. Cyclosporin A inhibited the calmodulin-dependent activation of phosphodiesterase in a dose-dependent manner. Binding of cyclosporin A to calmodulin may prevent the latter's role in the activation of the second messengers and enzymes required for effective cell proliferation and function in the immune response.
Heme, the iron-containing cofactor essential for the activity of many enzymes, is incorporated into its target proteins by unknown mechanisms. Here, an Escherichia coli hemoprotein, CcmE, was shown to bind heme in the bacterial periplasm by way of a single covalent bond to a histidine. The heme was then released and delivered to apocytochrome c. Thus, CcmE can be viewed as a heme chaperone guiding heme to its appropriate biological partner and preventing illegitimate complex formation.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive human genetic disorder caused by a deficiency of hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, phenylalanine 4-monooxygenase, EC 1.14.16.1). PKU is a common inborn error of amino-acid metabolism in caucasian populations and approximately 1 in 50 individuals are carriers of a PKU allele. To define the molecular basis of PKU, we characterized twelve restriction fragment-length polymorphism (RFLP) haplotypes of the PAH locus in the northern European population and observed that 90% of the PKU alleles in this population are confined to four common RFLP haplotypes. We have recently reported a splicing mutation in the PAH gene that is associated with RFLP haplotype 3 which is present at about 40% of mutant alleles. We now report the molecular lesion associated with the RFLP haplotype 2 mutant allele. This defect is caused by a C-to-T transition in exon 12 resulting in an amino-acid substitution (Arg to Trp) at residue 408 of PAH. Direct hybridization analysis of the point mutation using a specific oligonucleotide probe demonstrated that this mutation is also in linkage disequilibrium with RFLP haplotype 2 alleles that make up about 20% of mutant PAH genes.
A conserved tyrosine kinase-activated signal transduction pathway has recently been identified that comprises the plasma membrane-bound small guanine-nucleotide-binding protein Ras and the protein kinases Raf, MAP-kinase kinase and MAP kinase. GTP-bound Ras interacts directly with the amino-terminal regulatory domain of Raf, but although Ras and Raf can be coimmunoprecipitated from ligand-stimulated cells, Ras-GTP does not stimulate the kinase activity of Raf in vitro. Furthermore, we have failed to detect Ras in preparations of active detergent-solubilized Raf, demonstrating that once it is activated, Raf does not require Ras. Whereas Raf is normally cytosolic, in cells expressing active Ras, Raf is associated with the plasma membrane. This led us to investigate whether Ras is required to localize Raf to the plasma membrane in order for Raf to become activated. We fused the membrane localization signal of K-Ras(4B) to the carboxy terminus of Raf. This protein is constitutively active and can be further activated by epidermal growth factor, independently of Ras. Our results indicate that Ras functions as a regulated, membrane-bound anchor for Raf, and that other signal(s) also contribute to Raf activation.
Mutations in BRCA1 are associated with a high risk of breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1 participates in the DNA damage response and acts as a ubiquitin ligase. However, its regulation remains poorly understood. Here we report that BRCA1 is modified by small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) in response to genotoxic stress, and co-localizes at sites of DNA damage with SUMO1, SUMO2/3 and the SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9. PIAS SUMO E3 ligases co-localize with and modulate SUMO modification of BRCA1, and are required for BRCA1 ubiquitin ligase activity in cells. In vitro SUMO modification of the BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer greatly increases its ligase activity, identifying it as a SUMO-regulated ubiquitin ligase (SRUbL). Further, PIAS SUMO ligases are required for complete accumulation of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) damage-repair proteins subsequent to RNF8 accrual, and for proficient double-strand break repair. These data demonstrate that the SUMOylation pathway plays a significant role in mammalian DNA damage response.
Complete amino acid sequences have been established for 19 muscle-related proteins and these proteins are each sufficiently abundant to suggest that their mRNA levels are about 0.4% or higher. Based on these considerations, a simple theoretical analysis shows that clones for most of these proteins can be identified within a complementary DNA library by sequencing cDNA inserts from 150-200 randomly selected clones. This procedure should not only rigorously identify specific clones, but it could also uncover amino acid sequence variants of major muscle proteins such as the troponins. We have determined sequences for about 20,000 nucleotides within 178 randomly selected clones of a rabbit muscle cDNA library, and report here that in addition to finding sequences encoding the two known skeletal muscle isotypes of troponin C, we have discovered sequences encoding two forms of troponin T. Over the region of nucleotide sequence overlap in the troponin T clones, the new isotype diverges significantly from its counterpart. Altogether, clones for 13 of the 19 known muscle-specific proteins were identified, in addition to the clone for the new troponin T isotype.
Cells employ a variety of linear motors, such as myosin, kinesin and RNA polymerase, which move along and exert force on a filamentous structure. But only one rotary motor has been investigated in detail, the bacterial flagellum (a complex of about 100 protein molecules). We now show that a single molecule of F1-ATPase acts as a rotary motor, the smallest known, by direct observation of its motion. A central rotor of radius approximately 1 nm, formed by its gamma-subunit, turns in a stator barrel of radius approximately 5nm formed by three alpha- and three beta-subunits. F1-ATPase, together with the membrane-embedded proton-conducting unit F0, forms the H+-ATP synthase that reversibly couples transmembrane proton flow to ATP synthesis/hydrolysis in respiring and photosynthetic cells. It has been suggested that the gamma-subunit of F1-ATPase rotates within the alphabeta-hexamer, a conjecture supported by structural, biochemical and spectroscopic studies. We attached a fluorescent actin filament to the gamma-subunit as a marker, which enabled us to observe this motion directly. In the presence of ATP, the filament rotated for more than 100 revolutions in an anticlockwise direction when viewed from the 'membrane' side. The rotary torque produced reached more than 40 pN nm(-1) under high load.
Galactose dehydrogenase, a soluble enzyme of the mammalian liver, catalyzes the conversion of galactose to galactonic acid. This reaction, together with the subsequent formation of 3-ketogalactonic acid which can be decarboxylated to yield d-xylulose, is a newly discovered pathway for the metabolism of galactosee. This pathway may account for the oxidation of galactose observed in pathients with galactosemia.
The eukaryotic TATA-binding protein TBP, which is required for transcription by RNA polymerase II, is tightly associated with a particular set of factors in the TFIID complex, and as such provides a target for transcriptional regulation exerted by upstream factors. An embryonic carcinoma (EC) cell-specific activity like that of the viral factor E1A has been implicated in the mediation of transactivation from the retinoic acid receptor to human TBP, but yeast TBP cannot perform this function. Using TBP mutants with an altered TATA-box-binding specificity, we show here that yeast TBP can mediate transcriptional activation in mammalian cells and that its inability to convey retinoic acid-dependent transactivation in EC cells is due to specific residues in its core region. These residues preclude a functional association with the cellular E1A-like activity. TBP is thus a target for retinoic acid-dependent transactivation in EC cells by providing a surface for interaction with the EC cell-specific E1A-like activity.
F-actin is a helical assembly of actin, which is a component of muscle fibres essential for contraction and has a crucial role in numerous cellular processes, such as the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia, as the most abundant component and regulator of cytoskeletons by dynamic assembly and disassembly (from G-actin to F-actin and vice versa). Actin is a ubiquitous protein and is involved in important biological functions, but the definitive high-resolution structure of F-actin remains unknown. Although a recent atomic model well reproduced X-ray fibre diffraction intensity data from a highly oriented liquid-crystalline sol specimen, its refinement without experimental phase information has certain limitations. Direct visualization of the structure by electron cryomicroscopy, however, has been difficult because it is relatively thin and flexible. Here we report the F-actin structure at 6.6 A resolution, made obtainable by recent advances in electron cryomicroscopy. The density map clearly resolves all the secondary structures of G-actin, such as a-helices, b-structures and loops, and makes unambiguous modelling and refinement possible. Complex domain motions that open the nucleotide-binding pocket on F-actin formation, specific D-loop and terminal conformations, and relatively tight axial but markedly loose interprotofilament interactions hydrophilic in nature are revealed in the F-actin model, and all seem to be important for dynamic functions of actin.
Regulation of transcription initiation by proteins binding at DNA sequences some distance from the promoter region itself seems to be a general phenomenon in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Proteins bound to an enhancer site in eukaryotes can turn on a distant gene, whereas efficient repression of some prokaryotic genes such as the gal, ara and deo operons of Escherichia coli, requires the presence of two operator sites, separated by 110, 200 and 600 base pairs (bp) respectively. In the deo operon, which encodes nucleoside catabolizing enzymes, we have shown that efficient and cooperative repression can be obtained when the distance between the two sites ranges from 224 to 997 bp. Here, we report that transcription initiation can be regulated from an operator site placed 1 to 5 kilobases (kb) downstream of the deoP2 promoter (and downstream of the transcribed gene), and present the first experimental data for prokaryotic regulation at distances greater than 1 kb. Our results support the model of DNA loop formation as a common regulatory mechanism explaining both some prokaryotic regulation and the action of eukaryotic enhancers.
Gene regulation by RNA interference requires the functions of the PAZ domain protein Argonaute. In plants, mutations in ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1) are associated with distinctive developmental defects that suggest a role for microRNA (miRNA) in organ polarity. Potential targets of miRNA regulation are the homeodomain/leucine zipper genes PHABULOSA (PHB) and PHAVOLUTA (PHV). These genes are expressed in a polar fashion in leaf primordia and are required for adaxial cell fate. Here we show that a 21-nucleotide miRNA that directs cleavage of PHB/PHV messenger RNA accumulates first in the embryonic meristem, and then in the abaxial domain of the developing leaf. miRNA distribution is disrupted by mutations in AGO1, indicating that AGO1 affects the regulation of miRNA. In addition, interactions between homeodomain/leucine zipper genes and an allelic series of ago1 indicate that miRNA acts as a signal to specify leaf polarity.
The sequencing of euryarchaeal genomes has suggested that the essential protein lysyl-transfer RNA (tRNA) synthetase (LysRS) is absent from such organisms. However, a single 62-kilodalton protein with canonical LysRS activity was purified from Methanococcus maripaludis, and the gene that encodes this protein was cloned. The predicted amino acid sequence of M. maripaludis LysRS is similar to open reading frames of unassigned function in both Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum and Methanococcus jannaschii but is unrelated to canonical LysRS proteins reported in eubacteria, eukaryotes, and the crenarchaeote Sulfolobus solfataricus. The presence of amino acid motifs characteristic of the Rossmann dinucleotide-binding domain identifies M. maripaludis LysRS as a class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, in contrast to the known examples of this enzyme, which are class II synthetases. These data question the concept that the classification of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases does not vary throughout living systems.
Three patients with a form of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, a generalized disorder of connective tissue, have detectable amounts of procollagen in extracts of their skin and tendon. The activity of procollagen peptidase, the enzyme that converts procollagen to collagen, is reduced in cultures of fibroblasts. The clinical manifestations of this syndrome may be related to impaired enzymatic conversion of procollagen to collagen. Cultures of skin fibroblasts from these patients have an increased rate of synthesis of collagenous protein (collagen and procollagen), possibly related to the inability of these cells to convert procollagen to collagen.
Voltage-sensitive sodium channels are responsible for the initiation and propagation of the action potential and therefore are important for neuronal excitability. Complementary DNA clones encoding the beta 1 subunit of the rat brain sodium channel were isolated by a combination of polymerase chain reaction and library screening techniques. The deduced primary structure indicates that the beta 1 subunit is a 22,851-dalton protein that contains a single putative transmembrane domain and four potential extracellular N-linked glycosylation sites, consistent with biochemical data. Northern blot analysis reveals a 1,400-nucleotide messenger RNA in rat brain, heart, skeletal muscle, and spinal cord. Coexpression of beta 1 subunits with alpha subunits increases the size of the peak sodium current, accelerates its inactivation, and shifts the voltage dependence of inactivation to more negative membrane potentials. These results indicate that the beta 1 subunit is crucial in the assembly, expression, and functional modulation of the heterotrimeric complex of the rat brain sodium channel.
A variety of small RNAs ranging from tens to hundreds of nucleotides in length grow autocatalytically in a Q beta replicase (Q beta phage RNA-dependent RNA polymerase) reaction in the absence of added template, and similar RNAs are found in Q beta phage-infected Escherichia coli cells. Three such RNAs have been sequenced. One of them that is 221 nucleotides (nt) long ('MDV-1' RNA) has been found to be partially homologous to Q beta phage RNA 8, which might be considered as an indication of its origination from by-products of the Q beta RNA replication. To gain further insight into the origin and function of these RNAs, we have sequenced a new RNA, 120 nt long, isolated from the products of spontaneous synthesis by the nominally RNA-free Q beta replicase preparation. The minus strand of this RNA appeared to be a recombinant RNA, composed of the internal fragment of Q beta RNA (approximately 80 nt long) and the 33-nt-long 3'-terminal fragment of E. coli tRNA(1Asp). This seems to be the first strong indication of RNA recombination in bacterial cells. The various implications of this finding are discussed.
The agent responsible for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) is thought to be a malfolded, protease-resistant version (PrPres) of the normal cellular prion protein (PrP). The interspecies transmission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) to mice was studied. Although all of the mice injected with homogenate from BSE-infected cattle brain exhibited neurological symptoms and neuronal death, more than 55 percent had no detectable PrPres. During serial passage, PrPres appeared after the agent became adapted to the new host. Thus, PrPres may be involved in species adaptation, but a further unidentified agent may actually transmit BSE.
The DNA polymerase from Thermus aquaticus (Taq polymerase) is homologous to Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I (Pol I) and likewise has domains responsible for DNA polymerase and 5' nuclease activities. The structures to the polymerase domains of Taq polymerase and of the Klenow fragment (KF) of Pol I are almost identical, whereas the structure of a vestigial editing 3'-5' exonuclease domain of Taq polymerase that lies between the other two domains is dramatically altered, resulting in the absence of this activity in the thermostable enzyme. The structures have been solved for editing complexes between KF and single-stranded DNA and for duplex DNA with a 3' overhanging single strand, but not for a complex containing duplex DNA at the polymerase active-site. Here we present the co-crystal structure of Taq polymerase with a blunt-ended duplex DNA bound to the polymerase active-site cleft; the DNA neither bends nor goes through the large polymerase cleft, and the structural form of the bound DNA is between the B and A forms. A wide minor groove allows access to protein side chains that hydrogen-bond to the N3 of purines and the O2 of pyrimidines at the blunt-end terminus. Part of the DNA bound to the polymerase site shares a common binding site with DNA bound to the exonuclease site, but they are translated relative to each other by several angstroms along their helix axes.
In contrast to normal differentiated cells, which rely primarily on mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to generate the energy needed for cellular processes, most cancer cells instead rely on aerobic glycolysis, a phenomenon termed "the Warburg effect." Aerobic glycolysis is an inefficient way to generate adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP), however, and the advantage it confers to cancer cells has been unclear. Here we propose that the metabolism of cancer cells, and indeed all proliferating cells, is adapted to facilitate the uptake and incorporation of nutrients into the biomass (e.g., nucleotides, amino acids, and lipids) needed to produce a new cell. Supporting this idea are recent studies showing that (i) several signaling pathways implicated in cell proliferation also regulate metabolic pathways that incorporate nutrients into biomass; and that (ii) certain cancer-associated mutations enable cancer cells to acquire and metabolize nutrients in a manner conducive to proliferation rather than efficient ATP production. A better understanding of the mechanistic links between cellular metabolism and growth control may ultimately lead to better treatments for human cancer.
Glycogen storage disease (GSD) type 1a is caused by the deficiency of D-glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), the key enzyme in glucose homeostasis. Despite both a high incidence and morbidity, the molecular mechanisms underlying this deficiency have eluded characterization. In the present study, the molecular and biochemical characterization of the human G6Pase complementary DNA, its gene, and the expressed protein, which is indistinguishable from human microsomal G6Pase, are reported. Several mutations in the G6Pase gene of affected individuals that completely inactivate the enzyme have been identified. These results establish the molecular basis of this disease and open the way for future gene therapy.
In Caenorhabditis elegans, the gonad acquires two U-shaped arms by the directed migration of its distal tip cells (DTCs) along the body wall basement membranes. Correct migration of DTCs requires the mig-17 gene, which encodes a member of the metalloprotease-disintegrin protein family. The MIG-17 protein is secreted from muscle cells of the body wall and localizes in the basement membranes of gonad. This localization is dependent on the disintegrin-like domain of MIG-17 and its catalytic activity. These results suggest that the MIG-17 metalloprotease directs migration of DTCs by remodeling the basement membrane.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) prevents the display of class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptide complexes at the surface of infected cells as a means of escaping immune detection. Two HCMV-encoded immunoevasins, US2 and US11, induce the dislocation of class I MHC heavy chains from the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and target them for proteasomal degradation in the cytosol. Although the outcome of the dislocation reactions catalysed is similar, US2 and US11 operate differently: Derlin-1 is a key component of the US11 but not the US2 pathway. So far, proteins essential for US2-dependent dislocation have not been identified. Here we compare interacting partners of wild-type US2 with those of a dislocation-incompetent US2 mutant, and identify signal peptide peptidase (SPP) as a partner for the active form of US2. We show that a decrease in SPP levels by RNA-mediated interference inhibits heavy-chain dislocation by US2 but not by US11. Our data implicate SPP in the US2 pathway and indicate the possibility of a previously unknown function for this intramembrane-cleaving aspartic protease in dislocation from the endoplasmic reticulum.
In animals, the double-stranded RNA-specific endonuclease Dicer produces two classes of functionally distinct, tiny RNAs: microRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). miRNAs regulate mRNA translation, whereas siRNAs direct RNA destruction via the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway. Here we show that, in human cell extracts, the miRNA let-7 naturally enters the RNAi pathway, which suggests that only the degree of complementarity between a miRNA and its RNA target determines its function. Human let-7 is a component of a previously identified, miRNA-containing ribonucleoprotein particle, which we show is an RNAi enzyme complex. Each let-7-containing complex directs multiple rounds of RNA cleavage, which explains the remarkable efficiency of the RNAi pathway in human cells.
We describe a microarray-based screen performed by imposing different genetic selections on thousands of yeast mutants in parallel, representing most genes in the yeast genome. The presence or absence of mutants was detected by oligonucleotide arrays that hybridize to 20-nucleotide "barcodes." We used this method to screen for components of the nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway. Known components of the pathway were identified, as well as a gene not previously known to be involved in NHEJ, NEJ1. Nej1 protein interacts with the amino terminus of LIF1/XRCC4, a recently recognized "guardian of the genome" against cancer.
Recurrent chromosomal translocations involving the mixed lineage leukaemia (MLL) gene initiate aggressive forms of leukaemia, which are often refractory to conventional therapies. Many MLL-fusion partners are members of the super elongation complex (SEC), a critical regulator of transcriptional elongation, suggesting that aberrant control of this process has an important role in leukaemia induction. Here we use a global proteomic strategy to demonstrate that MLL fusions, as part of SEC and the polymerase-associated factor complex (PAFc), are associated with the BET family of acetyl-lysine recognizing, chromatin 'adaptor' proteins. These data provided the basis for therapeutic intervention in MLL-fusion leukaemia, via the displacement of the BET family of proteins from chromatin. We show that a novel small molecule inhibitor of the BET family, GSK1210151A (I-BET151), has profound efficacy against human and murine MLL-fusion leukaemic cell lines, through the induction of early cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. I-BET151 treatment in two human leukaemia cell lines with different MLL fusions alters the expression of a common set of genes whose function may account for these phenotypic changes. The mode of action of I-BET151 is, at least in part, due to the inhibition of transcription at key genes (BCL2, C-MYC and CDK6) through the displacement of BRD3/4, PAFc and SEC components from chromatin. In vivo studies indicate that I-BET151 has significant therapeutic value, providing survival benefit in two distinct mouse models of murine MLL-AF9 and human MLL-AF4 leukaemia. Finally, the efficacy of I-BET151 against human leukaemia stem cells is demonstrated, providing further evidence of its potent therapeutic potential. These findings establish the displacement of BET proteins from chromatin as a promising epigenetic therapy for these aggressive leukaemias.
Complementary DNA clones that code for the immunogenic region of the Plasmodium knowlesi circumsporozoite protein were shown to contain a tandemly repeating 36-base pair unit. A synthetic dodecapeptide corresponding to the predicted reading frame of the repeating nucleotide unit behaved, in an immunoradiometric assay, identically with the native P. knowlesi circumsporozoite protein. The repeating 36-base pair unit occurred 12 times within the gene and accounts for at least one-third of the amino acid sequence of the surface antigen protein.
Adenylyl cyclases are under positive and negative control by guanine nucleotides and hormones. Stimulatory responses are mediated by a guanine nucleotide- and Mg-binding regulatory component (Ns), a protein that has been purified to homogeneity. Inhibitory responses have been hypothesized to be mediated by an analogous regulatory component (Ni) distinct from Ns, but definitive proof for this is lacking and these effects may result from modulation of Ns activity. Recently, Bordetella pertussis toxin has been shown to ADP-ribosylate a peptide that is not part of Ns, and this coincides with attenuation of hormonal inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. We show here that cyc- S49 cells contain a substrate for ADP-ribosylation by pertussis toxin and that the toxin alters GTP dependent inhibition of cyc- adenyl cyclase activity. As cyc- S49 cells do not contain Ns by several criteria, we conclude that Ni is a distinct and separate regulatory component of adenylyl cyclase.
Xenopus oocytes convert a continuously variable stimulus, the concentration of the maturation-inducing hormone progesterone, into an all-or-none biological response-oocyte maturation. Here evidence is presented that the all-or-none character of the response is generated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. Analysis of individual oocytes showed that the response of MAPK to progesterone or Mos was equivalent to that of a cooperative enzyme with a Hill coefficient of at least 35, more than 10 times the Hill coefficient for the binding of oxygen to hemoglobin. The response can be accounted for by the intrinsic ultrasensitivity of the oocyte's MAPK cascade and a positive feedback loop in which the cascade is embedded. These findings provide a biochemical rationale for the all-or-none character of this cell fate switch.
Copper is an essential trace element for eukaryotes and most prokaryotes. However, intracellular free copper must be strictly limited because of its toxic side effects. Complex systems for copper trafficking evolved to satisfy cellular requirements while minimizing toxicity. The factors driving the copper transfer between protein partners along cellular copper routes are, however, not fully rationalized. Until now, inconsistent, scattered and incomparable data on the copper-binding affinities of copper proteins have been reported. Here we determine, through a unified electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS)-based strategy, in an environment that mimics the cellular redox milieu, the apparent Cu(I)-binding affinities for a representative set of intracellular copper proteins involved in enzymatic redox catalysis, in copper trafficking to and within various cellular compartments, and in copper storage. The resulting thermodynamic data show that copper is drawn to the enzymes that require it by passing from one copper protein site to another, exploiting gradients of increasing copper-binding affinity. This result complements the finding that fast copper-transfer pathways require metal-mediated protein-protein interactions and therefore protein-protein specific recognition. Together with Cu,Zn-SOD1, metallothioneins have the highest affinity for copper(I), and may play special roles in the regulation of cellular copper distribution; however, for kinetic reasons they cannot demetallate copper enzymes. Our study provides the thermodynamic basis for the kinetic processes that lead to the distribution of cellular copper.
Many transcriptional activators in prokaryotes are known to bind near a promoter and contact RNA polymerase, but it is not clear whether a protein-protein contact between an activator and RNA polymerase is enough to activate gene transcription. Here we show that contact between a DNA-bound protein and a heterologous protein domain fused to RNA polymerase can elicit transcriptional activation; moreover, the strength of this engineered protein-protein interaction determines the amount of gene activation. Our results indicate that an arbitrary interaction between a DNA-bound protein and RNA polymerase can activate transcription. We also find that when the DNA-bound 'activator' makes contact with two different components of the polymerase, the effect of these two interactions on transcription is synergistic.
Catecholamines signal through the beta2-adrenergic receptor by promoting production of the second messenger adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP). The magnitude of this signal is restricted by desensitization of the receptors through their binding to beta-arrestins and by cAMP degradation by phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzymes. We show that beta-arrestins coordinate both processes by recruiting PDEs to activated beta2-adrenergic receptors in the plasma membrane of mammalian cells. In doing so, the beta-arrestins limit activation of membrane-associated cAMP-activated protein kinase by simultaneously slowing the rate of cAMP production through receptor desensitization and increasing the rate of its degradation at the membrane.
There is an emerging consensus that gene regulation evolves through changes in cis-regulatory elements and transcription factors. Although it is clear how nucleotide substitutions in cis-regulatory elements affect gene expression, it is not clear how amino-acid substitutions in transcription factors influence gene regulation. Here we show that amino-acid changes in the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-b (CEBPB, also known as C/EBP-b) in the stem-lineage of placental mammals changed the way it responds to cyclic AMP/protein kinase A (cAMP/PKA) signalling. By functionally analysing resurrected ancestral proteins, we identify three amino-acid substitutions in an internal regulatory domain of CEBPB that are responsible for the novel function. These amino-acid substitutions reorganize the location of key phosphorylation sites, introducing a new site and removing two ancestral sites, reversing the response of CEBPB to GSK-3b-mediated phosphorylation from repression to activation. We conclude that changing the response of transcription factors to signalling pathways can be an important mechanism of gene regulatory evolution.
Telomeres were originally defined as chromosome caps that prevent the natural ends of linear chromosomes from undergoing deleterious degradation and fusion events. POT1 (protection of telomeres) protein binds the single-stranded G-rich DNA overhangs at human chromosome ends and suppresses unwanted DNA repair activities. TPP1 is a previously identified binding partner of POT1 that has been proposed to form part of a six-protein shelterin complex at telomeres. Here, the crystal structure of a domain of human TPP1 reveals an oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding fold that is structurally similar to the beta-subunit of the telomere end-binding protein of a ciliated protozoan, suggesting that TPP1 is the missing beta-subunit of human POT1 protein. Telomeric DNA end-binding proteins have generally been found to inhibit rather than stimulate the action of the chromosome end-replicating enzyme, telomerase. In contrast, we find that TPP1 and POT1 form a complex with telomeric DNA that increases the activity and processivity of the human telomerase core enzyme. We propose that POT1-TPP1 switches from inhibiting telomerase access to the telomere, as a component of shelterin, to serving as a processivity factor for telomerase during telomere extension.
Apicomplexan parasites invade host cells and immediately initiate cell division. The extracellular parasite discharges transmembrane proteins onto its surface to mediate motility and invasion. These are shed by intramembrane cleavage, a process associated with invasion but otherwise poorly understood. Functional analysis of Toxoplasma rhomboid 4, a surface intramembrane protease, by conditional overexpression of a catalytically inactive form produced a profound block in replication. This was completely rescued by expression of the cleaved cytoplasmic tail of Toxoplasma or Plasmodium apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1). These results reveal an unexpected function for AMA1 in parasite replication and suggest that invasion proteins help to promote parasite switch from an invasive to a replicative mode.
The three-dimensional structure of an unusually active hydrolytic antibody with a phosphonate transition state analog (hapten) bound to the active site has been solved to 2.5 A resolution. The antibody (17E8) catalyzes the hydrolysis of norleucine and methionine phenyl esters and is selective for amino acid esters that have the natural alpha-carbon L configuration. A plot of the pH-dependence of the antibody-catalyzed reaction is bell-shaped with an activity maximum at pH 9.5; experiments on mechanism lend support to the formation of a covalent acyl-antibody intermediate. The structural and kinetic data are complementary and support a hydrolytic mechanism for the antibody that is remarkably similar to that of the serine proteases. The antibody active site contains a Ser-His dyad structure proximal to the phosphorous atom of the bound hapten that resembles two of the three components of the Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad of serine proteases. The antibody active site also contains a Lys residue to stabilize oxyanion formation, and a hydrophobic binding pocket for specific substrate recognition of norleucine and methionine side chains. The structure identifies active site residues that mediate catalysis and suggests specific mutations that may improve the catalytic efficiency of the antibody. This high resolution structure of a catalytic antibody-hapten complex shows that antibodies can converge on active site structures that have arisen through natural enzyme evolution.
An enzyme system with requirements similar to those for replication of phage fd replicative form (RF) DNA in bacteriophage fd-infected cells has been reconstituted with purified fd gene 2 protein, and DNA polymerase III holoenzyme, DNA binding protein I and rep-protein (rep-helicase) of Escherichia coli. The system generates viral circular single strands, which are infective for E. coli spheroplasts. Parental and newly synthesized DNA are covalently connected in early stages of replication, as expected for DNA replication using the rolling circle mechanism. Single-stranded tails of the rolling circle intermediates are cleaved after a full round of replication by gene 2 protein and circularized by the same enzyme molecule.
Ribozymes enhance chemical reaction rates using many of the same catalytic strategies as protein enzymes. In the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) ribozyme, site-specific self-cleavage of the viral RNA phosphodiester backbone requires both divalent cations and a cytidine nucleotide. General acid-base catalysis, substrate destabilization and global and local conformational changes have all been proposed to contribute to the ribozyme catalytic mechanism. Here we report ten crystal structures of the HDV ribozyme in its pre-cleaved state, showing that cytidine is positioned to activate the 2'-OH nucleophile in the precursor structure. This observation supports its proposed role as a general base in the reaction mechanism. Comparison of crystal structures of the ribozyme in the pre- and post-cleavage states reveals a significant conformational change in the RNA after cleavage and that a catalytically critical divalent metal ion from the active site is ejected. The HDV ribozyme has remarkable chemical similarity to protein ribonucleases and to zymogens for which conformational dynamics are integral to biological activity. This finding implies that RNA structural rearrangements control the reactivity of ribozymes and ribonucleoprotein enzymes.
Fatty acid hydroperoxides (lipoxygenase products) are metabolized to allene oxides by a type of dehydrase that has been detected in plants, corals, and starfish oocytes. The allene oxides are unstable epoxide precursors of more complex products such as jasmonic acid, the plant growth hormone. Characterization of the dehydrase enzyme of flaxseed revealed that it is a 55-kilodalton hemoprotein. The spectral characteristics of this dehydrase revealed it to be a cytochrome P-450. It operates with the remarkable activity of greater than or equal to 1000 turnovers per second. The results establish a new catalytic activity for a cytochrome P-450 and illustrate the cooperation of different oxygenases in pathways of fatty acid metabolism.
Proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) through an endosomal/lysosomal pathway generates carboxy-terminal polypeptides that contain an intact beta-amyloid domain. Cleavage by as-yet unidentified proteases releases the beta-amyloid peptide in soluble form. In Alzheimer's disease, aggregated beta-amyloid is deposited in extracellular neuritic plaques. Although most of the molecular mechanisms involving beta-amyloid and APP in the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease are still unclear, changes in APP metabolism may be important in the pathogenesis of the disease. Here we show that transgenic mice expressing the amyloidogenic carboxy-terminal 104 amino acids of APP develop, with ageing, extracellular beta-amyloid immunoreactivity, increased gliosis and microglial reactivity, as well as cell loss in the CA1 region of the hippocampus. Adult transgenic mice demonstrate spatial-learning deficits in the Morris water maze and in maintenance of long-term potentiation (LTP). Our results indicate that alterations in the processing of APP may have considerable physiological effects on synaptic plasticity.
The structure determination of pyruvate kinase shows that each subunit of the tetrameric molecule consists of three domains. The largest of these domains has a remarkable similarity to the structure of triosephosphate isomerase. Another domain shows similarities to many other nucleotide binding proteins. We discuss these similarities and their implications for current arguments on protein taxonomy and evolution.
Sites of DNA synthesis initiation have been detected at the nucleotide level in a yeast origin of bidirectional replication with the use of replication initiation point mapping. The ARS1 origin of Saccharomyces cerevisiae showed a transition from discontinuous to continuous DNA synthesis in an 18-base pair region (nucleotides 828 to 845) from within element B1 toward B2, adjacent to the binding site for the origin recognition complex, the putative initiator protein.
In eukaryotic cells, many short-lived proteins are conjugated with Lys 48-linked ubiquitin chains and degraded by the proteasome. Ubiquitination requires an activating enzyme (E1), a conjugating enzyme (E2) and a ligase (E3). Most ubiquitin ligases use either a HECT (homologous to E6-associated protein C terminus) or a RING (really interesting new gene) domain to catalyse polyubiquitination, but the mechanism of E3 catalysis is poorly defined. Here we dissect this process using mouse Ube2g2 (E2; identical at the amino acid level to human Ube2g2) and human gp78 (E3), an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated conjugating system essential for the degradation of misfolded ER proteins. We demonstrate by expressing recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli that Ube2g2/gp78-mediated polyubiquitination involves preassembly of Lys 48-linked ubiquitin chains at the catalytic cysteine of Ube2g2. The growth of Ube2g2-anchored ubiquitin chains seems to be mediated by an aminolysis-based transfer reaction between two Ube2g2 molecules that each carries a ubiquitin moiety in its active site. Intriguingly, polyubiquitination of a substrate can be achieved by transferring preassembled ubiquitin chains from Ube2g2 to a lysine residue in a substrate.
Natural products containing phosphorus-carbon bonds have found widespread use in medicine and agriculture. One such compound, phosphinothricin tripeptide, contains the unusual amino acid phosphinothricin attached to two alanine residues. Synthetic phosphinothricin (glufosinate) is a component of two top-selling herbicides (Basta and Liberty), and is widely used with resistant transgenic crops including corn, cotton and canola. Recent genetic and biochemical studies showed that during phosphinothricin tripeptide biosynthesis 2-hydroxyethylphosphonate (HEP) is converted to hydroxymethylphosphonate (HMP). Here we report the in vitro reconstitution of this unprecedented C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bond cleavage reaction and X-ray crystal structures of the enzyme. The protein is a mononuclear non-haem iron(ii)-dependent dioxygenase that converts HEP to HMP and formate. In contrast to most other members of this family, the oxidative consumption of HEP does not require additional cofactors or the input of exogenous electrons. The current study expands the scope of reactions catalysed by the 2-His-1-carboxylate mononuclear non-haem iron family of enzymes.
During transcription elongation, three flexibly connected parts of RNA polymerase of Escherichia coli advance along the template so that the front-end domain is followed by the catalytic site which in turn is followed by the RNA product binding site. The advancing enzyme was found to maintain the same conformation throughout extended segments of the transcribed region. However, when the polymerase traveled across certain DNA sites that seemed to briefly anchor the front-end domain, cyclic shifting of the three parts, accompanied by buildup and relief of internal strain, was observed. Thus, elongation proceeded in alternating laps of monotonous and inchworm-like movement with the flexible RNA polymerase configuration being subject to direct sequence control.
The T cytoplasm of maize serves as a model for the nuclear restoration of cytoplasmic male sterility. The rf2 gene, one of two nuclear genes required for fertility restoration in male-sterile T-cytoplasm (cmsT) maize, was cloned. The protein predicted by the rf2 sequence is a putative aldehyde dehydrogenase, which suggests several mechanisms that might explain Rf2-mediated fertility restoration in cmsT maize. Aldehyde dehydrogenase may be involved in the detoxification of acetaldehyde produced by ethanolic fermentation during pollen development, may play a role in energy metabolism, or may interact with URF13, the mitochondrial protein associated with male sterility in cmsT maize.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common, late-onset, and complex trait with multiple risk factors. Concentrating on a region harboring a locus for AMD on 1q25-31, the ARMD1 locus, we tested single-nucleotide polymorphisms for association with AMD in two independent case-control populations. Significant association (P = 4.95 x 10(-10)) was identified within the regulation of complement activation locus and was centered over a tyrosine-402 --> histidine-402 protein polymorphism in the gene encoding complement factor H. Possession of at least one histidine at amino acid position 402 increased the risk of AMD 2.7-fold and may account for 50% of the attributable risk of AMD.
Signaling by cell surface receptors and heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) is one of the most exhaustively studied processes in the cell but remains a major focus of molecular pharmacology research. The pheromone-response system in yeast (see the Connections Map at Science's Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment) has provided numerous major advances in our understanding of G protein signaling and regulation. However, the basic features of this prototypical pathway have remained largely unchanged since the mid-1990s. New tools available in yeast are beginning to uncover new pathway components and interactions and have revealed signaling in unexpected locations within the cell.
Polyadenylation of messenger RNA precursors is a complex process that requires multiple protein factors (for reviews, see refs 1, 2). Cleavage stimulation factor (CstF) is one of these, functioning together with cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor, two cleavage factors, and poly(A)+ polymerase. CstF is composed of three subunits of M(r) 77, 64 and 50K. The 64K and 50K subunits contain, respectively, an RNP-type RNA-binding domain that contacts the pre-mRNA and transducin repeats characteristic of G-protein beta-subunits. Here we report the cloning and characterization of the 77K subunit of human CstF (referred to as 77K). We show that the 77K subunit is required for formation of active CstF and bridges the 64K and 50K subunits. Sequence analyses indicate that the 77K subunit is the homologue of the protein encoded by the Drosophila melanogaster suppressor of forked (su(f)) gene. Mutations in su(f) can enhance or suppress the effects of transposable element insertions, and our data indicate that this is due to changes in polyadenylation. Both the 77K subunit and the su(f) protein share homology with Saccharomyces cerevisiae RNA14, previously shown to be involved in mRNA metabolism. Our results thus also indicate that components of the complex polyadenylation machinery are conserved from yeast to man.
The biosynthesis of penicillin and cephalosporin antibiotics in microorganisms requires the formation of the bicyclic nucleus of penicillin. Isopenicillin N synthase (IPNS), a non-haem iron-dependent oxidase, catalyses the reaction of a tripeptide, delta-(L-alpha-aminoadipoyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine (ACV), and dioxygen to form isopenicillin N and two water molecules. Mechanistic studies suggest the reaction is initiated by ligation of the substrate thiolate to the iron centre, and proceeds through an enzyme-bound monocyclic intermediate. Here we report the crystal structure of IPNS complexed to ferrous iron and ACV, determined to 1.3 A resolution. Based on the structure, we propose a mechanism for penicillin formation that involves ligation of ACV to the iron centre, creating a vacant iron coordination site into which dioxygen can bind. Subsequently, iron-dioxygen and iron-oxo species remove the requisite hydrogens from ACV without the direct assistance of protein residues. The crystal structure of the complex with the dioxygen analogue, NO and ACV bound to the active-site iron supports this hypothesis.
Anthrax lethal toxin, produced by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis, is the major cause of death in animals infected with anthrax. One component of this toxin, lethal factor (LF), is suspected to be a metalloprotease, but no physiological substrates have been identified. Here it is shown that LF is a protease that cleaves the amino terminus of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases 1 and 2 (MAPKK1 and MAPKK2) and that this cleavage inactivates MAPKK1 and inhibits the MAPK signal transduction pathway. The identification of a cleavage site for LF may facilitate the development of LF inhibitors.
An old puzzle in protein biochemistry concerns the ready conversion of ovalbumin, by proteolysis, to the much more stable derivative, plakalbumin. Ovalbumin is now known to belong to the serpin superfamily, most of which are serine proteinase inhibitors. We report here studies of two such members of the family, the human plasma proteins alpha 1-antitrypsin and antithrombin, and show that they undergo a similar change in stability on selective proteolysis. This change, which is accompanied by a loss of inhibitory activity, can best be considered as an irreversible molecular transition from a native stressed (S) conformation, to a more ordered relaxed (R) form. The maintenance of the native S conformation, and hence the maintenance of inhibitory activity, is critically dependent on the integrity of an exposed loop of polypeptide. We propose that the susceptibility of this peptide loop to proteolytic cleavage gives it an incidental role as a physiological switch which allows the inactivation of individual inhibitors by specific proteolysis. The vulnerability of this exposed loop in each inhibitor also explains the pathological action of a number of venoms and toxins. In particular, the demonstration here of the cleavage of antithrombin, by leukocyte elastase, explains an observed change in blood coagulation that accompanies severe inflammation and which can result in fatal thrombosis.
When glycine418 of Escherichia coli glutathione reductase, which is in a closely packed region of the dimer interface, is replaced with a bulky tryptophan residue, the enzyme becomes highly cooperative (Hill coefficient 1.76) for glutathione binding. The cooperativity is lost when the mutant subunit is hybridized with a wild-type subunit to create a heterodimer. The mutation appears to disrupt atomic packing at the dimer interface, which induces a change of kinetic mechanism. A single mutation in a region of the protein remote from the active site can thus act as a molecular switch to confer cooperativity on an enzyme.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) in eukaryotes guide post-transcriptional regulation by means of targeted RNA degradation and translational arrest. They are released by a Dicer nuclease as a 21-24-nucleotide RNA duplex from a precursor in which an imperfectly matched inverted repeat forms a partly double-stranded region. One of the two strands is then recruited by an Argonaute nuclease that is the effector protein of the silencing mechanism. Short interfering RNAs (siRNAs), which are similar to miRNAs, are also produced by Dicer but the precursors are perfectly double-stranded RNA. These siRNAs guide post-transcriptional regulation, as with miRNAs, and epigenetic genome modification. Diverse eukaryotes including fungi, plants, protozoans and metazoans produce siRNAs but, until now, miRNAs have not been described in unicellular organisms and it has been suggested that they evolved together with multicellularity in separate plant and animal lineages. Here we show that the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii contains miRNAs, putative evolutionary precursors of miRNAs and species of siRNAs resembling those in higher plants. The common features of miRNAs and siRNAs in an alga and in higher plants indicate that complex RNA-silencing systems evolved before multicellularity and were a feature of primitive eukaryotic cells.
Prion diseases are transmissible neurodegenerative conditions characterized by the accumulation of protease-resistant forms of the prion protein (PrP), termed PrPres, in the brain. Insoluble PrPres tends to aggregate into amyloid fibrils. The anthracycline 4'-iodo-4'-deoxy-doxorubicin (IDX) binds to amyloid fibrils and induces amyloid resorption in patients with systemic amyloidosis. To test IDX in an experimental model of prion disease, Syrian hamsters were inoculated intracerebrally either with scrapie-infected brain homogenate or with infected homogenate coincubated with IDX. In IDX-treated hamsters, clinical signs of disease were delayed and survival time was prolonged. Neuropathological examination showed a parallel delay in the appearance of brain changes and in the accumulation of PrPres and PrP amyloid.
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are evolutionarily conserved enzymes that convert extracellular signals into various outputs such as cell growth, differentiation and cell death. MAPK phosphatases selectively inactivate MAPKs by dephosphorylating critical phosphothreonine and phosphotyrosine residues. The transcriptional induction of MAPK phosphatase expression by various stimuli, including MAPK activation, has been well documented as a negative-feedback mechanism of MAPK signalling. Here we show that Rnc1, a novel K-homology-type RNA-binding protein in fission yeast, binds and stabilizes Pmp1 messenger RNA, the MAPK phosphatase for Pmk1 (refs 10, 11). Rnc1 therefore acts as a negative regulator of Pmk1 signalling. Notably, Pmk1 phosphorylates Rnc1, causing enhancement of the RNA-binding activity of Rnc1. Thus, Rnc1 is a component of a new negative-feedback loop that regulates the Pmk1 pathway through its binding to Pmp1 mRNA. Our findings--the post-transcriptional mRNA stabilization of a MAPK phosphatase mediated by an RNA-binding protein--provide an additional regulatory mechanism for fine-tuning of MAPK signalling pathways.
Drosophila heat shock activator protein, a rare transacting factor which is induced upon heat shock to bind specifically to the heat shock regulatory sequence in vivo, has been purified from shocked cells to more than 95 percent homogeneity by sequence-specific duplex oligonucleotide affinity chromatography. The purified protein has a relative molecular mass of 110 kilodaltons, binds to the regulatory sequence with great affinity and specificity, and strongly stimulates transcription of the Drosophila hsp70 gene. Studies with this regulatory protein should lead to an understanding of the biochemical pathway underlying the heat shock phenomenon.
The enzyme ADAR2 is a double-stranded RNA-specific adenosine deaminase which is involved in the editing of mammalian messenger RNAs by the site-specific conversion of adenosine to inosine. Here we identify several rat ADAR2 mRNAs produced as a result of two distinct alternative splicing events. One such splicing event uses a proximal 3' acceptor site, adding 47 nucleotides to the ADAR2 coding region, changing the predicted reading frame of the mature ADAR2 transcript. Nucleotide-sequence analysis of ADAR2 genomic DNA revealed the presence of adenosine-adenosine (AA) and adenosine-guanosine (AG) dinucleotides at these proximal and distal alternative 3' acceptor sites, respectively. Use of the proximal 3' acceptor depends upon the ability of ADAR2 to edit its own pre-mRNA, converting the intronic AA to an adenosine-inosine (AI) dinucleotide which effectively mimics the highly conserved AG sequence normally found at 3' splice junctions. Our observations indicate that RNA editing can serve as a mechanism for regulating alternative splicing and they suggest a novel strategy by which ADAR2 can modulate its own expression.
The current model of serine protease diversity theorizes that the earliest protease molecules were simple digestive enzymes that gained complex regulatory functions and restricted substrate specificities through evolution. Among the chymase group of serine proteases are enzymes that convert angiotensin I to angiotensin II, as well as others that simply degrade angiotensins. An ancestral chymase reconstructed with the use of phylogenetic inference, total gene synthesis, and protein expression had efficient and specific angiotensin II-forming activity (turnover number, about 700 per second). Thus, angiotensin II-forming activity is the more primitive state for chymases, and the loss of such activity occurred later in the evolution of some of these serine proteases.
In vitro studies of muscle mitochondrial metabolism in patients with mitochondrial myopathy have identified a variety of functional defects of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, predominantly affecting complex I (NADH-CoQ reductase) or complex III (ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase) in adult cases. These two enzymes consist of approximately 36 subunits, eight of which are encoded by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). The increased incidence of maternal, as opposed to paternal, transmission in familial mitochondrial myopathy suggests that these disorders may be caused by mutations of mtDNA. Multiple restriction endonuclease analysis of leukocyte mtDNA from patients with the disease, and their relatives, showed no differences in cleavage patterns between affected and unaffected individuals in any single maternal line. When muscle mtDNA was studied, nine of 25 patients were found to have two populations of muscle mtDNA, one of which had deletions of up to 7 kilobases in length. These observations demonstrate that mtDNA heteroplasmy can occur in man and that human disease may be associated with defects of the mitochondrial genome.
Insoluble epidermal proteins (possibly keratin), previously considered inert to enzyme action, were solubilized by either trypsin or chymotrypsin. Cleavage of the disulfide bonds prior to enzymatic action is not necessary. In addition, the enzymatic action on intact epidermis is not influenced by the presence or absence of endogenous lipids, soluble proteins, peptides, or amino acids. Solubilization of epidermal protein by chymotrypsin is inhibited by the supernatant solution of the homogenized epidermis.
Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) produced during viral replication is believed to be the critical trigger for activation of antiviral immunity mediated by the RNA helicase enzymes retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5). We showed that influenza A virus infection does not generate dsRNA and that RIG-I is activated by viral genomic single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) bearing 5'-phosphates. This is blocked by the influenza protein nonstructured protein 1 (NS1), which is found in a complex with RIG-I in infected cells. These results identify RIG-I as a ssRNA sensor and potential target of viral immune evasion and suggest that its ability to sense 5'-phosphorylated RNA evolved in the innate immune system as a means of discriminating between self and nonself.
Axonemal dyneins have two or three globular heads joined by flexible tails to a common base, with each head/tail unit consisting of a single heavy-chain polypeptide of relative molecular mass greater than 400,000. The sizes of the components have been deduced by electron microscopy. The isolated beta heavy chain of sea urchin sperm flagella, which is immunologically identical to that of the embryo cilia, is of particular interest as it retains the capability for microtubule translocation in vitro. Limited proteolysis of the beta heavy chain divides it into two fragments, A and B, which sediment separately at 12S and 6S, and possibly correspond to the head and tail domains of the molecule. Dynein ATPase is the energy-transducing enzyme that generates the sliding movement between tubules that underlies the beating of cilia and flagella of eukaryotes, and possibly also other large intracellular movements. Here we report that the deduced amino-acid sequence of the beta heavy chain of axonemal dynein from embryos of the sea urchin Tripneustes gratilla has 4,466 residues and contains the consensus motifs for five nucleotide-binding sites. The probable hydrolytic ATP-binding site can be identified by its location close to or at the V1 site of vanadate-mediated photo-cleavage. The general features of the map of photocleavage and proteolytic peptides reported earlier have been confirmed, except that the map's polarity is reversed. The predicted secondary structure of the beta heavy chain consists of an alpha/beta-type pattern along its whole length. The two longest regions of potential alpha helix, with unbroken heptad hydrophobic repeats 120 and 50 amino acids long, may be of functional importance. But dynein does not seem to contain an extended coiled-coil tail domain.
Rabbit alpha globin gene copies have been made, using reverse transcriptase and DNA polymerase I, and cloned in bacterial plasmids. Plasmid pHb72 has been shown to contain the alpha gene sequence by restriction enzyme analysis and nucleotide sequencing studies, and therefore has been approved for propagation under P2 plus EK1 conditions by the National REcombinant DNA Committee.
The bacterial plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae injects effector proteins into host cells through a type III protein secretion system to cause disease. The enzymatic activities of most of P. syringae effectors and their targets remain obscure. Here we show that the type III effector HopU1 is a mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase (ADP-RT). HopU1 suppresses plant innate immunity in a manner dependent on its ADP-RT active site. The HopU1 substrates in Arabidopsis thaliana extracts were RNA-binding proteins that possess RNA-recognition motifs (RRMs). A. thaliana knockout lines defective in the glycine-rich RNA-binding protein GRP7 (also known as AtGRP7), a HopU1 substrate, were more susceptible than wild-type plants to P. syringae. The ADP-ribosylation of GRP7 by HopU1 required two arginines within the RRM, indicating that this modification may interfere with GRP7's ability to bind RNA. Our results suggest a pathogenic strategy where the ADP-ribosylation of RNA-binding proteins quells host immunity by affecting RNA metabolism and the plant defence transcriptome.
Mass spectrometry has become an increasingly important tool of high accuracy, efficiency, and speed for the routine analysis of nucleic acids. To make it useful for large-scale sequencing of genomic material as required for example in genotyping and clinical diagnosis, it is necessary to find approaches that allow the analysis of sequences much larger than the 100 nucleotides currently possible. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectra of synthetic DNA, restriction enzyme fragments of plasmid DNA, and RNA transcripts up to a size of 2180 nucleotides are reported. The demonstrated mass accuracy of 1 percent or better and the sample requirement of a few femtomoles or less surpass all currently available techniques for the analysis of large nucleic acids. DNA and RNA can be analyzed with only a limited investment in sample purification.
The erythrocyte component carrying the Duffy blood group antigen Fya has been identified as a 35- to 43-kilodalton protein. The protein is degraded by proteases, chymotrypsin, and Pronase, which destroy its antigenicity on intact erythrocytes. Its unusual property of aggregating on being boiled in 5 percent sodium dodecyl sulfate with 5 percent 2-mercaptoethanol distinguishes it from other erythrocyte membrane proteins described to date.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection is a continuing global health crisis that kills 2 million people each year. Although the structurally diverse lipids of the M. tuberculosis cell envelope each have non-redundant roles in virulence or persistence, the molecular mechanisms regulating cell envelope composition in M. tuberculosis are undefined. In higher eukaryotes, membrane composition is controlled by site two protease (S2P)-mediated cleavage of sterol regulatory element binding proteins, membrane-bound transcription factors that control lipid biosynthesis. S2P is the founding member of a widely distributed family of membrane metalloproteases that cleave substrate proteins within transmembrane segments. Here we show that a previously uncharacterized M. tuberculosis S2P homologue (Rv2869c) regulates M. tuberculosis cell envelope composition, growth in vivo and persistence in vivo. These results establish that regulated intramembrane proteolysis is a conserved mechanism controlling membrane composition in prokaryotes and show that this proteolysis is a proximal regulator of cell envelope virulence determinants in M. tuberculosis.
Nova proteins are a neuron-specific alternative splicing factors. We have combined bioinformatics, biochemistry and genetics to derive an RNA map describing the rules by which Nova proteins regulate alternative splicing. This map revealed that the position of Nova binding sites (YCAY clusters) in a pre-messenger RNA determines the outcome of splicing. The map correctly predicted Nova's effect to inhibit or enhance exon inclusion, which led us to examine the relationship between the map and Nova's mechanism of action. Nova binding to an exonic YCAY cluster changed the protein complexes assembled on pre-mRNA, blocking U1 snRNP (small nuclear ribonucleoprotein) binding and exon inclusion, whereas Nova binding to an intronic YCAY cluster enhanced spliceosome assembly and exon inclusion. Assays of splicing intermediates of Nova-regulated transcripts in mouse brain revealed that Nova preferentially regulates removal of introns harbouring (or closest to) YCAY clusters. These results define a genome-wide map relating the position of a cis-acting element to its regulation by an RNA binding protein, namely that Nova binding to YCAY clusters results in a local and asymmetric action to regulate spliceosome assembly and alternative splicing in neurons.
Rice, one of the world's most important food plants, has important syntenic relationships with the other cereal species and is a model plant for the grasses. Here we present a map-based, finished quality sequence that covers 95% of the 389 Mb genome, including virtually all of the euchromatin and two complete centromeres. A total of 37,544 non-transposable-element-related protein-coding genes were identified, of which 71% had a putative homologue in Arabidopsis. In a reciprocal analysis, 90% of the Arabidopsis proteins had a putative homologue in the predicted rice proteome. Twenty-nine per cent of the 37,544 predicted genes appear in clustered gene families. The number and classes of transposable elements found in the rice genome are consistent with the expansion of syntenic regions in the maize and sorghum genomes. We find evidence for widespread and recurrent gene transfer from the organelles to the nuclear chromosomes. The map-based sequence has proven useful for the identification of genes underlying agronomic traits. The additional single-nucleotide polymorphisms and simple sequence repeats identified in our study should accelerate improvements in rice production.
The nucleotide sequence of the region of Gardner-Rasheed feline sarcoma virus (GR-FeSV) encoding its primary translation product, p70gag-fgr, has been determined. From the nucleotide sequence, the amino acid sequence of this transforming protein was deduced. Computer analysis indicates that a portion of P70gag-fgr has extensive amino acid sequence homology with actin, a eukaryotic cytoskeletal protein. A second region of P70gag-fgr is closely related to the tyrosine-specific kinase gene family. Thus, the v-fgr oncogene appears to have arisen as a result of recombinational events involving two distinct cellular genes, one coding for a structural protein and the other for a protein kinase.
A homogenate of liver obtained by biopsy from two patients with cystathioninuria, an inborn error of metabolism, cleaved radioactive cystathionine only slightly until an excess of pyridoxal phosphate was added. The apoenzyme failed to bind the coenzyme normally. Pyridoxine therapy of familial cystathioninuria thus has a sound basis.
Several metazoan splicing factors are characterized by ribonucleoprotein (RNP) consensus sequences and arginine-serine repeats (RS domain) which are essential for their function in splicing. These include members of the SR-protein family (SC35, SF2/ASF), the U1 small nuclear (sn) RNP protein (U1-70K) and the U2 snRNP auxiliary factor (U2AF). SR proteins are phosphorylated in vivo and the phosphorylation state of U1-70K's RS domain influences its splicing activity. Here we report the purification of a protein kinase that is specific for SR proteins and show that it is DNA topoisomerase I. This enzyme lacks a canonical ATP-binding motif but binds ATP with a dissociation constant of 50 nM. Camptothecin and derivatives, known to be specific inhibitors of DNA topoisomerase I, strongly inhibit the kinase activity in the presence of DNA and affect the phosphorylation state of SR proteins. Thus, DNA topoisomerase I may well be one of the SR protein kinases operating in vivo.
Some highly purified glycolytic enzymes have been subjected to isoelectric focusing and found to contain a number of enzymatically active species. Crystalline aldolase A and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase from rabbit muscle were resolved into five components, crystalline aldolase from yeast was resolved into three components, pyruvate kinase from rabbit muscle yielded four components, and yeast enolase was resolved into two components. Rabbit muscle lactate dehydrogenase (M(4)) gave one major peak of protein and enzymatic activity. The profiles of aldolase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and yeast aldolases suggest random combinations of two closely related subunits into tetramers and dimers, respectively. The molecular heterogeneity of the other enzymes is not so easily related to subunit structure.
Calmodulin, a protein that binds calcium with high affinity and specificity, is structurally conserved and functionally preserved throughout the animal and plant kingdoms. It serves as an intracellular Ca2+-receptor and mediates the Ca2+ regulation of cyclic nucleotide and glycogen metabolism, secretion, motility and Ca2+ transport. Calmodulin is also a dynamic component of the mitotic apparatus.
Oxidative damage to DNA, reflected in the formation of 8-oxo-7-hydrodeoxyguanosine (8-oxodG), may be important in mutagenesis, carcinogenesis and the ageing process. Kuchino et al. studied DNA synthesis on oligodeoxynucleotide templates containing 8-oxodG, concluding that the modified base lacked base pairing specificity and directed misreading of pyrimidine residues neighbouring the lesion. Here we report different results, using an approach in which the several products of a DNA polymerase reaction can be measured. In contrast to the earlier report, we find that dCMP and dAMP are incorporated selectively opposite 8-oxodG with transient inhibition of chain extension occurring 3' to the modified base. The potentially mutagenic insertion of dAMP is targeted exclusively to the site of the lesion. The ratio of dCMP to dAMP incorporated varies, depending on the DNA polymerase involved. Chain extension from the dA.8-oxodG pair was efficiently catalysed by all polymerases tested.
Oxygen (O2) consumption and net K+ uptake were measured simultaneously upon reintroduction of K+ into a K+-depleted suspension of renal tubules. The K+/O2 stoichiometries of 11.8 +/- 0.2 and 8.4 +/- 0.6 were obtained for reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide- and flavoprotein-linked substrates, respectively. These values complement classical K+ to adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and ATP/O2 stoichiometries, thereby demonstrating a remarkably efficient coupling between the processes of Na+- and K+-dependent adenosinetriphosphatase-mediated ion transport and oxidative phosphorylation within the intact cell.
Adipocyte differentiation involves the transcriptional activation of several genes in triglyceride metabolism, including the adipose P2 (aP2 or 422) gene that encodes the adipocyte lipid-binding protein ALBP. Within the mouse aP2 promoter region, the AE-1 sequence functions as either a positive or a negative element in the regulation of aP2 gene expression. The AE-1 sequence is the binding site for the positive murine (3T3) adipocyte factor C/EBP-alpha, several human preadipocyte factors, and a 3T3 preadipocyte factor(s) that has been implicated as a repressor of aP2 gene expression. Here we report the cloning of new complementary DNAs that encode the 3T3 preadipocyte factor (termed AEBP1) and demonstrate that AEBP1 expression is abolished during adipocyte differentiation. Furthermore, we show that an activity of a carboxypeptidase associated with AEBP1 is important in the transcriptional repression function of AEBP1. Thus AEBP1 might represent a new type of transcription factor that regulates transcription by cleavage of factors involved in transcription.
Natural product chemical diversity is fuelled by the emergence and ongoing evolution of biosynthetic pathways in secondary metabolism. However, co-evolution of enzymes for metabolic diversification is not well understood, especially at the biochemical level. Here, two parallel assemblies with an extraordinarily high sequence identity from Lyngbya majuscula form a beta-branched cyclopropane in the curacin A pathway (Cur), and a vinyl chloride group in the jamaicamide pathway (Jam). The components include a halogenase, a 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl enzyme cassette for polyketide beta-branching, and an enoyl reductase domain. The halogenase from CurA, and the dehydratases (ECH(1)s), decarboxylases (ECH(2)s) and enoyl reductase domains from both Cur and Jam, were assessed biochemically to determine the mechanisms of cyclopropane and vinyl chloride formation. Unexpectedly, the polyketide beta-branching pathway was modified by introduction of a gamma-chlorination step on (S)-3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl mediated by Cur halogenase, a non-haem Fe(ii), alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent enzyme. In a divergent scheme, Cur ECH(2) was found to catalyse formation of the alpha,beta enoyl thioester, whereas Jam ECH(2) formed a vinyl chloride moiety by selectively generating the corresponding beta,gamma enoyl thioester of the 3-methyl-4-chloroglutaconyl decarboxylation product. Finally, the enoyl reductase domain of CurF specifically catalysed an unprecedented cyclopropanation on the chlorinated product of Cur ECH(2) instead of the canonical alpha,beta C = C saturation reaction. Thus, the combination of chlorination and polyketide beta-branching, coupled with mechanistic diversification of ECH(2) and enoyl reductase, leads to the formation of cyclopropane and vinyl chloride moieties. These results reveal a parallel interplay of evolutionary events in multienzyme systems leading to functional group diversity in secondary metabolites.
Where are we in our understanding of enzyme catalysis? The gloomier view is that protein structure and enzyme function are the finely balanced end-products of many weak interactions that can be summed only by massive computing power, and more precise parameterization than we enjoy at present. The cheerier position is that proteins are built on definable principles, and that enzymes use recognizable catalytic devices that will allow us to understand how existing enzymes work and to design new ones. To assess which interpretation is the more realistic, the simple reaction catalysed by triosephosphate isomerase is considered here. This examination illustrates some of the catalytic features of enzymes that are understood, and exposes a few that are not. But overall, the question turns out to have an optimistic answer.
Mathematical models have become a necessary tool for organizing the rapidly increasing amounts of large-scale data on biochemical pathways and for advanced evaluation of their structure and regulation. Most of these models have addressed specific pathways using either stoichiometric or flux-balance analysis, or fully kinetic Michaelis-Menten representations, metabolic control analysis, or biochemical systems theory. So far, the predictions of kinetic models have rarely been tested using direct experimentation. Here, we validate experimentally a biochemical systems theoretical model of sphingolipid metabolism in yeast. Simulations of metabolic fluxes, enzyme deletion and the effects of inositol (a key regulator of phospholipid metabolism) led to predictions that show significant concordance with experimental results generated post hoc. The model also allowed the simulation of the effects of acute perturbations in fatty-acid precursors of sphingolipids, a situation that is not amenable to direct experimentation. The results demonstrate that modelling now allows testable predictions as well as the design and evaluation of hypothetical 'thought experiments' that may generate new metabolomic approaches.
Antiterminator proteins control gene expression by recognizing control signals near the promoter and preventing transcriptional termination which would otherwise occur at sites that may be a long way downstream. The N protein of bacteriophage lambda recognizes a sequence in the nascent RNA, and modifies RNA polymerase by catalysing the formation of a stable ribonucleoprotein complex on its surface, whereas the lambda Q protein recognizes a sequence in the DNA. These mechanisms of antitermination in lambda provide models for analysing antitermination in viruses such as HIV-1 and in eukaryotic genes.
Single-stranded DNA generated in the cell during DNA metabolism is stabilized and protected by binding of ssDNA-binding (SSB) proteins. Escherichia coli SSB, a representative homotetrameric SSB, binds to ssDNA by wrapping the DNA using its four subunits. However, such a tightly wrapped, high-affinity protein-DNA complex still needs to be removed or repositioned quickly for unhindered action of other proteins. Here we show, using single-molecule two- and three-colour fluorescence resonance energy transfer, that tetrameric SSB can spontaneously migrate along ssDNA. Diffusional migration of SSB helps in the local displacement of SSB by an elongating RecA filament. SSB diffusion also melts short DNA hairpins transiently and stimulates RecA filament elongation on DNA with secondary structure. This observation of diffusional movement of a protein on ssDNA introduces a new model for how an SSB protein can be redistributed, while remaining tightly bound to ssDNA during recombination and repair processes.
Receptors for maleylated or acetylated proteins as well as for alpha-2-macroglobulin-protease complexes on macrophages serve as scavengers by mediating the uptake of macromolecules from the extracellular compartment. Described in this report is a novel function of these receptors on macrophages: regulation of neutral protease secretion. The binding of maleylated bovine serum albumin to macrophages triggered secretion of three neutral proteases: neutral caseinases, plasminogen activator, and cytolytic proteinase. Release of acid phosphatase, however, was not induced. An important biological consequence of protease secretion by macrophages, tumor-cytolysis, was also triggered by engagement of the receptor for maleylated bovine serum albumin. By contrast, the binding of alpha-2-macroglobulin-protease complexes to the macrophages suppressed secretion of all three proteases. Thus two receptors heretofore believed to serve principally as scavengers also regulate secretory functions of macrophages.
The natural history of the fungus-growing ants provides a spectacular example of a symbiotic association of two very different types of organisms. An anthropomorphic description is difficult to resist. The ants are efficient and industrious farmers. Their single crop is a fungus, grown on a substrate of leaves in carefully fertilized, welltended gardens. Virtually every facet of the ants' behavior and life cycle has been shaped by their association with the fungus they culture. A characteristic feature of the ants' gardening technique is the application of their fecal material to the garden and to substrate being prepared for incorporation into the garden. We have established the biochemical significance of this behavior. The fecal material contains proteolytic enzymes which compensate for a deficiency of such enzymes in the fungus. In addition, the nitrogenous components in the fecal material facilitate the initial growth of the fungus. In biochemical terms, then, one can say that the ants contribute their enzymatic apparatus to degrade protein and the fungus contributes its enzymatic apparatus to degrade cellulose. As in the case of so many other natural symbiotic and parasitic associations, the basis is an integration of complementary metabolic capabilities and deficiencies.
The complete (172,282 base pairs) nucleotide sequence of the B95-8 strain of Epstein-Barr virus has been established using the dideoxynucleotide/M13 sequencing procedure. Many RNA polymerase II promoters have been mapped and the mRNAs from these promoters have been assigned to the latent or early/late productive virus cycles. Likely protein-coding regions have been identified and three of these have been shown to encode a ribonucleotide reductase, a DNA polymerase and two surface glycoproteins.
The formation of aminoacyl-transfer RNA is a crucial step in ensuring the accuracy of protein synthesis. Despite the central importance of this process in all living organisms, it remains unknown how archaea and some bacteria synthesize Asn-tRNA and Gln-tRNA. These amide aminoacyl-tRNAs can be formed by the direct acylation of tRNA, catalysed by asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase and glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase, respectively. A separate, indirect pathway involves the formation of mis-acylated Asp-tRNA(Asn) or Glu-tRNA(Gln), and the subsequent amidation of these amino acids while they are bound to tRNA, which is catalysed by amidotransferases. Here we show that all archaea possess an archaea-specific heterodimeric amidotransferase (encoded by gatD and gatE) for Gln-tRNA formation. However, Asn-tRNA synthesis in archaea is divergent: some archaea use asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase, whereas others use a heterotrimeric amidotransferase (encoded by the gatA, gatB and gatC genes). Because bacteria primarily use transamidation, and the eukaryal cytoplasm uses glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase, it appears that the three domains use different mechanisms for Gln-tRNA synthesis; as such, this is the only known step in protein synthesis where all three domains have diverged. Closer inspection of the two amidotransferases reveals that each of them recruited a metabolic enzyme to aid its function; this provides direct evidence for a relationship between amino-acid metabolism and protein biosynthesis.
Posttranslational modifications of proteins regulate many biological processes, including metabolism, signal transduction, and gene expression. The synthetic challenges associated with generating homogeneous populations of selectively modified proteins, however, have hindered detailed studies of the effects of these modifications on protein structure and function. Here, we report an approach to the cotranslational synthesis of selectively glycosylated proteins in which the modified amino acid is genetically encoded. We show that myoglobin containing beta-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)-serine at a defined position can be expressed in Escherichia coli in good yield and with high fidelity. The beta-GlcNAc moiety can be recognized by a saccharide-binding protein, or subsequently modified with a galactosyltransferase to build more complex carbohydrates. This approach should be generally applicable to other posttranslational modifications such as protein phosphorylation, acetylation, and methylation.
Cells respond to DNA double-strand breaks by recruiting factors such as the DNA-damage mediator protein MDC1, the p53-binding protein 1 (53BP1), and the breast cancer susceptibility protein BRCA1 to sites of damaged DNA. Here, we reveal that the ubiquitin ligase RNF8 mediates ubiquitin conjugation and 53BP1 and BRCA1 focal accumulation at sites of DNA lesions. Moreover, we establish that MDC1 recruits RNF8 through phosphodependent interactions between the RNF8 forkhead-associated domain and motifs in MDC1 that are phosphorylated by the DNA-damage activated protein kinase ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM). We also show that depletion of the E2 enzyme UBC13 impairs 53BP1 recruitment to sites of damage, which suggests that it cooperates with RNF8. Finally, we reveal that RNF8 promotes the G2/M DNA damage checkpoint and resistance to ionizing radiation. These results demonstrate how the DNA-damage response is orchestrated by ATM-dependent phosphorylation of MDC1 and RNF8-mediated ubiquitination.
Enzyme preparations from young corn shoots lacked the coenzyme, flavin mononucleotide, that is required for glycolic acid oxidation. When the coenzyme was added to the shoots, the rate of carbon dioxide production during photosynthesis increased. Shoots of wheat or oats did not lack the coenzyme.
Cyclosporin A, a cyclic fungal undecapeptide produced by Tolypocladium inflatum, is a potent immunosuppressive drug originally isolated as an antifungal antibiotic. Cyclosporin A (CsA) is widely used in humans to prevent rejection of transplanted organs such as kidney, heart, bone marrow and liver. The biochemical basis of CsA action is not known: its primary cellular target has been suggested to be calmodulin, the prolactin receptor or cyclophilin, a CsA-binding protein originally isolated from the cytosol of bovine thymocytes. Cyclophilin has been shown to be a highly conserved protein present in all eukaryotic cells tested and to be identical to peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase, a novel type of enzyme that accelerates the slow refolding phase of certain proteins in vitro. We demonstrate that in the lower eukaryotes N. crassa and S. cerevisiae, cyclo philin mediates the cytotoxic CsA effect. In CsA-resistant mutants of both organisms, the cyclophilin protein is either lost completely or, if present, has lost its ability to bind CsA.
The human pathogenic bacterium Clostridium difficile thrives by the fermentation of l-leucine to ammonia, CO(2), 3-methylbutanoate and 4-methylpentanoate under anaerobic conditions. The reductive branch to 4-methylpentanoate proceeds by means of the dehydration of (R)-2-hydroxy-4-methylpentanoyl-CoA to 4-methylpent-2-enoyl-CoA, which is chemically the most demanding step. Ketyl radicals have been proposed to mediate this reaction catalysed by an iron-sulphur-cluster-containing dehydratase, which requires activation by ATP-dependent electron transfer from a second iron-sulphur protein functionally similar to the iron protein of nitrogenase. Here we identify a kinetically competent product-related allylic ketyl radical bound to the enzyme by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy employing isotope-labelled (R)-2-hydroxy-4-methylpentanoyl-CoA species. We also found that the enzyme generated the stabilized pentadienoyl ketyl radical from the substrate analogue 2-hydroxypent-4-enoyl-CoA, supporting the proposed mechanism. Our results imply that also other 2-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratases and the related benzoyl-CoA reductases-present in anaerobically living bacteria-employ ketyl radical intermediates. The absence of radical generators such as coenzyme B12, S-adenosylmethionine or oxygen makes these enzymes unprecedented in biochemistry.
Carbophenothion sulfoxide, an oxidative metabolite of carbophenothion, is reduced to carbophenothion in the living rat and by an in vitro system containing rat liver enzyme, reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, and flavin adenine dinu cleotide phosphate. Reduction of sulfoxides, formed metabolicially from certain commercial organophosphorus insecticides, may be important in ameliorating the toxicity of these compounds.
Molecular replication, a fundamental process of life, has in recent years been the subject of laboratory investigations using simple chemical systems. Whereas the work of Rebek's group has focused on molecular architectures not known in living systems, self-replicating and template-based self-assembling systems based on nucleotides are regarded as potential models for exploring the evolution of replicating systems on the early Earth. Previous replicating oligonucleotides have been of the single-stranded, self-complementary type: small oligonucleotide fragments are assembled on a pre-existing template and linked to form an exact copy of the template. This process cannot easily be reiterated, however, because of the strong binding of the newly formed strand to the original template. Furthermore, DNA replication in living systems operates by complementarity rather than self-complementarity--each newly assembled strand is complementary to, rather than identical to, its template--and the replication process starts and finishes with double helices. Here we report the self-replication of palindromic (symmetrical) duplex DNA-like oligonucleotides, 24 monomers long, in the absence of enzymes by means of a cycle that transfers information from template to copy and is potentially capable of extension to include non-symmetrical sequences, selection and mutation. Replication proceeds by a chemical process involving the formation of an intermediate triplex structure, and is sequence-selective in the sense that mismatches impair its efficiency. These results indicate that DNA-like double-helical molecules can replicate without assistance from proteins, a finding that may be relevant both to the appearance of replicating systems on the early Earth and to the development of new approaches to DNA amplification.
From worm to man, many odorant signals are perceived by the binding of volatile ligands to odorant receptors that belong to the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family. They couple to heterotrimeric G-proteins, most of which induce cAMP production. This second messenger then activates cyclic-nucleotide-gated ion channels to depolarize the olfactory receptor neuron, thus providing a signal for further neuronal processing. Recent findings, however, have challenged this concept of odorant signal transduction in insects, because their odorant receptors, which lack any sequence similarity to other GPCRs, are composed of conventional odorant receptors (for example, Or22a), dimerized with a ubiquitously expressed chaperone protein, such as Or83b in Drosophila. Or83b has a structure akin to GPCRs, but has an inverted orientation in the plasma membrane. However, G proteins are expressed in insect olfactory receptor neurons, and olfactory perception is modified by mutations affecting the cAMP transduction pathway. Here we show that application of odorants to mammalian cells co-expressing Or22a and Or83b results in non-selective cation currents activated by means of an ionotropic and a metabotropic pathway, and a subsequent increase in the intracellular Ca(2+) concentration. Expression of Or83b alone leads to functional ion channels not directly responding to odorants, but being directly activated by intracellular cAMP or cGMP. Insect odorant receptors thus form ligand-gated channels as well as complexes of odorant-sensing units and cyclic-nucleotide-activated non-selective cation channels. Thereby, they provide rapid and transient as well as sensitive and prolonged odorant signalling.
Several human tumour cell lines contain genes that can transform NIH 3T3 cells into malignant cells. Certain genes have been classified as members of the ras oncogene family, namely, Ha-ras, Ki-ras or N-ras. The proteins encoded by the ras family are generally small (Ha-ras, for example, encodes a protein of molecular weight 21,000 named p21), and are associated with the inner surface of the plasma membrane. The only known biochemical property common to all forms of the ras proteins is the ability to bind guanine nucleotides, a property which may be closely related to the transforming ability of ras proteins. A GTP-dependent, apparent autophosphorylation (on threonine 59) activity has been identified only in the case of the v-Ha-ras protein. Although the role of these biochemical activities in the transformation process remains unclear, we have initiated studies to determine the possible biochemical interactions of ras proteins with other membrane components. We report here the evidence that epidermal growth factor enhances the guanine nucleotide binding activity of activated c-Ha-ras or v-Ha-ras p21, and phosphorylation of v-Ha-ras p21, suggesting that some mitogenic growth factors may regulate those activities.
Para-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase inserts oxygen into substrates by means of the labile intermediate, flavin C(4a)-hydroperoxide. This reaction requires transient isolation of the flavin and substrate from the bulk solvent. Previous crystal structures have revealed the position of the substrate para-hydroxybenzoate during oxygenation but not how it enters the active site. In this study, enzyme structures with the flavin ring displaced relative to the protein were determined, and it was established that these or similar flavin conformations also occur in solution. Movement of the flavin appears to be essential for the translocation of substrates and products into the solvent-shielded active site during catalysis.
The innate immune system detects infection by using germline-encoded receptors that are specific for conserved microbial molecules. The recognition of microbial ligands leads to the production of cytokines, such as type I interferons (IFNs), that are essential for successful pathogen elimination. Cytosolic detection of pathogen-derived DNA is one major mechanism of inducing IFN production, and this process requires signalling through TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and its downstream transcription factor, IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). In addition, a transmembrane protein called STING (stimulator of IFN genes; also known as MITA, ERIS, MPYS and TMEM173) functions as an essential signalling adaptor, linking the cytosolic detection of DNA to the TBK1-IRF3 signalling axis. Recently, unique nucleic acids called cyclic dinucleotides, which function as conserved signalling molecules in bacteria, have also been shown to induce a STING-dependent type I IFN response. However, a mammalian sensor of cyclic dinucleotides has not been identified. Here we report evidence that STING itself is an innate immune sensor of cyclic dinucleotides. We demonstrate that STING binds directly to radiolabelled cyclic diguanylate monophosphate (c-di-GMP), and we show that unlabelled cyclic dinucleotides, but not other nucleotides or nucleic acids, compete with c-di-GMP for binding to STING. Furthermore, we identify mutations in STING that selectively affect the response to cyclic dinucleotides without affecting the response to DNA. Thus, STING seems to function as a direct sensor of cyclic dinucleotides, in addition to its established role as a signalling adaptor in the IFN response to cytosolic DNA. Cyclic dinucleotides have shown promise as novel vaccine adjuvants and immunotherapeutics, and our results provide insight into the mechanism by which cyclic dinucleotides are sensed by the innate immune system.
In the mouse circadian clock, a transcriptional feedback loop is at the centre of the clockwork mechanism. Clock and Bmal1 are essential transcription factors that drive the expression of three period genes (Per1-3) and two cryptochrome genes (Cry1 and Cry2). The Cry proteins feedback to inhibit Clock/Bmal1-mediated transcription by a mechanism that does not alter Clock/Bmal1 binding to DNA. Here we show that transcriptional regulation of the core clock mechanism in mouse liver is accompanied by rhythms in H3 histone acetylation, and that H3 acetylation is a potential target of the inhibitory action of Cry. The promoter regions of the Per1, Per2 and Cry1 genes exhibit circadian rhythms in H3 acetylation and RNA polymerase II binding that are synchronous with the corresponding steady-state messenger RNA rhythms. The histone acetyltransferase p300 precipitates together with Clock in vivo in a time-dependent manner. Moreover, the Cry proteins inhibit a p300-induced increase in Clock/Bmal1-mediated transcription. The delayed timing of the Cry1 mRNA rhythm, relative to the Per rhythms, is due to the coordinated activities of Rev-Erbalpha and Clock/Bmal1, and defines a new mechanism for circadian phase control.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the main site of protein and lipid synthesis, membrane biogenesis, xenobiotic detoxification and cellular calcium storage, and perturbation of ER homeostasis leads to stress and the activation of the unfolded protein response. Chronic activation of ER stress has been shown to have an important role in the development of insulin resistance and diabetes in obesity. However, the mechanisms that lead to chronic ER stress in a metabolic context in general, and in obesity in particular, are not understood. Here we comparatively examined the proteomic and lipidomic landscape of hepatic ER purified from lean and obese mice to explore the mechanisms of chronic ER stress in obesity. We found suppression of protein but stimulation of lipid synthesis in the obese ER without significant alterations in chaperone content. Alterations in ER fatty acid and lipid composition result in the inhibition of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA) activity and ER stress. Correcting the obesity-induced alteration of ER phospholipid composition or hepatic Serca overexpression in vivo both reduced chronic ER stress and improved glucose homeostasis. Hence, we established that abnormal lipid and calcium metabolism are important contributors to hepatic ER stress in obesity.
The hypothesis that certain RNA molecules may be able to catalyse RNA replication is central to current theories of the early evolution of life. In support of this idea, we describe here an RNA that synthesizes RNA using the same reaction as that employed by protein enzymes that catalyse RNA polymerization. In the presence of the appropriate template RNA and nucleoside triphosphates, the ribozyme extends an RNA primer by successive addition of up to six mononucleotides. The added nucleotides are joined to the growing RNA chain by 3',5'-phosphodiester linkages. The ribozyme shows marked template fidelity: extension by nucleotides complementary to the template is up to 1,000 times more efficient than is extension by mismatched nucleotides.
To acquire transforming potential, the precursor of the Ras oncoprotein must undergo farnesylation of the cysteine residue located in a carboxyl-terminal tetrapeptide. Inhibitors of the enzyme that catalyzes this modification, farnesyl protein transferase (FPTase), have therefore been suggested as anticancer agents for tumors in which Ras contributes to transformation. The tetrapeptide analog L-731,735 is a potent and selective inhibitor of FPTase in vitro. A prodrug of this compound, L-731,734, inhibited Ras processing in cells transformed with v-ras. L-731,734 decreased the ability of v-ras-transformed cells to form colonies in soft agar but had no effect on the efficiency of colony formation of cells transformed by either the v-raf or v-mos oncogenes. The results demonstrate selective inhibition of ras-dependent cell transformation with a synthetic organic inhibitor of FPTase.
Diacylglycerol (DG) plays a central role in phospholipid metabolism and is an endogenous activator of protein kinase C. We have suggested that constitutive activation of this kinase is one mechanism by which oncogenes transform cells. The ras-encoded proteins are similar to regulatory G-proteins and are candidates for the unknown G-protein that modulates phosphatidylinositol (PI) turnover. Differences in polyphosphoinositide metabolism have been reported for ras-transformed cells. But because these experiments were performed on confluent cultures of established cell lines, the differences are difficult to attribute to ras transformation. Here we show that exponentially growing NIH 3T3 fibroblasts recently transformed by Ha-ras or Ki-ras possess elevated DG concentrations without significant alterations in the levels of other polyphosphoinositide metabolites. The basal phosphorylation of protein kinase C substrate of relative molecular mass (Mr) 80,000 (80K) is significantly increased in all the ras-transformed cell lines. Surprisingly, however, further phosphorylation of this protein on addition of phorbol ester was greatly reduced. Ha-ras cells also show less binding of phorbol ester than control cells, suggesting that elevation of DG causes partial down-regulation in addition to activation of protein kinase C.
Molecular patterns in pathogenic RNAs can be recognized by the innate immune system, and a component of this response is the interferon-induced enzyme RNA-activated protein kinase (PKR). The major activators of PKR have been proposed to be long double-stranded RNAs. We report that RNAs with very limited secondary structures activate PKR in a 5'-triphosphate-dependent fashion in vitro and in vivo. Activation of PKR by 5'-triphosphate RNA is independent of RIG-I and is enhanced by treatment with type 1 interferon (IFN-alpha). Surveillance of molecular features at the 5' end of transcripts by PKR presents a means of allowing pathogenic RNA to be distinguished from self-RNA. The evidence presented here suggests that this form of RNA-based discrimination may be a critical step in mounting an early immune response.
Two of the first human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) strains isolated were authenticated by reanalyzing original cultured samples stored at the Collection Nationale de Culture des Microorganismes as well as uncultured primary material. Cloned polymerase chain reaction products were used to analyze coding sequences of the V3 loop in the gp120 glycoprotein. The original isolate HIV-1 Bru, formerly called LAV, was derived from patient BRU. HIV-1 Lai was derived from patient LAI and contaminated a HIV-1 Bru culture between 20 July and 3 August 1983. The culture became, in effect, HIV-1 Lai, identifiable by a unique motif in the V3 loop. Because of this contamination two, rather than one, HIV-1 isolates were sent to the Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology at the National Cancer Institute on 23 September 1983. Original HIV-1 Bru was indeed present in the sample marked JBB/LAV. However the M2T-/B sample harbored HIV-1 Lai, a strain capable of growing on established cell lines. The striking similarity between HIV-1 Lai (formerly LAV-Bru) and HTLV-3B sequences remains.
Protein-tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are key enzymes in signal-transduction pathways for a wide range of cellular processes. PTKs and PTPs are highly expressed in the central nervous system, which is consistent with the importance of tyrosine phosphorylation in neuronal function. Protein phosphorylation is known to be involved in the regulation of neurotransmitter receptors, but the effects of tyrosine phosphorylation on neurotransmitter receptor function in the central nervous system are unknown. Here we present evidence that in mammalian central neurons tyrosine phosphorylation regulates the function of the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor, a subtype of excitatory amino-acid receptor. NMDA-receptor-mediated whole-cell currents and intracellular Ca2+ responses are depressed by inhibition of PTKs. Conversely, NMDA currents are potentiated by intracellular application of the well characterized PTK pp60c-src. NMDA currents are also potentiated by intracellular administration of an inhibitor of PTPs. Protein-tyrosine phosphorylation is a new mechanism for regulating NMDA receptors and may be important in neuronal development, plasticity and toxicity.
Enzyme-reduced coenzyme binary complexes produce previously unreported shifts in the spectrum of the free coenzyme. These shifts give rise to difference spectra which resemble a general environmental change for reduced diphosphopyridine nucleotide (DPNH) in the glutamic dehydrogenase-DPNH complex, and indicate a more specific enzyme-coenzyme interaction for yeast alcohol dehydrogenase-DPNH, isocitrate dehydrogenase-TPNH, and lactic dehydrogenase-DPNH complexes.
The nucleotide sequence of molecular clones of DNA from a retrovirus, ARV-2, associated with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) was determined. Proviral DNA of ARV-2 (9737 base pairs) has long terminal repeat structures (636 base pairs) and long open reading frames encoding gag (506 codons), pol (1003 codons), and env (863 codons) genes. Two additional open reading frames were identified. Significant amino acid homology with several other retroviruses was noted in the predicted product of gag and pol, but ARV-2 was as closely related to murine and avian retroviruses as it was to human T-cell leukemia viruses (HTLV-I and HTLV-II). By means of an SV-40 vector in transfected simian cells, the cloned gag and env genes of ARV-2 were shown to express viral proteins.
Amino acid sequence homology was found between viral and host encephalitogenic protein. Immune responses were then generated in rabbits by using the viral peptide that cross-reacts with the self protein. Mononuclear cell infiltration was observed in the central nervous systems of animals immunized with the viral peptide. Myelin basic protein (MBP) is a host protein whose encephalitogenic site of ten amino acids induces experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. By computer analysis, hepatitis B virus polymerase (HBVP) was found to share six consecutive amino acids with the encephalitogenic site of rabbit MBP. Rabbits given injections of a selected eight- or ten-amino acid peptide from HBVP made antibody that reacted with the predetermined sequences of HBVP and also with native MBP. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from the immunized rabbits proliferated when incubated with either MBP or HBVP. Central nervous system tissue taken from these rabbits had a histologic picture reminiscent of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. Thus, viral infection may trigger the production of antibodies and mononuclear cells that cross-react with self proteins by a mechanism termed molecular mimicry. Tissue injury from the resultant autoallergic event can take place in the absence of the infectious virus that initiated the immune response.
Campylobacter jejuni, from the delta-epsilon group of proteobacteria, is a microaerophilic, Gram-negative, flagellate, spiral bacterium-properties it shares with the related gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori. It is the leading cause of bacterial food-borne diarrhoeal disease throughout the world. In addition, infection with C. jejuni is the most frequent antecedent to a form of neuromuscular paralysis known as Guillain-Barre syndrome. Here we report the genome sequence of C. jejuni NCTC11168. C. jejuni has a circular chromosome of 1,641,481 base pairs (30.6% G+C) which is predicted to encode 1,654 proteins and 54 stable RNA species. The genome is unusual in that there are virtually no insertion sequences or phage-associated sequences and very few repeat sequences. One of the most striking findings in the genome was the presence of hypervariable sequences. These short homopolymeric runs of nucleotides were commonly found in genes encoding the biosynthesis or modification of surface structures, or in closely linked genes of unknown function. The apparently high rate of variation of these homopolymeric tracts may be important in the survival strategy of C. jejuni.
Nuclear exclusion of the PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted in chromosome 10) tumour suppressor has been associated with cancer progression. However, the mechanisms leading to this aberrant PTEN localization in human cancers are currently unknown. We have previously reported that ubiquitinylation of PTEN at specific lysine residues regulates its nuclear-cytoplasmic partitioning. Here we show that functional promyelocytic leukaemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies co-ordinate PTEN localization by opposing the action of a previously unknown PTEN-deubiquitinylating enzyme, herpesvirus-associated ubiquitin-specific protease (HAUSP, also known as USP7), and that the integrity of this molecular framework is required for PTEN to be able to enter the nucleus. We find that PTEN is aberrantly localized in acute promyelocytic leukaemia, in which PML function is disrupted by the PML-RARalpha fusion oncoprotein. Remarkably, treatment with drugs that trigger PML-RARalpha degradation, such as all-trans retinoic acid or arsenic trioxide, restore nuclear PTEN. We demonstrate that PML opposes the activity of HAUSP towards PTEN through a mechanism involving the adaptor protein DAXX (death domain-associated protein). In support of this paradigm, we show that HAUSP is overexpressed in human prostate cancer and is associated with PTEN nuclear exclusion. Thus, our results delineate a previously unknown PML-DAXX-HAUSP molecular network controlling PTEN deubiquitinylation and trafficking, which is perturbed by oncogenic cues in human cancer, in turn defining a new deubiquitinylation-dependent model for PTEN subcellular compartmentalization.
The sensitivity to regulation of proteins undergoing covalent modification can be greatly increased when the substrates saturate the converter enzymes. This phenomenon, termed zero-order ultrasensitivity, has been found to occur in the reversible phosphorylation of isocitrate dehydrogenase. The possibility that this enhanced sensitivity is a common feature of covalent regulatory systems is discussed.
The immobilization antigens (i-antigens) of Paramecium, large polypeptides of relative molecular mass approximately 300,000, are located on the cell surface. Each i-antigen is encoded by a different unlinked gene, and no more than one gene is expressed at a time. The proteins and the mRNAs and genes encoding them are readily isolated. Here we report the nucleotide sequence of three regions of the A i-antigen gene from stock 51 of Paramecium tetraurelia. Surprisingly, all reading frames contain TAA and TAG stop codons, even though there is evidence that one reading frame of these sequences codes for the i-antigen. We suggest that in Paramecium UAA and UAG code for amino acids, instead of serving as translational stops as they do in all other organisms.
The mechanisms that regulate plant lipid metabolism determine the dietary and industrial value of storage oils found in economically important species and may control the ability of many plants to survive exposure to temperature extremes. Many of the problems researchers have in defining the pathways, enzymes, and genes involved in plant lipid metabolism appear to be amenable to analysis by genetic approaches. Mutants with alterations in membrane lipid composition have also been used to study the structural and adaptive roles of lipids. The application of genetic engineering methods affords opportunities for researchers to apply knowledge gained about plant lipid metabolism toward enhanced use of plant oils as abundant and renewable sources of reduced carbon.
The role of constraint in adaptive evolution is an open question. Directed evolution of an engineered beta-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase (IMDH), with coenzyme specificity switched from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP), always produces mutants with lower affinities for NADP. This result is the correlated response to selection for relief from inhibition by NADPH (the reduced form of NADP) expected of an adaptive landscape subject to three enzymatic constraints: an upper limit to the rate of maximum turnover (kcat), a correlation in NADP and NADPH affinities, and a trade-off between NAD and NADP usage. Two additional constraints, high intracellular NADPH abundance and the cost of compensatory protein synthesis, have ensured the conserved use of NAD by IMDH throughout evolution. Our results show that selective mechanisms and evolutionary constraints are to be understood in terms of underlying adaptive landscapes.
In mammals, several well-defined metabolic changes occur during infection, many of which are attributable to products of the reticuloendothelial system. Among these changes, a hypertriglyceridaemic state is frequently evident, resulting from defective triglyceride clearance, caused by systemic suppression of the enzyme lipoprotein lipase (LPL). We have found previously that macrophages secrete the hormone cachectin, which specifically suppresses LPL activity in cultured adipocytes (3T3-L1 cells). When originally purified from RAW 264.7 (mouse macrophage) cells, cachectin was shown to have a pI of 4.7, a subunit size of relative molecular mass (Mr) 17,000 and to form non-covalent multimers. A receptor for cachectin was identified on non-tumorigenic cultured cells and on normal mouse liver membranes. A new high-yield purification technique has enabled us to determine further details of the structure of mouse cachectin. We now report that a high degree of homology exists between the N-terminal sequence of mouse cachectin and the N-terminal sequence recently determined for human tumour necrosis factor (TNF). Purified cachectin also possesses potent TNF activity in vitro. These findings suggest that the 'cachectin' and 'TNF' activities of murine macrophage conditioned medium are attributable to a single protein, which modulates the metabolic activities of normal as well as neoplastic cells through interaction with specific high-affinity receptors.
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), which comprises only about 1% of the phospholipids in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane, is the source of three second messengers, activates many ion channels and enzymes, is involved in both endocytosis and exocytosis, anchors proteins to the membrane through several structured domains and has other roles. How can a single lipid in a fluid bilayer regulate so many distinct physiological processes? Spatial organization might be the key to this. Recent studies suggest that membrane proteins concentrate PIP2 and, in response to local increases in intracellular calcium concentration, release it to interact with other biologically important molecules.
The fidelity and specificity of information flow within a cell is controlled by scaffolding proteins that assemble and link enzymes into signalling circuits. These circuits can be inhibited by bacterial effector proteins that post-translationally modify individual pathway components. However, there is emerging evidence that pathogens directly organize higher-order signalling networks through enzyme scaffolding, and the identity of the effectors and their mechanisms of action are poorly understood. Here we identify the enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 type III effector EspG as a regulator of endomembrane trafficking using a functional screen, and report ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) GTPases and p21-activated kinases (PAKs) as its relevant host substrates. The 2.5 A crystal structure of EspG in complex with ARF6 shows how EspG blocks GTPase-activating-protein-assisted GTP hydrolysis, revealing a potent mechanism of GTPase signalling inhibition at organelle membranes. In addition, the 2.8 A crystal structure of EspG in complex with the autoinhibitory Ia3-helix of PAK2 defines a previously unknown catalytic site in EspG and provides an allosteric mechanism of kinase activation by a bacterial effector. Unexpectedly, ARF and PAKs are organized on adjacent surfaces of EspG, indicating its role as a 'catalytic scaffold' that effectively reprograms cellular events through the functional assembly of GTPase-kinase signalling complex.
Analysis of the genome sequence of the small hyperthermophilic archaeal parasite Nanoarchaeum equitans has not revealed genes encoding the glutamate, histidine, tryptophan and initiator methionine transfer RNA species. Here we develop a computational approach to genome analysis that searches for widely separated genes encoding tRNA halves that, on the basis of structural prediction, could form intact tRNA molecules. A search of the N. equitans genome reveals nine genes that encode tRNA halves; together they account for the missing tRNA genes. The tRNA sequences are split after the anticodon-adjacent position 37, the normal location of tRNA introns. The terminal sequences can be accommodated in an intervening sequence that includes a 12-14-nucleotide GC-rich RNA duplex between the end of the 5' tRNA half and the beginning of the 3' tRNA half. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and aminoacylation experiments of N. equitans tRNA demonstrated maturation to full-size tRNA and acceptor activity of the tRNA(His) and tRNA(Glu) species predicted in silico. As the joining mechanism possibly involves tRNA trans-splicing, the presence of an intron might have been required for early tRNA synthesis.
Tankyrase, a protein with homology to ankyrins and to the catalytic domain of poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase (PARP), was identified and localized to human telomeres. Tankyrase binds to the telomeric protein TRF1 (telomeric repeat binding factor-1), a negative regulator of telomere length maintenance. Like ankyrins, tankyrase contains 24 ankyrin repeats in a domain responsible for its interaction with TRF1. Recombinant tankyrase was found to have PARP activity in vitro, with both TRF1 and tankyrase functioning as acceptors for adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosylation. ADP-ribosylation of TRF1 diminished its ability to bind to telomeric DNA in vitro, suggesting that telomere function in human cells is regulated by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation.
AFTER exposure to secretagogues the small intestine changes from a tissue that absorbs fluid and electrolyte from lumen to blood into a tissue that secretes electrolyte and fluid into the lumen(1-4). It has been shown that this secretion results from an increase in the passive Cl(-) permeability of the mucosal border, which permits Nad to leak passively from the lateral intercellular spaces, where it is present at hypertonic concentrations(5), into the mucosal bathing solution. Na(+) and water, electroosmotically coupled to Na(+) movement, leak through the tight junctions(1,2), and Cl(-) leaks through relatively anhydrous anion-selective channels, induced withira the mucosal border by secretagogues. The increased reflux of NaCl from the lateral intercellular space accounts for both the apparent decrease in electroneutral NaCl uptake across the mucosal border induced by secretagogues and the apparent increase in active CP secretion and short-circuit current(3,6,7). We have investigated the mechanism by which intestinal secretagogues increase passive Cl(-) permeability and thereby cause secretion. Cl(-) permeability is increased by several secretagogues, some of which, such as theophylline and choleragen, increase intracellular cyclic AMP concentration, and others, such as A23187, the Ca(2+) ionophore, or carbachol, do not(8). Thus there has been no known common mode of secretory induction. To investigate this problem we used two drugs that prevent intestinal secretion in vitro, RMI 12330A (Richardson Merrell), and the antipsychotic pheno-thiazine trifluoperazine (Stelazine, Smith, Kline and French). RMI 12330A prevents secretion by inhibiting choleragen-induced adenylyl cyclase activity(9). Stelazine inhibits phosphodiesterase in tissues(11,12) by preventing the activation of the enzyme by Ca(2+)-dependent regulator protein, CDR. We report here that it also inhibits Cl(-) secretion and binds to CDR.
Tropomyosins are a closely related family of proteins with a dimeric alpha-coiled-coil structure. Skeletal isoforms are composed of two types of subunits, alpha and beta which, in turn, are assorted into two main molecular species alpha alpha and alpha beta. Both isoforms are present in different molar ratios in individual skeletal muscle types. In small mammals, however, only alpha-chain is expressed in cardiac muscle. Tropomyosin, in association with the troponin complex (troponin-I, -T and -C) plays a central role in the Ca2+-dependent regulation of vertebrate striated muscle contraction. On the other hand, despite structural similarities with the striated isoforms, the function of this protein in smooth muscle and non-muscle cells remains unknown, because in these cells contraction is thought to be regulated by myosin-linked processes independently of tropomyosin. Here we report the nucleotide sequences of cloned complementary DNAs for rat striated and smooth muscle alpha-tropomyosin. Comparison of the derived amino-acid sequences reveals the existence of tissue-specific peptides that delimit the putative troponin-I and troponin-T binding domains of tropomyosin. S1-nuclease mapping studies reveal the existence of three distinct alpha-tropomyosin messenger RNA isoforms each encoding a different protein; these isoforms are tissue-specific, developmentally regulated and most probably encoded by the same gene.
Transcription initiation factor TFIID is a multisubunit complex containing a TATA-box-binding factor (TFIID tau/TBP) and associated polypeptide factors (TAFs) with sizes ranging from M(r) approximately 20,000 to > 200,000. As a result of direct promoter interactions, TFIID nucleates the assembly of RNA polymerase II and other initiation factors into a functional preinitiation complex. Although the native TFIID complex mediates both basal and activator-dependent transcription in reconstituted systems, TBP itself is competent for only basal transcription. Thus, TAFs are essential cofactors for regulated transcription. The complementary DNAs encoding the p230 (M(r) 230,000), p110 and p85 subunits of TFIID have recently been cloned. Here we report the molecular cloning and characterization of the p62, p42, p28 and p22 subunits. These participate in a network of heterogeneous protein-protein interactions within TFIID. Sequence similarities between p62/p42 and the histones H4/H3, respectively, suggest that these subunits have a functional relationship with chromatin.
The molecular controls governing organ shape are poorly understood. In the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the gonad acquires a U-shape by the directed migration of a specialized 'leader' cell, which is located at the tip of the growing gonadal 'arm'. The gon-1 gene is essential for gonadal morphogenesis: in gon-1 mutants, no arm elongation occurs and somatic gonadal structures are severely malformed. Here we report that gon-1 encodes a secreted protein with a metalloprotease domain and multiple thrombospondin type-1-like repeats. This motif architecture is typical of a small family of genes that include bovine procollagen I N-protease (P1NP), which cleaves collagen, and murine ADAMTS-1, the expression of which correlates with tumour cell progression. We find that gon-1 is expressed in two sites, leader cells and muscle, and that expression in each site has a unique role in forming the gonad. We speculate that GON-1 controls morphogenesis by remodelling basement membranes and that regulation of its activity is crucial for achieving organ shape.
The enzyme mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) is a major target for therapeutic intervention to treat many human diseases, including cancer, but very little is known about the processes that control levels of mTOR protein. Here, we show that mTOR is targeted for ubiquitination and consequent degradation by binding to the tumor suppressor protein FBXW7. Human breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors showed a reciprocal relation between loss of FBXW7 and deletion or mutation of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog), which also activates mTOR. Tumor cell lines harboring deletions or mutations in FBXW7 are particularly sensitive to rapamycin treatment, which suggests that loss of FBXW7 may be a biomarker for human cancers susceptible to treatment with inhibitors of the mTOR pathway.
The iron-regulatory proteins (IRPs) posttranscriptionally regulate expression of transferrin receptor, ferritin, and other iron metabolism proteins. Although both IRPs can regulate expression of the same target genes, IRP2-/- mice significantly misregulate iron metabolism and develop neurodegeneration, whereas IRP1-/- mice are spared. We found that IRP2-/- cells misregulated iron metabolism when cultured in 3 to 6% oxygen, which is comparable to physiological tissue concentrations, but not in 21% oxygen, a concentration that activated IRP1 and allowed it to substitute for IRP2. Thus, IRP2 dominates regulation of mammalian iron homeostasis because it alone registers iron concentrations and modulates its RNA-binding activity at physiological oxygen tensions.
Diacylglycerol kinases (DGKs) terminate signalling from diacylglycerol by converting it to phosphatidic acid. Diacylglycerol regulates cell growth and differentiation, and its transient accumulation in the nucleus may be particularly important in this regulation. Here we show that a fraction of DGK-zeta is found in the nucleus, where it regulates the amount of nuclear diacylglycerol. Reducing nuclear diacylglycerol levels by conditional expression of DGK-zeta attenuates cell growth. The nuclear-localization signal of DGK-zeta is located in a region that is homologous to the phosphorylation-site domain of the MARCKS protein. This is, to our knowledge, the first evidence that this domain, which is a major target for protein kinase C, can localize a protein to the nucleus. Two isoforms of protein kinase C, but not others, regulate the localization of DGK-zeta. Our results define a cycle in which diacylglycerol activates protein kinase C, which then regulates the metabolism of diacylglycerol by alternating the intracellular location of DGK-zeta. This may be a general mechanism to control mitogenic signals that depend on nuclear diacylglycerol.
DNA ends exposed after introduction of double-strand breaks (DSBs) undergo 5'-3' nucleolytic degradation to generate single-stranded DNA, the substrate for binding by the Rad51 protein to initiate homologous recombination. This process is poorly understood in eukaryotes, but several factors have been implicated, including the Mre11 complex (Mre11-Rad50-Xrs2/NBS1), Sae2/CtIP/Ctp1 and Exo1. Here we demonstrate that yeast Exo1 nuclease and Sgs1 helicase function in alternative pathways for DSB processing. Novel, partially resected intermediates accumulate in a double mutant lacking Exo1 and Sgs1, which are poor substrates for homologous recombination. The early processing step that generates partly resected intermediates is dependent on Sae2. When Sae2 is absent, in addition to Exo1 and Sgs1, unprocessed DSBs accumulate and homology-dependent repair fails. These results suggest a two-step mechanism for DSB processing during homologous recombination. First, the Mre11 complex and Sae2 remove a small oligonucleotide(s) from the DNA ends to form an early intermediate. Second, Exo1 and/or Sgs1 rapidly process this intermediate to generate extensive tracts of single-stranded DNA that serve as substrate for Rad51.
With a synthetic oligonucleotide mixture as probe, complementary DNA clones of C-reactive protein were isolated from an adult human liver complementary DNA library. The clones ranged in size from 700 to 1100 base pairs and were identified by partial DNA sequence analysis. One complementary DNA clone was used as a probe for hybridization with human-rodent DNA's isolated from somatic cell hybrids and bound to nitrocellulose filters (Southern blot analysis) to assign the human C-reactive protein gene to chromosome 1.
The first step in oral absorption of many medically important peptide-based drugs is mediated by an intestinal proton-dependent peptide transporter. This transporter facilitates the oral absorption of beta-lactam antibiotics and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors from the intestine into enterocytes lining the luminal wall. A monoclonal antibody that blocked uptake of cephalexin was used to identify and clone a gene that encodes an approximately 92-kilodalton membrane protein that was associated with the acquisition of peptide transport activity by transport-deficient cells. The amino acid sequence deduced from the complementary DNA sequence of the cloned gene indicated that this transport-associated protein shares several conserved structural elements with the cadherin superfamily of calcium-dependent, cell-cell adhesion proteins.
Defects in human DNA repair proteins can give rise to the autosomal recessive disorders xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and Cockayne's syndrome (CS), sometimes even together. Seven XP and three CS complementation groups have been identified that are thought to be due to mutations in genes from the nucleotide excision repair pathway. Here we isolate frog and human complementary DNAs that encode proteins resembling RAD2, a protein involved in this pathway in yeast. Alignment of these three polypeptides, together with two other RAD2 related proteins, reveals that their conserved sequences are largely confined to two regions. Expression of the human cDNA in vivo restores to normal the sensitivity to ultraviolet light and unscheduled DNA synthesis of lymphoblastoid cells from XP group G, but not CS group A. The XP-G correcting protein XPGC is generated from a messenger RNA of approximately 4 kilobases that is present in normal amounts in the XP-G cell line.
Adaptive reversion of a +1 frameshift mutation in Escherichia coli, which requires homologous recombination functions, is shown here to occur by -1 deletions in regions of small mononucleotide repeats. This pattern makes improbable recombinational mechanisms for adaptive mutation in which blocks of sequences are transferred into the mutating gene, and it supports mechanisms that use DNA polymerase errors. The pattern appears similar to that of mutations found in yeast cells and in hereditary colon cancer cells that are deficient in mismatch repair. These results suggest a recombinational mechanism for adaptive mutation that functions through polymerase errors that persist as a result of a deficiency in post-synthesis mismatch repair.
The Ras-related GTP-binding protein Cdc42 is implicated in a variety of biological activities including the establishment of cell polarity in yeast, the regulation of cell morphology, motility and cell-cycle progression in mammalian cells and the induction of malignant transformation. We identified a Cdc42 mutant (Cdc42F28L) which binds GTP in the absence of a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, but still hydrolyses GTP with a turnover number identical to that for wild-type Cdc42. Expression of this mutant in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts causes cellular transformation, mimicking many of the characteristics of cells transformed by the Dbl oncoprotein, a known guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Cdc42. Here we searched for new Cdc42 targets in an effort to understand how Cdc42 mediates cellular transformation. We identified the gamma-subunit of the coatomer complex (gammaCOP) as a specific binding partner for activated Cdc42. The binding of Cdc42 to gammaCOP is essential for a transforming signal distinct from those elicited by Ras.
Endoplasmic reticulum-localized protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B terminates growth factor signal transduction by dephosphorylation of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). But how PTP1B allows for RTK signaling in the cytoplasm is unclear. In order to test whether PTP1B activity is spatially regulated, we developed a method based on Forster resonant energy transfer for imaging enzyme-substrate (ES) intermediates in live cells. We observed the establishment of a steady-state ES gradient across the cell. This gradient exhibited robustness to cell-to-cell variability, growth factor activation, and RTK localization, which demonstrated spatial regulation of PTP1B activity. Such regulation may be important for generating distinct cellular environments that permit RTK signal transduction and that mediate its eventual termination.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the most common cause of irreversible vision loss in individuals aged older than 50 years, is classified as either wet (neovascular) or dry (nonneovascular). Inherited variation in the complement factor H gene is a major risk factor for drusen in dry AMD. Here we report that a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the promoter region of HTRA1, a serine protease gene on chromosome 10q26, is a major genetic risk factor for wet AMD. A whole-genome association mapping strategy was applied to a Chinese population, yielding a P value of <10(-11). Individuals with the risk-associated genotype were estimated to have a likelihood of developing wet AMD 10 times that of individuals with the wild-type genotype.
We previously reported that human and mouse fibroblast-like cells release into their growth medium a protein that we termed protease nexin. Protease nexin forms a covalent acyl linkage with thrombin and certain other serine proteases via the protease active site and mediates their binding, internalization and degradation by cells. Binding of thrombin-protease nexin to cells is mediated by the protease nexin portion of the complex to a high-affinity cellular binding site. As thrombin is a potent mitogen for a variety of fibroblast-like cells in culture, we examined whether protease nexin itself regulates thrombin-stimulated cell division. Recently, we showed that heparin virtually blocked the binding of thrombin-protease nexin complexes to both mouse and human cells without affecting the ability of these cells to respond to thrombin. Thus, protease nexin does not appear to be a positive modulator in thrombin-induced cell division. Here, we show that protease nexin negatively regulates the mitogenic response of cells in culture to thrombin.
The deposition of liver glycogen in starved rats given a single dose of cortisone is inhibited by puromycin and actinomycin. The former agent interferes with induced enzyme formation in general, and the latter with the cortisone-induced rise in liver enzyme levels. The results suggest that the regulatory eJffect of cortisone on carbohydrate metabolism may be brought about -by its action on the cellular concentration of certain enzyme proteins.
Cholesterol plays an indispensable role in regulating the properties of cell membranes in mammalian cells. Recent advances suggest that cholesterol exerts many of its actions mainly by maintaining sphingolipid rafts in a functional state. How rafts contribute to cholesterol metabolism and transport in the cell is still an open issue. It has long been known that cellular cholesterol levels are precisely controlled by biosynthesis, efflux from cells, and influx of lipoprotein cholesterol into cells. The regulation of cholesterol homeostasis is now receiving a new focus, and this changed perspective may throw light on diseases caused by cholesterol excess, the prime example being atherosclerosis.
Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)/cachectin is a multifunctional cytokine that has effects in inflammation, sepsis, lipid and protein metabolism, haematopoiesis, angiogenesis and host resistance to parasites and malignancy. TNF-alpha was first described in activated macrophages, but certain mouse or rat mast cell populations (reviewed in refs 4,5) and some in vitro-derived human cells with cytochemical features of mast cells-basophils may also contain products similar to TNF-alpha. Here we present evidence that resident mouse peritoneal mast cells constitutively contain large amounts of TNF-alpha bioactivity, whereas cultured, immature mast cells vary in their TNF-alpha content. IgE-dependent activation of cultured or peritoneal mast cells induces extracellular release of TNF-alpha and augments levels of TNF-alpha messenger RNA and bioactivity. These findings identify mouse mast cells as an important source of both preformed and immunologically inducible TNF-alpha, and suggest that release of TNF-alpha by mast cells may contribute to host defence, the pathophysiology of allergic diseases and other processes dependent on TNF-alpha.
Iron deficiency afflicts more than three billion people worldwide, and plants are the principal source of iron in most diets. Low availability of iron often limits plant growth because iron forms insoluble ferric oxides, leaving only a small, organically complexed fraction in soil solutions. The enzyme ferric-chelate reductase is required for most plants to acquire soluble iron. Here we report the isolation of the FRO2 gene, which is expressed in iron-deficient roots of Arabidopsis. FRO2 belongs to a superfamily of flavocytochromes that transport electrons across membranes. It possesses intramembranous binding sites for haem and cytoplasmic binding sites for nucleotide cofactors that donate and transfer electrons. We show that FRO2 is allelic to the frd1 mutations that impair the activity of ferric-chelate reductase. There is a nonsense mutation within the first exon of FRO2 in frd1-1 and a missense mutation within FRO2 in frd1-3. Introduction of functional FRO2 complements the frd1-1 phenotype in transgenic plants. The isolation of FRO2 has implications for the generation of crops with improved nutritional quality and increased growth in iron-deficient soils.
The intense interest in the metabolic fate of epoxidized xenobiotics is due to several factors. For instance, epoxides are often intermediates in the lipophile to hydrophile conversions necessary for the excretion of olefinic and aromatic compounds by living systems, and are widely encountered in man's diet from both natural and man-made sources. Some of these epoxidized compounds may alkylate proteins and nucleic acids and thus include some of the most potent cytotoxins, mutagens and carcinogens known. In mammals, epoxides may rearrange, deoxygenate to olefins, react with glutathione to form conjugates, or be hydrolysed by water to yield 1,2-diols with or without enzymatic catalysis. The enzymes which catalyse the formation of diols are known as epoxide hydrolases (EC 3.3.2.3), and their subcellular distribution is the subject of this report. Early data showed that styrene oxide hydrolase activity was associate with the microsomal subcellular fraction. Epoxide hydrolase activity was subsequently demonstrated on the nuclear, Golgi apparatus and plasma membranes, and in the cytosol of the cell, leaving the mitochondria as the last major cellular organelle assumed to be devoid of epoxide hydrolase activity. We now report strong evidence for the occurrence of substantial epoxide hydrolase activity in the mitochondria.
Phosphorylation of the heptapeptide repeats in the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II has been widely proposed as an essential step in transcription initiation on the basis of findings indicating (1) that the CTDs of RNA polymerase II molecules actively engaged in transcription are highly phosphorylated; (2) that polymerase molecules containing non-phosphorylated CTDs preferentially enter the preinitiation complex where they are subsequently phosphorylated; and (3) that essential initiation factors b from yeast, delta from rat, and BTF2(TFIIH) from human cells have closely associated CTD-kinase activities. Here we take advantage of a highly purified enzyme system which supports both CTD phosphorylation and basal transcription to test this hypothesis directly. Using the isoquinoline sulphonamide derivative H-8, which is a potent inhibitor of CTD kinase, we show that basal transcription occurs in the absence of CTD phosphorylation.
The 2.5 angstrom resolution x-ray crystal structure of the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (RNAP) alpha subunit amino-terminal domain (alphaNTD), which is necessary and sufficient to dimerize and assemble the other RNAP subunits into a transcriptionally active enzyme and contains all of the sequence elements conserved among eukaryotic alpha homologs, has been determined. The alphaNTD monomer comprises two distinct, flexibly linked domains, only one of which participates in the dimer interface. In the alphaNTD dimer, a pair of helices from one monomer interact with the cognate helices of the other to form an extensive hydrophobic core. All of the determinants for interactions with the other RNAP subunits lie on one face of the alphaNTD dimer. Sequence alignments, combined with secondary-structure predictions, support proposals that a heterodimer of the eukaryotic RNAP subunits related to Saccharomyces cerevisiae Rpb3 and Rpb11 plays the role of the alphaNTD dimer in prokaryotic RNAP.
The peripheral receptive properties and central projections of different classes of dorsal root ganglion neurones are well characterized. Much less is known about the transmitters used by these neurones. Excitatory amino acids have been proposed as sensory transmitters but the sensitivity of virtually all central neurones to those compounds has made it difficult to assess their precise role in sensory transmission. Several neuropeptides have been localized within discrete subclasses of primary sensory neurones that project to the superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord and may be afferent transmitters. However, only about one-third of spinal sensory neurones have been shown to contain neuropeptides. We have recently described the presence of a 5'-nucleotide hydrolysing acid phosphatase in a separate subpopulation of dorsal root ganglion neurones that project to the superficial dorsal horn. This enzyme also appears in certain autonomic and endocrine cells that contain high concentrations of releasable nucleotides in their storage granules. It is possible that the presence of this enzyme in sensory neurones is also associated with a releasable pool of nucleotides. Holton and Holton have provided evidence that ATP is released from the peripheral terminals of unmyelinated sensory fibres and have suggested that release of ATP might also occur from central sensory terminals. To investigate the possibility that nucleotides act as central sensory transmitters we have examined their actions on rat dorsal horn and dorsal root ganglion neurones maintained in dissociated cell culture. We report here a selective and potent excitation of subpopulations of both neuronal types by ATP.
Apoptosis is a highly regulated process that is crucial for normal development and homeostasis of multicellular organisms. The p35 protein from baculoviruses effectively prevents apoptosis by its broad-spectrum caspase inhibition. Here we report the crystal structure of p35 in complex with human caspase-8 at 3.0 A resolution, and biochemical and mutagenesis studies based on the structural information. The structure reveals that the caspase is inhibited in the active site through a covalent thioester linkage to p35, which we confirmed by gel electrophoresis, hydroxylamine treatment and mass spectrometry experiments. The p35 protein undergoes dramatic conformational changes on cleavage by the caspase. The repositioning of the amino terminus of p35 into the active site of the caspase eliminates solvent accessibility of the catalytic dyad. This may be crucial for preventing hydrolysis of the thioester intermediate, which is supported by the abrogation of inhibitory activity through mutations at the N terminus of p35. The p35 protein also makes conserved contacts with the caspase outside the active-site region, providing the molecular basis for the broad-spectrum inhibitory activity of this protein. We demonstrate a new molecular mechanism of caspase inhibition, as well as protease inhibition in general.
Clinical malaria is associated with the proliferation of Plasmodium parasites in human erythrocytes. The coordinated processes of parasite egress from and invasion into erythrocytes are rapid and tightly regulated. We have found that the plant-like calcium-dependent protein kinase PfCDPK5, which is expressed in invasive merozoite forms of Plasmodium falciparum, was critical for egress. Parasites deficient in PfCDPK5 arrested as mature schizonts with intact membranes, despite normal maturation of egress proteases and invasion ligands. Merozoites physically released from stalled schizonts were capable of invading new erythrocytes, separating the pathways of egress and invasion. The arrest was downstream of cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase (PfPKG) function and independent of protease processing. Thus, PfCDPK5 plays an essential role during the blood stage of malaria replication.
The alphabeta tubulin heterodimer is the structural subunit of microtubules, which are cytoskeletal elements that are essential for intracellular transport and cell division in all eukaryotes. Each tubulin monomer binds a guanine nucleotide, which is nonexchangeable when it is bound in the alpha subunit, or N site, and exchangeable when bound in the beta subunit, or E site. The alpha- and beta-tubulins share 40% amino-acid sequence identity, both exist in several isotype forms, and both undergo a variety of posttranslational modifications. Limited sequence homology has been found with the proteins FtsZ and Misato, which are involved in cell division in bacteria and Drosophila, respectively. Here we present an atomic model of the alphabeta tubulin dimer fitted to a 3.7-A density map obtained by electron crystallography of zinc-induced tubulin sheets. The structures of alpha- and beta-tubulin are basically identical: each monomer is formed by a core of two beta-sheets surrounded by alpha-helices. The monomer structure is very compact, but can be divided into three functional domains: the amino-terminal domain containing the nucleotide-binding region, an intermediate domain containing the Taxol-binding site, and the carboxy-terminal domain, which probably constitutes the binding surface for motor proteins.
Mutants in the gene CDC34 of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are defective in the transition from G1 to the S phase of the cell cycle. This gene was cloned and shown to encode a 295-residue protein that has substantial sequence similarity to the product of the yeast RAD6 gene. The RAD6 gene is required for a variety of cellular functions including DNA repair and was recently shown to encode a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. When produced in Escherichia coli, the CDC34 gene product catalyzed the covalent attachment of ubiquitin to histones H2A and H2B in vitro, demonstrating that the CDC34 protein is another distinct member of the family of ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes. The cell cycle function of CDC34 is thus likely to be mediated by the ubiquitin-conjugating activity of its product.
The structure of a T7 RNA polymerase (T7 RNAP) initiation complex captured transcribing a trinucleotide of RNA from a 17-base pair promoter DNA containing a 5-nucleotide single-strand template extension was determined at a resolution of 2.4 angstroms. Binding of the upstream duplex portion of the promoter occurs in the same manner as that in the open promoter complex, but the single-stranded template is repositioned to place the +4 base at the catalytic active site. Thus, synthesis of RNA in the initiation phase leads to accumulation or "scrunching" of the template in the enclosed active site pocket of T7 RNAP. Only three base pairs of heteroduplex are formed before the RNA peels off the template.
Single-molecule imaging techniques were used to reveal the binding of individual cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate molecules to heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein coupled receptors on the surface of living Dictyostelium discoideum cells. The binding sites were uniformly distributed and diffused rapidly in the plane of the membrane. The probabilities of individual association and dissociation events were greater for receptors at the anterior end of the cell. Agonist-induced receptor phosphorylation had little effect on any of the monitored properties, whereas G protein coupling influenced the binding kinetics. These observations illustrate the dynamic properties of receptors involved in gradient sensing and suggest that these may be polarized in chemotactic cells.
Flagella from sperm of the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis and cilia from Tetrahymena pyriformis contain guanine nucleotides bound to the outer-fiber fraction in the ratio of one mole of nucleotide per mole of protein subunit.
Cellular growth and proliferation are coordinated during organogenesis. Misregulation of these processes leads to pathological conditions such as cancer. Tuberous sclerosis (TSC) is a benign tumour syndrome caused by mutations in either TSC1 or TSC2 tumour suppressor genes. Studies in Drosophila and other organisms have identified TSC signalling as a conserved pathway for growth control. Activation of the TSC pathway is mediated by Rheb (Ras homologue enriched in brain), a Ras superfamily GTPase. Rheb is a direct target of TSC2 and is negatively regulated by its GTPase-activating protein activity. However, molecules required for positive regulation of Rheb have not been identified. Here we show that a conserved protein, translationally controlled tumour protein (TCTP), is an essential new component of the TSC-Rheb pathway. Reducing Drosophila TCTP (dTCTP) levels reduces cell size, cell number and organ size, which mimics Drosophila Rheb (dRheb) mutant phenotypes. dTCTP is genetically epistatic to Tsc1 and dRheb, but acts upstream of dS6k, a downstream target of dRheb. dTCTP directly associates with dRheb and displays guanine nucleotide exchange activity with it in vivo and in vitro. Human TCTP (hTCTP) shows similar biochemical properties compared to dTCTP and can rescue dTCTP mutant phenotypes, suggesting that the function of TCTP in the TSC pathway is evolutionarily conserved. Our studies identify TCTP as a direct regulator of Rheb and a potential therapeutic target for TSC disease.
Antigen stimulation of immune cells triggers Ca2+ entry through Ca2+ release-activated Ca2+ (CRAC) channels, promoting the immune response to pathogens by activating the transcription factor NFAT. We have previously shown that cells from patients with one form of hereditary severe combined immune deficiency (SCID) syndrome are defective in store-operated Ca2+ entry and CRAC channel function. Here we identify the genetic defect in these patients, using a combination of two unbiased genome-wide approaches: a modified linkage analysis with single-nucleotide polymorphism arrays, and a Drosophila RNA interference screen designed to identify regulators of store-operated Ca2+ entry and NFAT nuclear import. Both approaches converged on a novel protein that we call Orai1, which contains four putative transmembrane segments. The SCID patients are homozygous for a single missense mutation in ORAI1, and expression of wild-type Orai1 in SCID T cells restores store-operated Ca2+ influx and the CRAC current (I(CRAC)). We propose that Orai1 is an essential component or regulator of the CRAC channel complex.
The inhibition of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels in secretory cells by plasma membrane receptors is mediated by pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins. Multiple forms of G proteins have been described, differing principally in their alpha subunits, but it has not been possible to establish which G-protein subtype mediates inhibition by a specific receptor. By intranuclear injection of antisense oligonucleotides into rat pituitary GH3 cells, the essential role of the Go-type G proteins in Ca(2+)-channel inhibition is established: the subtypes Go1 and Go2 mediate inhibition through the muscarinic and somatostatin receptors, respectively.
One of us has previously reported that treatment of the Keilin and Hartree heart-muscle preparation with 2,3-dimercaptopropanol (BAL), in the presence of air, leads to the complete inactivation of the succinate oxidase system with little if any effect on the activities of succinate dehydrogenase (until more than half the BAL was oxidized) or cytochrome c oxidase. The inactivation of the complete succinate oxidase system requires the oxidation of BAL by air in the presence of the enzyme. It is not caused by H2O2 or BAL disulphides produced during the oxidation of BAL. Spectroscopic studies identified the block as lying between cytochromes b and c. It was suggested that a BAL-labile factor is present which transfers electrons from cytochrome b to cytochrome c and which is destroyed by coupled oxidation with BAL. The factor is also required for NADH oxidation. Subsequent work showed it is not identical with cytochrome c1 (ref. 4), myoglobin present in the preparation or the antimycin-binding site. We report here that this factor is identical to the iron-sulphur protein in the central portion of the respiratory chain first identified by Rieske.
Talin is a high-molecular-weight cytoskeletal protein concentrated at regions of cell-substratum contact and, in lymphocytes, at cell-cell contacts. Integrin receptors are involved in the attachment of adherent cells to extracellular matrices and of lymphocytes to other cells. In these situations, talin codistributes with concentrations of integrins in the cell surface membrane. Furthermore, in vitro binding studies suggest that integrins bind to talin, although with low affinity. Talin also binds with high affinity to vinculin, another cytoskeletal protein concentrated at points of cell adhesion. Finally, talin is a substrate for the Ca2(+)-activated protease, calpain II, which is also concentrated at points of cell-substratum contact. To learn more about the structure of talin and its involvement in transmembrane connections between extracellular adhesions and the cytoskeleton, we have cloned and sequenced murine talin. We describe a model for the structure of talin based on this sequence and other data. Homologies between talin and other proteins define a novel family of submembranous cytoskeleton-associated proteins all apparently involved in connections to the plasma membrane.
Much work on the signal transduction mechanisms underlying neurotransmission has been directed towards studying the roles of the cyclic AMP and phosphoinositide pathways. Upon ligand binding, the transmitter receptors interact with heterotrimeric G proteins, allowing G alpha and G beta gamma subunits to disengage. The free G alpha then modulates the activity of adenylyl cyclase and phospholipase C. It has been suggested that the G beta gamma complex which is activated through muscarinic or neuropeptide receptors can stimulate mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) via activation of the small guanine-nucleotide-binding protein Ras. Sequential activation of the intermediates in the Ras/Raf serine-threonine protein kinase/MAPK kinase/MAPK/transcription factor pathway has emerged as a central mechanism for controlling cell proliferation and differentiation in yeast, worms, fruitflies and mammals. Here we show, by analysis of Drosophila mutants, that synaptic current and modulation of K+ current, triggered by a pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating polypeptide-like neuropeptide, are mediated by coactivation of the Ras/Raf and Rutabaga-adenylyl cyclase pathways. Thus the Ras/Raf pathway also appears to be essential for G-protein-coupled neurotransmission.
The enzyme peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) was recently discovered in mammalian tissues and purified from porcine kidney. It catalyses the slow cis-trans isomerization of proline peptide (Xaa-Pro) bonds in oligopeptides and accelerates slow, rate-limiting steps in the folding of several proteins. Here, we report the N-terminal sequence of PPIase together with further chemical and enzymatic properties. The results indicate that this enzyme is probably identical to cyclophilin, a recently discovered mammalian protein which binds tightly to cyclosporin A (CsA). Cyclophilin is thought to be linked to the immunosuppressive action of CsA. The first 38 amino-acid residues of porcine PPIase and of bovine cyclophilin are identical and the two proteins both have a relative molecular mass of about 17,000 (ref. 7). The catalysis of prolyl isomerization in oligopeptides and of protein folding by PPIase are strongly inhibited in the presence of low levels of CsA. The activities of both PPIase and cyclophilin depend on a single sulphydryl group. At present it is unknown whether the inhibition of prolyl isomerase activity is related with the immunosuppressive action of CsA.
In budding yeast many genes are expressed under cell-cycle control in late G1. These include a large group of DNA synthesis genes, the HO gene involved in mating-type switching, CTS1 (chitinase) and also CLN1 and CLN2 (ref. 4) encoding G1 cyclins. Two factors, encoded by the SWI4 and SWI6 genes, are required for HO (ref. 5), CLN (refs 6, 7) and CTS1 (ref. 3) gene expression and, at least in the HO promoter, bind to CACGA4 upstream sequences (CCBs). This motif is not found upstream of the DNA synthesis genes, which instead have a hexamer element, ACGCGT1 (MCB), an MluI restriction site, that is recognized by a cell-cycle regulated transcription complex DSC1 (ref. 1). This MluI-activation system consisting of the MCBs and DSC1 is conserved in fission yeast where a DSC1-like complex controls the cdc22+ ribonucleotide reductase gene. The Schizosaccharomyces pombe cdc10+ gene encodes a component of DSC1 (ref. 10) and, significantly, this has homology with both the Swi4 and Swi6 proteins. Here we show that Swi6 is an essential component of DSC1 and that deletion of SWI6 impairs the cell-cycle regulation of the DNA synthesis genes, as well as CLN1 and CLN2. Thus Swi6 is the common factor in regulation of all the above genes and may therefore be responsible for the timing of their expression in late G1.
A vitamin D--dependent calcium binding protein in the chick kidney that was detected by immunocytochemical techniques was localized exclusively in the distal convoluted tubule, the initial collecting tubule, and the early part of the collecting tubule. The intercalated (mitochondria-rich) cells in these tubular segments were negative for the calcium binding protein. Subcellularly, the protein was found in the cytosol and the nucleus of the tubular cells. The results suggest a role for vitamin D--dependent calcium binding protein in intracellular calcium metabolism rather than a direct involvement in membrane-mediated calcium reabsorption in the avian kidney.
Telomeres, the natural ends of linear eukaryotic chromosomes, are essential for chromosome stability. Because of the nature of DNA replication, telomeres require a specialized mechanism to ensure their complete duplication. Telomeres are also capable of silencing the transcription of genes that are located near them. In order to identify genes in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae that are important for telomere function, a screen was conducted for genes that, when expressed in high amounts, would suppress telomeric silencing. This screen lead to the identification of the gene TLC1 (telomerase component 1). TLC1 encodes the template RNA of telomerase, a ribonucleoprotein required for telomere replication in a variety of organisms. The discovery of TLC1 confirms the existence of telomerase in S. cerevisiae and may facilitate both the analysis of this enzyme and an understanding of telomere structure and function.
A plasma membrane form of guanylate cyclase is a cell surface receptor for atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). In response to ANP binding, the receptor-enzyme produces increased amounts of the second messenger, guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate. Maximal activation of the cyclase requires the presence of adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) or nonhydrolyzable ATP analogs. The intracellular region of the receptor contains at least two domains with homology to other proteins, one possessing sequence similarity to protein kinase catalytic domains, the other to regions of unknown function in a cytoplasmic form of guanylate cyclase and in adenylate cyclase. It is now shown that the protein kinase-like domain functions as a regulatory element and that the second domain possesses catalytic activity. When the kinase-like domain was removed by deletion mutagenesis, the resulting ANP receptor retained guanylate cyclase activity, but this activity was independent of ANP and its stimulation by ATP was markedly reduced. A model for signal transduction is suggested in which binding of ANP to the extracellular domain of its receptor initiates a conformational change in the protein kinase-like domain, resulting in derepression of guanylate cyclase activity.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) mounts a stubborn defense against oxidative and nitrosative components of the immune response. Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (Lpd) and dihydrolipoamide succinyltransferase (SucB) are components of alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes that are central to intermediary metabolism. We find that Lpd and SucB support Mtb's antioxidant defense. The peroxiredoxin alkyl hydroperoxide reductase (AhpC) is linked to Lpd and SucB by an adaptor protein, AhpD. The 2.0 angstrom AhpD crystal structure reveals a thioredoxin-like active site that is responsive to lipoamide. We propose that Lpd, SucB (the only lipoyl protein detected in Mtb), AhpD, and AhpC together constitute a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reduced)-dependent peroxidase and peroxynitrite reductase. AhpD thus represents a class of thioredoxin-like molecules that enables an antioxidant defense.
The entire protein sequence database has been exhaustively matched. Definitive mutation matrices and models for scoring gaps were obtained from the matching and used to organize the sequence database as sets of evolutionarily connected components. The methods developed are general and can be used to manage sequence data generated by major genome sequencing projects. The alignments made possible by the exhaustive matching are the starting point for successful de novo prediction of the folded structures of proteins, for reconstructing sequences of ancient proteins and metabolisms in ancient organisms, and for obtaining new perspectives in structural biochemistry.
The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) mediates various cellular responses, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, breakdown of phosphoinositides and modulation of potassium channels, through the action of guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins. Pharmacologically distinguishable forms of the mAChR occur in different tissues and have provisionally been classified into M1 (I), M2 cardiac (II) and M2 glandular (III) subtypes on the basis of their difference in apparent affinity for antagonists. In an attempt to elucidate the molecular basis of the functional heterogeneity of the mAChR, we have cloned and sequenced DNAs complementary to porcine cerebral and cardiac messenger RNAs encoding mAChRs and have thereby deduced the primary structures of the receptor proteins. We report here that the messenger RNA generated by transcription of the cardiac complementary DNA directs the formation of a functional mAChR in Xenopus oocytes and that this mAChR differs from the mAChR formed by expression of the cerebral cDNA both in acetylcholine (ACh)-induced response and in antagonist binding properties. Our results provide evidence indicating that the mAChR encoded by the cerebral cDNA (designated as mAChR I) and the mAChR encoded by the cardiac cDNA (mAChR II) are of the M1 (I) and the M2 cardiac (II) subtype, respectively.
The flavin adenine dinucleotide--dependent monooxygenase in mammalian hepatic microsomes plays a major role in the oxidative metabolism of thioether-containing pesticides. Thirty-four compounds were tested, and it was determined that organophosphorus insecticides such as disulfoton and phorate are rapidly oxidized by the purified enzyme to their corresponding sulfoxides. The enzyme does not catalyze the oxidation of the thiophosphoryl and thiol sulfur atoms of these or other phosphorothioates and phosphorodithioates, or the oxidation of the sulfoxide to the sulfone. Carbamates aldicarb and Croneton are also oxidized, but at a lower rate.
Many species of parasitoid wasps inject polydnavirus particles in order to manipulate host defenses and development. Because the DNA packaged in these particles encodes almost no viral structural proteins, their relation to viruses has been debated. Characterization of complementary DNAs derived from braconid wasp ovaries identified genes encoding subunits of a viral RNA polymerase and structural components of polydnavirus particles related most closely to those of nudiviruses--a sister group of baculoviruses. The conservation of this viral machinery in different braconid wasp lineages sharing polydnaviruses suggests that parasitoid wasps incorporated a nudivirus-related genome into their own genetic material. We found that the nudiviral genes themselves are no longer packaged but are actively transcribed and produce particles used to deliver genes essential for successful parasitism in lepidopteran hosts.
The cutting rates of bovine pancreatic deoxyribonuclease I (DNase I) vary along a given DNA sequence, indicating that the enzyme recognizes sequence-dependent structural variations of the DNA double-helix. In an attempt to define the helical parameters determining this sequence-dependence, we have co-crystallized a complex of DNase I with a self-complementary octanucleotide and refined the crystal structure at 2 A resolution. This structure confirms the basic features of an early model, namely that an exposed loop of DNase I binds in the minor groove of B-type DNA and that interactions do occur with the backbone of both strands. Nicked octamer duplexes that have lost a dinucleotide from the 3'-end of one strand are hydrogen-bonded across a two-fold axis in the crystal to form a quasi-continuous double helix of 14 base pairs. The DNA 14-mer has a B-type conformation and shows substantial distortion of both local and overall helix parameters, induced mainly by the tight interaction of Y73 and R38 in the unusually wide minor groove. Directly coupled to the widening of the groove by approximately 3A is a 21.5 degree bend of the DNA away from the bound enzyme towards the major groove, suggesting that both DNA stiffness and groove width are important in determining the sequence-dependence of the enzyme cutting rate. A second cut of the DNA which is induced by diffusion of Mn2+ into the co-crystals suggests that there are two active sites in DNase I separated by more than 15A.
An integrated human-mouse positional candidate approach was used to identify the gene responsible for the phenotypes observed in a mouse model of Niemann-Pick type C (NP-C) disease. The predicted murine NPC1 protein has sequence homology to the putative transmembrane domains of the Hedgehog signaling molecule Patched, to the cholesterol-sensing regions of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase and SREBP cleavage-activating protein (SCAP), and to the NPC1 orthologs identified in human, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, and the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The mouse model may provide an important resource for studying the role of NPC1 in cholesterol homeostasis and neurodegeneration and for assessing the efficacy of new drugs for NP-C disease.
Phosphorylation of membrane components is thought to be an important process in membrane function. Phosphorylated proteins and a special class of phospholipids, the (poly)phosphoinositides (poly PI), are implicated in the regulation of membrane permeability and synaptic transmission in neurones. For many years, protein phosphorylation and poly PI metabolism have been studied in parallel without knowledge of their possible interaction. We report here that the ACTH-sensitive protein kinase/B-50 protein complex which we recently isolated in soluble form from rat brain synaptosomal plasma membranes has lipid phosphorylating activity. Exogenously added phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (DPI) is phosphorylated to phosphatidylinositol 4,5-diphosphate (TPI), and this DPI-kinase activity is dependent on the state of phosphorylation of the protein kinase/B-50 protein complex. The results imply that phosphorylation of protein may affect the metabolism of (poly) PI in brain cell membranes.
Protease nexin-II (PN-II) [amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP)] and the amyloid beta-protein are major constituents of neuritic plaques and cerebrovascular deposits in individuals with Alzheimer's disease and Down syndrome. Both the brain and the circulation have been implicated as sources of these molecules, although they have not been detected in blood. Human platelets have now been found to contain relatively large amounts of PN-II/APP. Platelet PN-II/APP was localized in platelet alpha-granules and was secreted upon platelet activation. Because PN-II/APP is a potent protease inhibitor and possesses growth factor activity, these results implicate PN-II/APP in wound repair. In certain disease states, alterations in platelet release and processing and clearance of PN-II/APP and its derived fragments could lead to pathological accumulation of these proteins.
Neurotransmitter release is potently blocked by a group of structurally related toxin proteins produced by Clostridium botulinum. Botulinum neurotoxin type B (BoNT/B) and tetanus toxin (TeTx) are zinc-dependent proteases that specifically cleave synaptobrevin (VAMP), a membrane protein of synaptic vesicles. Here we report that inhibition of transmitter release from synaptosomes caused by botulinum neurotoxin A (BoNT/A) is associated with the selective proteolysis of the synaptic protein SNAP-25. Furthermore, isolated or recombinant L chain of BoNT/A cleaves SNAP-25 in vitro. Cleavage occurred near the carboxyterminus and was sensitive to divalent cation chelators. In addition, a glutamate residue in the BoNT/A L chain, presumably required to stabilize a water molecule in the zinc-containing catalytic centre, was required for proteolytic activity. These findings demonstrate that BoNT/A acts as a zinc-dependent protease that selectively cleaves SNAP-25. Thus, a second component of the putative fusion complex mediating synaptic vesicle exocytosis is targeted by a clostridial neurotoxin.
Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signalling regulates embryonic dorsal-ventral cell fate decisions in flies, frogs and fish. BMP activity is controlled by several secreted factors including the antagonists chordin and short gastrulation (SOG). Here we show that a second secreted protein, Twisted gastrulation (Tsg), enhances the antagonistic activity of Sog/chordin. In Drosophila, visualization of BMP signalling using anti-phospho-Smad staining shows that the tsg and sog loss-of-function phenotypes are very similar. In S2 cells and imaginal discs, TSG and SOG together make a more effective inhibitor of BMP signalling than either of them alone. Blocking Tsg function in zebrafish with morpholino oligonucleotides causes ventralization similar to that produced by chordin mutants. Co-injection of sub-inhibitory levels of morpholines directed against both Tsg and chordin synergistically enhances the penetrance of the ventralized phenotype. We show that Tsgs from different species are functionally equivalent, and conclude that Tsg is a conserved protein that functions with SOG/chordin to antagonize BMP signalling.
Most northern Europeans have only the normal M form of the plasma protease inhibitor alpha 1-antitrypsin, but some 4% are heterozygotes for the Z deficiency variant. For reasons that have not been well-understood, the Z mutation results in a blockage in the final stage of processing of antitrypsin in the liver such that in the Z homozygote only 15% of the protein is secreted into the plasma. The 85% of the alpha 1-antitrypsin that is not secreted accumulates in the endoplasmic reticulum of the hepatocyte; much of it is degraded but the remainder aggregates to form insoluble intracellular inclusions. These inclusions are associated with hepatocellular damage, and 10% of newborn Z homozygotes develop liver disease which often leads to a fatal childhood cirrhosis. Here we demonstrate the molecular pathology underlying this accumulation and describe how the Z mutation in antitrypsin results in a unique molecular interaction between the reactive centre loop of one molecule and the gap in the A-sheet of another. This loop-sheet polymerization of Z antitrypsin occurs spontaneously at 37 degrees C and is completely blocked by the insertion of a specific peptide into the A-sheet of the antitrypsin molecule. Z antitrypsin polymerized in vitro has identical properties and ultrastructure to the inclusions isolated from hepatocytes of a Z homozygote. The concentration and temperature dependence of this loop-sheet polymerization has implications for the management of the liver disease of the newborn Z homozygote.
The concentration in plasma of the female protein (FP) of the golden Syrian hamster is regulated by sex steroids and by mediators of the acute-phase response to tissue injury or inflammation. A complementary DNA (cDNA) clone corresponding to FP was isolated from a hamster liver cDNA library and used to determine the nucleotide sequence and derived amino acid sequence of native FP. The primary sequence of FP is 69 percent identical to human serum amyloid P component and 50 percent identical to human C-reactive protein. Evidence showed that sex-limited and acute-phase control of the FP gene is pretranslational. The FP protein is thus a useful model for investigating dual regulation of expression of a single gene.
RNA polymerase II transcripts, heterogeneous nuclear RNAs (hnRNAs), associate in the nucleus with specific proteins that bind premessenger RNA (hnRNP proteins) and with small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs). These hnRNA-hnRNP-snRNP complexes assemble on nascent transcripts and hnRNA is processed to mRNA in them. HnRNP proteins have been localized to the nucleoplasm and their functions were presumed to be limited to nuclear events in mRNA biogenesis. It was proposed that an exchange of hnRNP for mRNA-binding proteins accompanies transport of mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. We show here that several of the abundant hnRNP proteins, including A1, shuttle between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. HnRNP proteins may thus also have cytoplasmic functions. Furthermore, when in the cytoplasm, A1 is bound to mRNA and RNA polymerase II transcription is necessary before it can return to the nucleus. We propose that the cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein complex of mRNA with hnRNP proteins is the substrate of nuclear-cytoplasmic transport of mRNA.
The polar domains of the two transcarbamoylases, aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase) and ornithine transcarbamoylase, (OTCase) from Escherichia coli bind the common substrate carbamoyl phosphate and share extensive amino-acid sequence homology. The equatorial domains of the two enzymes differ in their substrate specificity (ATCase binds aspartate, OTCase binds ornithine) and have decreased sequence identity. While addressing the conservation of specific protein interactions during the evolution of these enzymes, we were able to switch one of their amino-acid-specific equatorial domains to produce a viable chimaeric enzyme. This was achieved by the in vitro fusion of DNA encoding the polar domain of OTCase to DNA encoding the equatorial domain of ATCase. The resulting gene fusion successfully transformed an argI-pyrB deletion strain of E. coli to pyrimidine prototrophy, giving rise to Pyr+ transformants that expressed ATCase but not OTCase activity. The formation of this active chimaeric enzyme shows that by exchanging protein domains between two functionally divergent enzymes we have achieved a switching in substrate specificity.
Many oomycete and fungal plant pathogens are obligate biotrophs, which extract nutrients only from living plant tissue and cannot grow apart from their hosts. Although these pathogens cause substantial crop losses, little is known about the molecular basis or evolution of obligate biotrophy. Here, we report the genome sequence of the oomycete Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (Hpa), an obligate biotroph and natural pathogen of Arabidopsis thaliana. In comparison with genomes of related, hemibiotrophic Phytophthora species, the Hpa genome exhibits dramatic reductions in genes encoding (i) RXLR effectors and other secreted pathogenicity proteins, (ii) enzymes for assimilation of inorganic nitrogen and sulfur, and (iii) proteins associated with zoospore formation and motility. These attributes comprise a genomic signature of evolution toward obligate biotrophy.
Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors (GPCRs) respond to a variety of different external stimuli and activate G proteins. GPCRs share many structural features, including a bundle of seven transmembrane alpha helices connected by six loops of varying lengths. We determined the structure of rhodopsin from diffraction data extending to 2.8 angstroms resolution. The highly organized structure in the extracellular region, including a conserved disulfide bridge, forms a basis for the arrangement of the seven-helix transmembrane motif. The ground-state chromophore, 11-cis-retinal, holds the transmembrane region of the protein in the inactive conformation. Interactions of the chromophore with a cluster of key residues determine the wavelength of the maximum absorption. Changes in these interactions among rhodopsins facilitate color discrimination. Identification of a set of residues that mediate interactions between the transmembrane helices and the cytoplasmic surface, where G-protein activation occurs, also suggests a possible structural change upon photoactivation.
There is a decrease in the content of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide of tubercle bacilli grown in the presence of isoniazid. In extracts of tubercle bacilli, the activity of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotidase is nil or very small; after incubation with the drug the enzyme becomes active. Isoniazid also increases the activity of the enzyme after it is partially activated by heating. There may be a correlation between the capacity of isoniazid to activate the enzyme and the decrease in the dinucleotide content of the tubercle bacilli.
It is now possible to reproduce most of the reactions involved in DNA replication using prokaryotic enzymes in vitro. Such systems have revealed that DNA replication is a complex process depending on a relatively large number of proteins, and that nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis energy is used at several discrete steps. Much of the complexity of DNA replication may arise from the need for extreme copying fidelity.
The Philadelphia (Ph') chromosome, an abnormal chromosome 22 (ref. 1), is one of the best-known examples of a specific human chromosomal abnormality strongly associated with one form of human leukaemia, chronic myelocytic leukaemia (CML). The finding that a small region of chromosome 9 which includes the c-abl oncogene is translocated to chromosome 22 prompted studies to elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in this disease. We have demonstrated previously that the chromosome 9 of one patient with CML contains a breakpoint 14 kilobases (kb) 5' of the most 5' v-abl-homologous exon. These data suggest a role for c-abl in CML, a theory supported by the presence of an abnormally sized abl messenger RNA and protein in the CML cell line K562. The region involved in the translocation on chromosome 22 has also been identified: all Ph'-positive patients examined to date have a breakpoint within a 5.8-kb region, for which we have proposed the name 'breakpoint cluster region' (bcr). To determine whether bcr contains protein-encoding regions, probes from bcr were tested for their ability to hybridize to complementary DNA sequences. A 0.6-kb HindIII/BamHI bcr restriction enzyme fragment proved suitable for isolating several cDNA clones from a human fibroblast cDNA library. Using bcr cDNA sequences, we obtained data strongly suggesting the presence of a chimaeric bcr/abl mRNA in the leukaemic cells of Ph'-positive CML patients. The recent isolation of cDNA clones containing bcr and abl sequences confirms this finding. Because the bcr part of the chimaeric mRNA could be required to induce the transforming activity of the human c-abl oncogene, we have now initiated studies to characterize the normal 'bcr gene' and to determine the effect of a translocation within its coding domain. We demonstrate that as a result of the Ph' translocation, a variable number of bcr exons are included in the chimaeric bcr/abl mRNA. The bcr gene sequences in this mRNA could be responsible for the transition of the abl cellular proto-oncogene into an oncogene.
Eukaryotes and archaea use a protease called the proteasome that has an integral role in maintaining cellular function through the selective degradation of proteins. Proteolysis occurs in a barrel-shaped 20S core particle, which in Thermoplasma acidophilum is built from four stacked homoheptameric rings of subunits, a and b, arranged a(7)b(7)b(7)a(7) (ref. 5). These rings form three interconnected cavities, including a pair of antechambers (formed by a(7)b(7)) through which substrates are passed before degradation and a catalytic chamber (b(7)b(7)) where the peptide-bond hydrolysis reaction occurs. Although it is clear that substrates must be unfolded to enter through narrow, gated passageways (13 A in diameter) located on the a-rings, the structural and dynamical properties of substrates inside the proteasome antechamber remain unclear. Confinement in the antechamber might be expected to promote folding and thus impede proteolysis. Here we investigate the folding, stability and dynamics of three small protein substrates in the antechamber by methyl transverse-relaxation-optimized NMR spectroscopy. We show that these substrates interact actively with the antechamber walls and have drastically altered kinetic and equilibrium properties that maintain them in unstructured states so as to be accessible for hydrolysis.
Cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) is a member of a highly conserved family of protein kinases that regulate the eukaryotic cell cycle. The crystal structures of the human CDK2 apoenzyme and its Mg2+ ATP complex have been determined to 2.4 A resolution. The structure is bi-lobate, like that of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, but contains a unique helix-loop segment that interferes with ATP and protein substrate binding and probably plays a key part in the regulation of all cyclin-dependent kinases.
The adenylate cyclase system, which consists of a catalytic moiety and regulatory guanine nucleotide-binding proteins, provides the effector mechanism for the intracellular actions of many hormones and drugs. The tissue specificity of the system is determined by the particular receptors that a cell expresses. Of the many receptors known to modulate adenylate cyclase activity, the best characterized and one of the most pharmacologically important is the beta-adrenergic receptor (beta AR). The pharmacologically distinguishable subtypes of the beta-adrenergic receptor, beta 1 and beta 2 receptors, stimulate adenylate cyclase on binding specific catecholamines. Recently, the avian erythrocyte beta 1, the amphibian erythrocyte beta 2 and the mammalian lung beta 2 receptors have been purified to homogeneity and demonstrated to retain binding activity in detergent-solubilized form. Moreover, the beta-adrenergic receptor has been reconstituted with the other components of the adenylate cyclase system in vitro, thus making this hormone receptor particularly attractive for studies of the mechanism of receptor action. This situation is in contrast to that for the receptors for growth factors and insulin, where the primary biochemical effectors of receptor action are unknown. Here, we report the cloning of the gene and cDNA for the mammalian beta 2AR. Analysis of the amino-acid sequence predicted for the beta AR indicates significant amino-acid homology with bovine rhodopsin and suggests that, like rhodopsin, beta AR possesses multiple membrane-spanning regions.
Is the control of bacterial metabolism so complex? The answer can be found in a simple experiment. Two cultures of bacteria are grown in different mediums. One contains as the carbon and nitrogen sources a mixture of amino acids, while the other contains only glucose and ammonia, so that the cells must synthesize all of the amino acids. The results show that insofar as the cells in both cultures grow at comparable rates, they will have the same composition in terms of DNA, RNA, and protein (30). To explain this phenomena I have argued that through the control mechanisms responsible for the distribution of substrates in intermediary metabolism, the substrates of protein synthesis are produced at concentrations and rates commensurate with the ability of the environment to support growth. The provision of these substrates relative to the ability of the protein forming system to utilize them regulates the synthesis of ribosomal and transfer RNA, which, after adjustment for various modulating influences, such as nonfunctioning ribosomes or ribosomal RNA turnover, brings the number of functioning ribosomes to a point in keeping with the provision of external nutrients. The synthesis of messenger (or total) RNA, ribosomal proteins, and DNA, and the process of cell division, for example, are subject to their own controls, but through the burden they each place on intermediary metabolism, they provide a means for partitioning the cell's metabolic resources. It might be noted that this view may not be very far from the idea once held that the rate at which each of the transfer RNA's was changed by amino acids regulate the synthesis of bacterial RNA, but growth regulation is clearly more complicated than implied by that model (76).
Inactivation of the murine TATA binding protein (TBP) gene by homologous recombination leads to growth arrest and apoptosis at the embryonic blastocyst stage. However, after loss of TBP, RNA polymerase II (pol II) remains in a transcriptionally active phosphorylation state, and in situ run-on experiments showed high levels of pol II transcription comparable to those of wild-type cells. In contrast, pol I and pol III transcription was arrested. Our results show a differential dependency of the RNA polymerases on TBP and provide evidence for TBP-independent pol II transcriptional mechanisms that allow reinitiation and maintenance of gene transcription in vivo.
Pyrrolysine, the twenty-second amino acid found to be encoded in the natural genetic code, is necessary for all of the known pathways by which methane is formed from methylamines. Pyrrolysine comprises a methylated pyrroline carboxylate in amide linkage to the e-amino group of L-lysine. In certain Archaea, three methyltransferases initiate methanogenesis from the various methylamines, and these enzymes are encoded by genes with an in-frame amber codon that is translated as pyrrolysine. Escherichia coli that has been transformed with the pylTSBCD genes from methanogenic Archaea can incorporate endogenously biosynthesized pyrrolysine into proteins. The decoding of UAG as pyrrolysine requires pylT, which produces tRNA(Pyl) (also called tRNA(CUA)), and pylS, which encodes a pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase. The pylB, pylC and pylD genes are each required for tRNA-independent pyrrolysine synthesis. Pyrrolysine is the last remaining genetically encoded amino acid with an unknown biosynthetic pathway. Here we provide genetic and mass spectrometric evidence for a pylBCD-dependent pathway in which pyrrolysine arises from two lysines. We show that a newly uncovered UAG-encoded amino acid, desmethylpyrrolysine, is made from lysine and exogenous D-ornithine in a pylC-dependent process followed by a pylD-dependent process, but it is not further converted to pyrrolysine. These results indicate that the radical S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) protein PylB mediates a lysine mutase reaction that produces 3-methylornithine, which is then ligated to a second molecule of lysine by PylC before oxidation by PylD results in pyrrolysine. The discovery of lysine as the sole precursor to pyrrolysine will further inform discussions of the evolution of the genetic code and amino acid biosynthetic pathways. Furthermore, intermediates of the pathway may provide new avenues by which the pyl system can be exploited to produce recombinant proteins with useful modified residues.
Most eukaryotic messenger RNAs have the sequence AAUAAA 11-30 nucleotides from the 3'-terminal poly(A) tract. Since this is the only significant sequence homology in the 3' non-coding region it has been suggested that it may be a recognition site for enzymes involved in polyadenylation and/or termination of polymerase II transcription. This idea is strengthened by observations on the effect of deletion mutations in or around the AATAAA sequence on polyadenylation of late simian virus 40 (SV40) mRNA; removal of this sequence prevents poly(A) addition. Naturally occurring variants of this hexanucleotide are rare and hitherto their functional significance has not been assessed. We have now identified a human alpha 2-globin gene which contains a single point mutation in this hexanucleotide (AATAAA leads to AATAAG). The paired alpha 1 gene on the same chromosome is completely inactivated by a frame-shift mutation. This unique combination has enabled the expression of the mutant alpha 2 gene to be studied in vivo where it has been found that the accumulated level of alpha 2-specific mRNA in erythroid cells is reduced. Furthermore, readthrough transcripts extending beyond the normal poly(A) addition site are detected in mRNA obtained from HeLa cells transfected with cloned DNA from the mutant alpha 2 gene, suggesting that the single nucleotide change in the AATAAA sequence is the cause of its abnormal expression.
The principle of transition-state stabilization asserts that the occurrence of enzymic catalysis is equivalent to saying that an enzyme binds the transition state much more strongly than it binds the ground-state reactants. An outline of the origin and gradual acceptance of this idea is presented, and elementary transition-state theory is reviewed. It is pointed out that a misconception about the theory has led to oversimplification of the accepted expression relating catalysis and binding, and an amended expression is given. Some implications of the transition-state binding principle are then explored. The amended expression suggests that internal molecular dynamics may also play a role in enzymic catalysis. Although such effects probably do not make a major contribution, their magnitude is completely unknown. Two examples of recent advances due to application of the transition-state binding principle are reviewed, one pertaining to the zinc protease mechanism and the other to the generation of catalytic antibodies.
Bag (Bcl2-associated athanogene) domains occur in a class of cofactors of the eukaryotic chaperone 70-kilodalton heat shock protein (Hsp70) family. Binding of the Bag domain to the Hsp70 adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) domain promotes adenosine 5'-triphosphate-dependent release of substrate from Hsp70 in vitro. In a 1.9 angstrom crystal structure of a complex with the ATPase of the 70-kilodalton heat shock cognate protein (Hsc70), the Bag domain forms a three-helix bundle, inducing a conformational switch in the ATPase that is incompatible with nucleotide binding. The same switch is observed in the bacterial Hsp70 homolog DnaK upon binding of the structurally unrelated nucleotide exchange factor GrpE. Thus, functional convergence has allowed proteins with different architectures to trigger a conserved conformational shift in Hsp70 that leads to nucleotide exchange.
Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins (G proteins) dissociate into guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-bound alpha subunits and a complex of beta and gamma subunits after interaction with receptors. The GTP-alpha subunit complex activates appropriate effectors, such as adenylyl cyclase, retinal phosphodiesterase, phospholipase C, and ion channels. G protein beta gamma subunits have been found to have regulatory effects on certain types of adenylyl cyclase. In the presence of Gs alpha, the alpha subunit of the G protein that activates adenylyl cyclase, one form of adenylyl cyclase was inhibited by beta gamma, some forms were activated by beta gamma, and some forms were not affected by beta gamma. These interactions suggest mechanisms for communication between distinct signal-transducing pathways.
The restoration of catalytic activity to mutant enzymes by small molecules is well established for in vitro systems. Here, we show that the protein tyrosine kinase Src arginine-388-->alanine (R388A) mutant can be rescued in live cells with the use of the small molecule imidazole. Cellular rescue of a viral Src homolog was rapid and reversible and conferred predicted oncogenic properties. Using chemical rescue in combination with mass spectrometry, we confirmed six known Src kinase substrates and identified several new protein targets. Chemical rescue data suggest that cellular Src is active under basal conditions. Rescue of R388A cellular Src provided insights into the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. This chemical rescue approach will likely have many applications in cell signaling.
The rate of protein degradation in rabbit erythrocytes in normally very low. However, when cells were exposed to agents that oxidize cell proteins (nitrite or phenylhydrazine), the degradation of erythrocyte proteins to amino acids increased 7- to 33-fold. This effect was inhibited by the reducing agent methylene blue. Stimulation of proteolysis also occurred in cell extracts and resulted from the production of substrates (damaged proteins) rather than from activation of proteases. Inhibitors of glycolysis and of the soluble adenosine triphosphate-dependent proteolytic pathway decreased the protein degradation induced by nitrite, whereas inhibitors of lysosomal proteolysis had no effect. Thus, the adenosine triphosphate-dependent proteolytic system is present in mature red cells where it may help protect against the accumulation of proteins damaged by oxidation or other means.
DNA methyltransferase (cytosine-5) 1 (Dnmt1) is the principal enzyme responsible for maintenance of CpG methylation and is essential for the regulation of gene expression, silencing of parasitic DNA elements, genomic imprinting and embryogenesis. Dnmt1 is needed in S phase to methylate newly replicated CpGs occurring opposite methylated ones on the mother strand of the DNA, which is essential for the epigenetic inheritance of methylation patterns in the genome. Despite an intrinsic affinity of Dnmt1 for such hemi-methylated DNA, the molecular mechanisms that ensure the correct loading of Dnmt1 onto newly replicated DNA in vivo are not understood. The Np95 (also known as Uhrf1 and ICBP90) protein binds methylated CpG through its SET and RING finger-associated (SRA) domain. Here we show that localization of mouse Np95 to replicating heterochromatin is dependent on the presence of hemi-methylated DNA. Np95 forms complexes with Dnmt1 and mediates the loading of Dnmt1 to replicating heterochromatic regions. By using Np95-deficient embryonic stem cells and embryos, we show that Np95 is essential in vivo to maintain global and local DNA methylation and to repress transcription of retrotransposons and imprinted genes. The link between hemi-methylated DNA, Np95 and Dnmt1 thus establishes key steps of the mechanism for epigenetic inheritance of DNA methylation.
The human APOBEC3G (apolipoprotein B messenger-RNA-editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G) protein is a single-strand DNA deaminase that inhibits the replication of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1), other retroviruses and retrotransposons. APOBEC3G anti-viral activity is circumvented by most retroelements, such as through degradation by HIV-1 Vif. APOBEC3G is a member of a family of polynucleotide cytosine deaminases, several of which also target distinct physiological substrates. For instance, APOBEC1 edits APOB mRNA and AID deaminates antibody gene DNA. Although structures of other family members exist, none of these proteins has elicited polynucleotide cytosine deaminase or anti-viral activity. Here we report a solution structure of the human APOBEC3G catalytic domain. Five alpha-helices, including two that form the zinc-coordinating active site, are arranged over a hydrophobic platform consisting of five beta-strands. NMR DNA titration experiments, computational modelling, phylogenetic conservation and Escherichia coli-based activity assays combine to suggest a DNA-binding model in which a brim of positively charged residues positions the target cytosine for catalysis. The structure of the APOBEC3G catalytic domain will help us to understand functions of other family members and interactions that occur with pathogenic proteins such as HIV-1 Vif.
Analysis of extracts of the bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei showed that both DNA polymerase-alpha and DNA polymerase-beta activities were present. The detection of DNA polymerase-beta in T. brucei demonstrates the presence of this enzyme in unicellular organisms. DNA polymerase-beta is present also in Leishmania mexicana. The DNA polymerases in T. brucei are immunologically distinct from the host enzymes. The structural differences between the parasite and the host enzymes could be exploited for the development of agents to combat parasitic diseases.
Interferon-gamma-inducing factor (IGIF, interleukin-18) is a recently described cytokine that shares structural features with the interleukin-1 (IL-1) family of proteins and functional properties with IL-12. Like IL-12, IGIF is a potent inducer of interferon (IFN)-gamma from T cells and natural killer cells. IGIF is synthesized as a biologically inactive precursor molecule (proIGIF). The cellular production of IL-1beta, a cytokine implicated in a variety of inflammatory diseases, requires cleavage of its precursor (proIL-1beta) at an Asp-X site by interleukin-1beta-converting enzyme (ICE, recently termed caspase-1). The Asp-X sequence at the putative processing site in proIGIF suggests that a protease such as caspase-1 might be involved in the maturation of IGIF. Here we demonstrate that caspase-1 processes proIGIF and proIL-1beta with equivalent efficiencies in vitro. A selective caspase-1 inhibitor blocks both lipopolysaccharide-induced IL-1beta and IFN-gamma production from human mononuclear cells. Furthermore, caspase-1-deficient mice are defective in lipopolysaccharide-induced IFN-gamma production. Our results thus implicate caspase-1 in the physiological production of IGIF and demonstrate that it plays a critical role in the regulation of multiple proinflammatory cytokines. Specific caspase-1 inhibitors would provide a new class of anti-inflammatory drugs with multipotent action.
Little is known about the structure and function of membrane domains in the vacuolar apparatus of animal cells. A unique feature of late endosomes, which are part of the pathway that leads to lysosomes, is that they contain a complex system of poorly characterized internal membranes in their lumen. These endosomes are therefore known as multivesicular or multilamellar organelles. Some proteins distribute preferentially within these internal membranes, whereas others are exclusively localized to the organelle's limiting membrane. The composition and function of this membrane system are poorly understood. Here we show that these internal membranes contain large amounts of a unique lipid, and thus form specialized domains within endosomes. These specialized domains are involved in sorting the multifunctional receptor for insulin-like growth factor 2 and ligands bearing mannose-6-phosphate, in particular lysosomal enzymes. We also show that this unique lipid is a specific antigen for human antibodies associated with the antiphospholipid syndrome. These antibodies may act intracellularly by altering the protein-sorting functions of endosomes.
The nucleotide sequence of a human Blym-1 transforming gene activated in a Burkitt's lymphoma cell line was determined. This sequence predicts a small protein of 58 amino acids that is 33 percent identical to the predicted product of chicken Blym-1, the activated transforming gene of chicken B cell lymphomas. Both the human and chicken Blym-1 genes exhibit significant identity to an amino-terminal region of transferrins.
Assessing the energy costs of development in extreme environments is important for understanding how organisms can exist at the margins of the biosphere. Macromolecular turnover rates of RNA and protein were measured at -1.5 degrees C during early development of an Antarctic sea urchin. Contrary to expectations of low synthesis with low metabolism at low temperatures, protein and RNA synthesis rates exhibited temperature compensation and were equivalent to rates in temperate sea urchin embryos. High protein metabolism with a low metabolic rate is energetically possible in this Antarctic sea urchin because the energy cost of protein turnover, 0.45 joules per milligram of protein, is 1/25th the values reported for other animals.
Tritiated-polyuridylie acid was degraded rapidly in extracts of Escherichia coli and degradation was not dependent on concomitant polyphenylalanine synthesis. Since a large portion of the polymer was degraded before appreciable polyphenylalanine was synthesized, the catalytic activity of the undegraded polyuridylic acid in directing protein synthesis was suggested. The predominant breakdown products were 5'-mononucleotide phosphates. Possible enzymatic routes of polyuridylic acid breakdown are discussed.
The atrium of the heart contains peptides, termed atrial natriuretic factors ( ANFs ), diuretic and smooth-muscle-relaxing activities. In view of its potent effects on salt metabolism in the kidney and on vascular smooth muscle, ANF is considered to play an important part in the control of fluid volume and vascular function. Several different ANF peptides varying in size have been isolated and their amino acid sequences determined. Analysis of the sequences of the peptides suggests that they are derived by proteolysis from the same precursor. To examine this hypothesis, we have cloned cDNAs of the ANF precursor using rat atrial mRNA, determined its nucleotide sequence and deduced its amino acid sequence. The ANF precursor consists of 152 amino acid residues including a putative signal peptide sequence. This sequence contains the amino acid sequences of all the ANF peptides reported to date.
Transmembrane signals initiated by a broad range of extracellular stimuli converge on nodes that regulate phospholipase C (PLC)-dependent inositol lipid hydrolysis for signal propagation. We describe how heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) activate PLC-bs and in turn are deactivated by these downstream effectors. The 2.7-angstrom structure of PLC-b3 bound to activated Ga(q) reveals a conserved module found within PLC-bs and other effectors optimized for rapid engagement of activated G proteins. The active site of PLC-b3 in the complex is occluded by an intramolecular plug that is likely removed upon G protein-dependent anchoring and orientation of the lipase at membrane surfaces. A second domain of PLC-b3 subsequently accelerates guanosine triphosphate hydrolysis by Ga(q), causing the complex to dissociate and terminate signal propagation. Mutations within this domain dramatically delay signal termination in vitro and in vivo. Consequently, this work suggests a dynamic catch-and-release mechanism used to sharpen spatiotemporal signals mediated by diverse sensory inputs.
Abuse of the dissociative anesthetic ketamine can lead to a syndrome indistinguishable from schizophrenia. In animals, repetitive exposure to this N-methyl-d-aspartate-receptor antagonist induces the dysfunction of a subset of cortical fast-spiking inhibitory interneurons, with loss of expression of parvalbumin and the gamma-aminobutyric acid-producing enzyme GAD67. We show here that exposure of mice to ketamine induced a persistent increase in brain superoxide due to activation in neurons of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase. Decreasing superoxide production prevented the effects of ketamine on inhibitory interneurons in the prefrontal cortex. These results suggest that NADPH oxidase may represent a novel target for the treatment of ketamine-induced psychosis.
During transcription of protein-coding genes, bacterial RNA polymerase (RNAP) is closely followed by a ribosome that translates the newly synthesized transcript. Our in vivo measurements show that the overall elongation rate of transcription is tightly controlled by the rate of translation. Acceleration and deceleration of a ribosome result in corresponding changes in the speed of RNAP. Moreover, we found an inverse correlation between the number of rare codons in a gene, which delay ribosome progression, and the rate of transcription. The stimulating effect of a ribosome on RNAP is achieved by preventing its spontaneous backtracking, which enhances the pace and also facilitates readthrough of roadblocks in vivo. Such a cooperative mechanism ensures that the transcriptional yield is always adjusted to translational needs at different genes and under various growth conditions.
Two heterologous prokaryotic activators, the bacteriophage lambda cI protein (lambda cI) and the Escherichia coli cyclic AMP receptor protein (CRP), were shown to activate transcription synergistically from an artificial promoter bearing binding sites for both proteins. The synergy depends on a functional activation (positive control) surface on each activator. These results imply that both proteins interact directly with RNA polymerase and thus suggest a precise mechanism for transcriptional synergy: the interaction of two activators with two distinct surfaces of RNA polymerase.
Nonsense-mediated messenger RNA (mRNA) decay, or NMD, is a critical process of selective degradation of mRNAs that contain premature stop codons. NMD depends on both pre-mRNA splicing and translation, and it requires recognition of the position of stop codons relative to exon-exon junctions. A key factor in NMD is hUpf3, a mostly nuclear protein that shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm and interacts specifically with spliced mRNAs. We found that hUpf3 interacts with Y14, a component of post-splicing mRNA-protein (mRNP) complexes, and that hUpf3 is enriched in Y14-containing mRNP complexes. The mRNA export factors Aly/REF and TAP are also associated with nuclear hUpf3, indicating that hUpf3 is in mRNP complexes that are poised for nuclear export. Like Y14 and Aly/REF, hUpf3 binds to spliced mRNAs specifically ( approximately 20 nucleotides) upstream of exon-exon junctions. The splicing-dependent binding of hUpf3 to mRNAs before export, as part of the complex that assembles near exon-exon junctions, allows it to serve as a link between splicing and NMD in the cytoplasm.
Overlapping complementary DNA clones were isolated from epithelial cell libraries with a genomic DNA segment containing a portion of the putative cystic fibrosis (CF) locus, which is on chromosome 7. Transcripts, approximately 6500 nucleotides in size, were detectable in the tissues affected in patients with CF. The predicted protein consists of two similar motifs, each with (i) a domain having properties consistent with membrane association and (ii) a domain believed to be involved in ATP (adenosine triphosphate) binding. A deletion of three base pairs that results in the omission of a phenylalanine residue at the center of the first predicted nucleotide-binding domain was detected in CF patients.
Gene silencing in eukaryotes is associated with the formation of heterochromatin, a complex of proteins and DNA that block transcription. Heterochromatin is characterized by the methylation of cytosine nucleotides of the DNA, the methylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3 Lys 9), and the specific binding of heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) to methylated H3 Lys 9 (refs 1-7). Although the relationship between these chromatin modifications is generally unknown, in the fungus Neurospora crassa, DNA methylation acts genetically downstream of H3 Lys 9 methylation. Here we report the isolation of KRYPTONITE, a methyltransferase gene specific to H3 Lys 9, identified in a mutant screen for suppressors of gene silencing at the Arabidopsis thaliana SUPERMAN (SUP) locus. Loss-of-function kryptonite alleles resemble mutants in the DNA methyltransferase gene CHROMOMETHYLASE3 (CMT3), showing loss of cytosine methylation at sites of CpNpG trinucleotides (where N is A, C, G or T) and reactivation of endogenous retrotransposon sequences. We show that CMT3 interacts with an Arabidopsis homologue of HP1, which in turn interacts with methylated histones. These data suggest that CpNpG DNA methylation is controlled by histone H3 Lys 9 methylation, through interaction of CMT3 with methylated chromatin.
The zinc-finger protein Kruppel (Kr) is an integral part of the Drosophila segmentation gene cascade and is essential in organogenesis during later embryonic development. In tissue culture, Kr regulates transcription. Monomeric Kr can act as a transcriptional activator, whereas Kr dimers formed at high concentrations cause repression. Here we show that Kr-dependent control of transcription involves functional interactions with components of the basal RNA polymerase II transcription machinery, which includes the initiation factors TFIIA, B, E, F, H and I (refs 10, 11) as well as the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAFs) contained in the multisubunit TFIID (ref. 12). Our results indicate that when acting from a site close to a basal promoter, monomeric Kr interacts with TFIIB to activate transcription, whereas an interaction of the Kr dimer with TFIIE beta, a subunit of TFIIE, results in transcriptional repression.
In eukaryotes, ubiquitin (Ub)-dependent proteolysis is essential for bulk protein turnover as well as diverse processes including cell-cycle control, differentiation, antigen presentation, and the stress response. Generally, multiple ubiquitins are added onto a substrate to form an isopeptide-linked 'polyubiquitin' chain, which targets substrates for degradation by the 26S proteasome. The specificity of Ub-dependent degradation was thought to depend primarily on the selection of targets for ubiquitination, but recently we have reported evidence for a second level of specificity in which (poly)Ub-protein conjugates are partitioned among two fates: degradation of the protein substrate by the 26S proteasome; and disassembly by Ub isopeptidase(s) to regenerate the protein substrate. Potentially, an isopeptidase could influence degradation by 'editing' (poly)Ub-protein conjugates according to the extent of ubiquitination rather than the structure of the ubiquitination target itself. Here we describe a bovine isopeptidase that is well suited to such an editing function because of its unique localization and specificity. This enzyme is an intrinsic subunit of PA700, the 19S regulatory complex of the 26S proteasome. By disassembling the degradation signal from only the distal end of (poly)Ub chains, this isopeptidase can selectively rescue poorly ubiquitinated or slowly degraded Ub-protein conjugates from proteolysis.
The microtubule cytoskeleton is a dynamic structure in which the lengths of the microtubules are tightly regulated. One regulatory mechanism is the depolymerization of microtubules by motor proteins in the kinesin-13 family. These proteins are crucial for the control of microtubule length in cell division, neuronal development and interphase microtubule dynamics. The mechanism by which kinesin-13 proteins depolymerize microtubules is poorly understood. A central question is how these proteins target to microtubule ends at rates exceeding those of standard enzyme-substrate kinetics. To address this question we developed a single-molecule microscopy assay for MCAK, the founding member of the kinesin-13 family. Here we show that MCAK moves along the microtubule lattice in a one-dimensional (1D) random walk. MCAK-microtubule interactions were transient: the average MCAK molecule diffused for 0.83 s with a diffusion coefficient of 0.38 microm2 s(-1). Although the catalytic depolymerization by MCAK requires the hydrolysis of ATP, we found that the diffusion did not. The transient transition from three-dimensional diffusion to 1D diffusion corresponds to a "reduction in dimensionality" that has been proposed as the search strategy by which DNA enzymes find specific binding sites. We show that MCAK uses this strategy to target to both microtubule ends more rapidly than direct binding from solution.
Carbohydrate and protein fractions from the filtrate of a culture of Mycobacterium bovis strain BCG have equal activity in sensitive guinea pigs. The sequential action of two proteolytic enzymes caused little alteration in the reactivity of the carbohydrate but almost completely eliminated the reactivity of the protein.
The yeast transcriptional activator GAL4 binds specific sites on DNA to activate transcription of adjacent genes. The distinct activating regions of GAL4 are rich in acidic residues and it has been suggested that these regions interact with another protein component of the transcriptional machinery (such as the TATA-binding protein or RNA polymerase II) while the DNA-binding region serves to position the activating region near the gene. Here we show that various GAL4 derivatives, when expressed at high levels in yeast, inhibit transcription of certain genes lacking GAL4 binding sites, that more efficient activators inhibit more strongly and that inhibition does not depend on the DNA-binding domain. We suggest that this inhibition, which we call squelching, reflects titration of a transcription factor by the activating region of GAL4.
A growing colony of a mutant strain of Neurospora crassa had two morphologically distinct areas which were formed as a result of a rhythmic spore-forming (conidiation) process. The total pyridine nucleotide content of these two areas was the same, but the levels of NADH, NADPH, and NADP were lower in the conidiating area, while the NAD level was higher. These biochemical differences in the adjacent areas of a single colony were only found in newly formed areas, and were not a permanent record. It is not known whether these pyridine nucleotide changes are a result of the conidiation process, or whether they are tied more directly to some underlying metabolic oscillation. However, it is speculated that the changes in the levels of these key coenzymes could have far-reaching effects on many areas of metabolism.
Homing endonucleases are a diverse collection of proteins that are encoded by genes with mobile, self-splicing introns. They have also been identified in self-splicing inteins (protein introns). These enzymes promote the movement of the DNA sequences that encode them from one chromosome location to another; they do this by making a site-specific double-strand break at a target site in an allele that lacks the corresponding mobile intron. The target sites recognized by these small endonucleases are generally long (14-44 base pairs). Four families of homing endonucleases have been identified, including the LAGLIDADG, the His-Cys box, the GIY-YIG and the H-N-H endonucleases. The first identified His-Cys box homing endonuclease was I-PpoI from the slime mould Physarum polycephalum. Its gene resides in one of only a few nuclear introns known to exhibit genetic mobility. Here we report the structure of the I-PpoI homing endonuclease bound to homing-site DNA determined to 1.8 A resolution. I-PpoI displays an elongated fold of dimensions 25 x 35 x 80 A, with mixed alpha/beta topology. Each I-PpoI monomer contains three antiparallel beta-sheets flanked by two long alpha-helices and a long carboxy-terminal tail, and is stabilized by two bound zinc ions 15 A apart. The enzyme possesses a new zinc-bound fold and endonuclease active site. The structure has been determined in both uncleaved substrate and cleaved product complexes.
Giant axonal neuropathy (GAN) is a devastating sensory and motor neuropathy caused by mutations in the GAN gene, which encodes the ubiquitously expressed protein gigaxonin. Cytopathological features of GAN include axonal degeneration, with accumulation and aggregation of cytoskeletal components. Little is currently known about the molecular mechanisms underlying this recessive disorder. Here we show that gigaxonin controls protein degradation, and is essential for neuronal function and survival. We present evidence that gigaxonin binds to the ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 through its amino-terminal BTB domain, while the carboxy-terminal kelch repeat domain interacts directly with the light chain (LC) of microtubule-associated protein 1B (MAP1B). Overexpression of gigaxonin leads to enhanced degradation of MAP1B-LC, which can be antagonized by proteasome inhibitors. Ablation of gigaxonin causes a substantial accumulation of MAP1B-LC in GAN-null neurons. Moreover, we show that overexpression of MAP1B in wild-type cortical neurons leads to cell death characteristic of GAN-null neurons, whereas reducing MAP1B levels significantly improves the survival rate of null neurons. Our results identify gigaxonin as a ubiquitin scaffolding protein that controls MAP1B-LC degradation, and provide insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying human neurodegenerative disorders.
Molecular chaperones are a family of unrelated proteins found in all types of cell. They mediate the correct assembly of other polypeptides, but are not components of the mature assembled structures. Chaperones function by binding specifically to interactive protein surfaces that are exposed transiently during many cellular processes and so prevent them from undergoing incorrect interactions that might produce nonfunctional structures. The concept of molecular chaperones originated largely from studies of the chloroplast enzyme rubisco, which fixes carbon dioxide in plant photosynthesis; the function of chaperones forces a rethinking of the principle of protein self-assembly.
Adenovirus E1A proteins stimulate transcription by RNA polymerases II and III from many promoters. The detailed mechanism of transcriptional activation (transactivation) by E1A proteins remains unclear, but genetic and biochemical results suggest that E1A products might act to stimulate the activity of cellular transcription factors. In this study, a detailed mutational analysis of the adenovirus E1B promoter was undertaken to define the DNA sequences required for proper basal transcription and E1A transactivation. Two key findings emerged: first the E1B promoter is an unusually simple RNA polymerase II promoter requiring only two sequence elements for proper regulation, the TATA box and a binding site for transcription factor Sp1; and second only mutations in the TATA box interfere with E1A-transactivation, suggesting that E1A mediates its effect on this promoter through the TATA-box transcription factor.
The prion hypothesis posits that a misfolded form of prion protein (PrP) is responsible for the infectivity of prion disease. Using recombinant murine PrP purified from Escherichia coli, we created a recombinant prion with the attributes of the pathogenic PrP isoform: aggregated, protease-resistant, and self-perpetuating. After intracerebral injection of the recombinant prion, wild-type mice developed neurological signs in approximately 130 days and reached the terminal stage of disease in approximately 150 days. Characterization of diseased mice revealed classic neuropathology of prion disease, the presence of protease-resistant PrP, and the capability of serially transmitting the disease; these findings confirmed that the mice succumbed to prion disease. Thus, as postulated by the prion hypothesis, the infectivity in mammalian prion disease results from an altered conformation of PrP.
In eukaryotes nucleotide excision repair of DNA damaged by ultraviolet radiation requires several gene products; defects in this process result in the cancer-prone syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) in humans. The RAD2 gene is one of at least seven genes indispensable for excision repair in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and its encoded protein shares remarkable homology with the XP group-G gene product. Here we overproduce the RAD2-encoded protein in S. cerevisiae, purify it to near homogeneity, and show that RAD2 protein in the presence of magnesium degrades circular single-stranded DNA. The RAD2 endonuclease is specific for single-stranded DNA as it does not act on double-stranded DNA. Given the absolute requirement for RAD2 in the incision step of excision repair, our findings directly implicate RAD2 protein and its human homologue XPG protein as a catalytic component that incises the damaged DNA strand during excision repair. Furthermore, our results indicate that eukaryotes probably employ two distinct endonuclease activities to mediate the dual incision at the damage site.
CRISPR/Cas systems constitute a widespread class of immunity systems that protect bacteria and archaea against phages and plasmids, and commonly use repeat/spacer-derived short crRNAs to silence foreign nucleic acids in a sequence-specific manner. Although the maturation of crRNAs represents a key event in CRISPR activation, the responsible endoribonucleases (CasE, Cas6, Csy4) are missing in many CRISPR/Cas subtypes. Here, differential RNA sequencing of the human pathogen Streptococcus pyogenes uncovered tracrRNA, a trans-encoded small RNA with 24-nucleotide complementarity to the repeat regions of crRNA precursor transcripts. We show that tracrRNA directs the maturation of crRNAs by the activities of the widely conserved endogenous RNase III and the CRISPR-associated Csn1 protein; all these components are essential to protect S. pyogenes against prophage-derived DNA. Our study reveals a novel pathway of small guide RNA maturation and the first example of a host factor (RNase III) required for bacterial RNA-mediated immunity against invaders.
The potential impact of pandemic influenza makes effective measures to limit the spread and morbidity of virus infection a public health priority. Antiviral drugs are seen as essential requirements for control of initial influenza outbreaks caused by a new virus, and in pre-pandemic plans there is a heavy reliance on drug stockpiles. The principal target for these drugs is a virus surface glycoprotein, neuraminidase, which facilitates the release of nascent virus and thus the spread of infection. Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza) are two currently used neuraminidase inhibitors that were developed using knowledge of the enzyme structure. It has been proposed that the closer such inhibitors resemble the natural substrate, the less likely they are to select drug-resistant mutant viruses that retain viability. However, there have been reports of drug-resistant mutant selection in vitro and from infected humans. We report here the enzymatic properties and crystal structures of neuraminidase mutants from H5N1-infected patients that explain the molecular basis of resistance. Our results show that these mutants are resistant to oseltamivir but still strongly inhibited by zanamivir owing to an altered hydrophobic pocket in the active site of the enzyme required for oseltamivir binding. Together with recent reports of the viability and pathogenesis of H5N1 (ref. 7) and H1N1 (ref. 8) viruses with neuraminidases carrying these mutations, our results indicate that it would be prudent for pandemic stockpiles of oseltamivir to be augmented by additional antiviral drugs, including zanamivir.
Central to the role of p53 in cell regulation are its sequence-specific interactions with genes that control the cell cycle and apoptosis. p53 response elements contain two or more copies of a somewhat promiscuous consensus sequence: 5'-XXXC(A,T)(T,A)GYY-3' (where X is a purine and Y is a pyrimidine) (ref. 3). The sequence-specific DNA-binding region of p53 resides in its central conserved region. Although this region itself is not known to be phosphorylated, the amino and carboxy termini of human p53 contain sites for phosphorylation by several protein kinases. We have examined the role of cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) shown previously to phosphorylate human p53 at serine 315 (ref. 5). We report here that p53 is efficiently and selectively phosphorylated by S and G2/M Cdks. Such phosphorylation markedly stimulates sequence-specific DNA binding by p53 and also causes a distinctive conformational change in p53 as revealed by partial protease analysis. Strikingly, Cdk phosphorylation also confers binding-site preference on p53. These data suggest a potential regulatory mechanism of p53 activity.
Sphingolipid metabolites participate in key events of signal transduction and cell regulation. In the sphingomyelin cycle, a number of extracellular agents and insults (such as tumor necrosis factor, Fas ligands, and chemotherapeutic agents) cause the activation of sphingomyelinases, which act on membrane sphingomyelin and release ceramide. Multiple experimental approaches suggest an important role for ceramide in regulating such diverse responses as cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and cell senescence. In vitro, ceramide activates a serine-threonine protein phosphatase, and in cells it regulates protein phosphorylation as well as multiple downstream targets [such as interleukin converting enzyme (ICE)-like proteases, stress-activated protein kinases, and the retinoblastoma gene product] that mediate its distinct cellular effects. This spectrum of inducers of ceramide accumulation and the nature of ceramide-mediated responses suggest that ceramide is a key component of intracellular stress response pathways.
Protein kinase C (PKC) is believed to have a crucial role in synaptic transmitter release and long-term potentiation. An important substrate of PKC in the brain is the neuron-specific presynaptically localized protein B-50 (also termed GAP-43, F1, pp46 or P-57). B-50 has been implicated in the regulation of polyphosphoinositide metabolism and calmodulin binding, and in the mechanisms of neurite outgrowth, long-term potentiation and transmitter release. It is still unknown, however, whether B-50 (and/or its phosphorylation) is essential to any of these processes. Here we report the results of studies in which antibodies to B-50, which interfere with B-50 phosphorylation, were introduced into rat cortical synaptosomes that were permeabilized with streptolysin-O (SL-O). We found that the release of [3H]noradrenaline, induced by increasing the Ca2+ concentration in the buffer, is inhibited completely by the antibodies. These results provide the first demonstration of a causal relationship between the PKC substrate B-50 and the release of neurotransmitter.
The metabolic repertoire in nature is augmented by generating hybrid metabolites from a limited set of gene products. In mycobacteria, several unique complex lipids are produced by the combined action of fatty acid synthases and polyketide synthases (PKSs), although it is not clear how the covalently sequestered biosynthetic intermediates are transferred from one enzymatic complex to another. Here we show that some of the 36 annotated fadD genes, located adjacent to the PKS genes in the Mycobacterium tuberculosis genome, constitute a new class of long-chain fatty acyl-AMP ligases (FAALs). These proteins activate long-chain fatty acids as acyl-adenylates, which are then transferred to the multifunctional PKSs for further chain extension. This mode of activation and transfer of fatty acids is contrary to the previously described universal mechanism involving the formation of acyl-coenzyme A thioesters. Similar mechanisms may operate in the biosynthesis of other lipid-containing metabolites and could have implications in engineering novel hybrid products.
The small guanine nucleotide (GTP)-binding protein Rac regulates mitogen-induced cytoskeletal changes and c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK), and its activity is required for Ras-mediated cell transformation. Epistatic analysis placed Rac as a key downstream target in Ras signalling; however, the biochemical mechanism regulating the cross-talk among these small GTP-binding proteins remains to be elucidated. Eps8 (relative molecular mass 97,000) is a substrate of receptors with tyrosine kinase activity which binds, through its SH3 domain, to a protein designated E3b1/Abi-1. Here we show that Eps8 and E3b1/Abi-1 participate in the transduction of signals from Ras to Rac, by regulating Rac-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) activities. We also show that Eps8, E3b1 and Sos-1 form a tri-complex in vivo that exhibits Rac-specific GEF activity in vitro. We propose a model in which Eps8 mediates the transfer of signals between Ras and Rac, by forming a complex with E3b1 and Sos-1.
The transcription of eukaryotic protein-coding genes involves complex regulation of RNA polymerase (Pol) II activity in response to physiological conditions and developmental cues. One element of this regulation involves phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest polymerase subunit by a transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, which comprises the kinase CDK9 and cyclin T1 or T2 (ref. 1). Here we report that in human HeLa cells more than half of the P-TEFb is sequestered in larger complexes that also contain 7SK RNA, an abundant, small nuclear RNA (snRNA) of hitherto unknown function. P-TEFb and 7SK associate in a specific and reversible manner. In contrast to the smaller P-TEFb complexes, which have a high kinase activity, the larger 7SK/P-TEFb complexes show very weak kinase activity. Inhibition of cellular transcription by chemical agents or ultraviolet irradiation trigger the complete disruption of the P-TEFb/7SK complex, and enhance CDK9 activity. The transcription-dependent interaction of P-TEFb with 7SK may therefore contribute to an important feedback loop modulating the activity of RNA Pol II.
Apoptosis, or cellular suicide, is important for normal development and tissue homeostasis, but too much or too little apoptosis can also cause disease. The family of cysteine proteases, the so- called caspases, are critical mediators of programmed cell death, and thus far 14 family members have been identified. Some of these, such as caspase-8, mediate signal transduction downstream of death receptors located on the plasma membrane. Others, such as caspase-9, mediate apoptotic signals after mitochondrial damage. Stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can also result in apoptosis. Here we show that caspase-12 is localized to the ER and activated by ER stress, including disruption of ER calcium homeostasis and accumulation of excess proteins in ER, but not by membrane- or mitochondrial-targeted apoptotic signals. Mice that are deficient in caspase-12 are resistant to ER stress-induced apoptosis, but their cells undergo apoptosis in response to other death stimuli. Furthermore, we show that caspase-12-deficient cortical neurons are defective in apoptosis induced by amyloid-beta protein but not by staurosporine or trophic factor deprivation. Thus, caspase-12 mediates an ER-specific apoptosis pathway and may contribute to amyloid-beta neurotoxicity.
Plasma concentrations of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides are among the most important risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD) and are targets for therapeutic intervention. We screened the genome for common variants associated with plasma lipids in >100,000 individuals of European ancestry. Here we report 95 significantly associated loci (P < 5 x 10(-8)), with 59 showing genome-wide significant association with lipid traits for the first time. The newly reported associations include single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near known lipid regulators (for example, CYP7A1, NPC1L1 and SCARB1) as well as in scores of loci not previously implicated in lipoprotein metabolism. The 95 loci contribute not only to normal variation in lipid traits but also to extreme lipid phenotypes and have an impact on lipid traits in three non-European populations (East Asians, South Asians and African Americans). Our results identify several novel loci associated with plasma lipids that are also associated with CAD. Finally, we validated three of the novel genes-GALNT2, PPP1R3B and TTC39B-with experiments in mouse models. Taken together, our findings provide the foundation to develop a broader biological understanding of lipoprotein metabolism and to identify new therapeutic opportunities for the prevention of CAD.
Alopecia areata (AA) is among the most highly prevalent human autoimmune diseases, leading to disfiguring hair loss due to the collapse of immune privilege of the hair follicle and subsequent autoimmune attack. The genetic basis of AA is largely unknown. We undertook a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in a sample of 1,054 cases and 3,278 controls and identified 139 single nucleotide polymorphisms that are significantly associated with AA (P <or= 5 x 10(-7)). Here we show an association with genomic regions containing several genes controlling the activation and proliferation of regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells), cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA4), interleukin (IL)-2/IL-21, IL-2 receptor A (IL-2RA; CD25) and Eos (also known as Ikaros family zinc finger 4; IKZF4), as well as the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region. We also find association evidence for regions containing genes expressed in the hair follicle itself (PRDX5 and STX17). A region of strong association resides within the ULBP (cytomegalovirus UL16-binding protein) gene cluster on chromosome 6q25.1, encoding activating ligands of the natural killer cell receptor NKG2D that have not previously been implicated in an autoimmune disease. By probing the role of ULBP3 in disease pathogenesis, we also show that its expression in lesional scalp from patients with AA is markedly upregulated in the hair follicle dermal sheath during active disease. This study provides evidence for the involvement of both innate and acquired immunity in the pathogenesis of AA. We have defined the genetic underpinnings of AA, placing it within the context of shared pathways among autoimmune diseases, and implicating a novel disease mechanism, the upregulation of ULBP ligands, in triggering autoimmunity.
In eukaryotes, small non-coding RNAs regulate gene expression, helping to control cellular metabolism, growth and differentiation, to maintain genome integrity, and to combat viruses and mobile genetic elements. These pathways involve two specialized ribonucleases that control the production and function of small regulatory RNAs. The enzyme Dicer cleaves double-stranded RNA precursors, generating short interfering RNAs and microRNAs in the cytoplasm. These small RNAs are transferred to Argonaute proteins, which guide the sequence-specific silencing of messenger RNAs that contain complementary sequences by either enzymatically cleaving the mRNA or repressing its translation. The molecular structures of Dicer and the Argonaute proteins, free and bound to small RNAs, have offered exciting insights into the molecular mechanisms that are central to RNA silencing pathways.
Activation of 2-5A-dependent ribonuclease by 5'-phosphorylated, 2',5'-linked oligoadenylates, known as 2-5A, is one pathway of interferon action. Unaided uptake into HeLa cells of 2-5A linked to an antisense oligonucleotide resulted in the selective ablation of messenger RNA for the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-dependent protein kinase PKR. Similarly, purified, recombinant human 2-5A-dependent ribonuclease was induced to selectively cleave PKR messenger RNA. Cells depleted of PKR activity were unresponsive to activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B) by the dsRNA poly(I):poly(C), which provides direct evidence that PKR is a transducer for the dsRNA signaling of NF-kappa B.
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), a 28-amino acid peptide originally isolated from porcine duodenum, is present not only in gastrointestinal tissues but also in neural tissues, possibly as a neurotransmitter, and exhibits a wide range of biological actions (for example, relaxation of smooth muscle, stimulation of intestinal water and electrolyte secretion and release of insulin, glucagon and several anterior pituitary hormones). As the structure of porcine and bovine VIP shows several similarities to those of mammalian glucagon, secretin and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP), VIP is considered to be a member of the glucagon-secretin family. Recently, we have found that VIP is synthesized from a precursor, pro-VIP (molecular weight (Mr) 17,500), in human neuroblastoma cells and that the primary translation product of the mRNA encoding VIP is prepro-VIP (Mr 20,000). In an attempt to elucidate the primary structure of the precursor, we have now cloned the DNA sequence complementary to the mRNA coding for human VIP and analysed the nucleotide sequence. The entire amino acid sequence of the precursor, deduced from the nucleotide sequence, indicates that the precursor protein contains not only VIP but also a novel peptide of 27 amino acids. The peptide, designated PHM-27, differs by only 2 amino acids from PHI-27, a peptide recently isolated from porcine intestine, and is also closely related in sequence to VIP.
Schistosoma mansoni is responsible for the neglected tropical disease schistosomiasis that affects 210 million people in 76 countries. Here we present analysis of the 363 megabase nuclear genome of the blood fluke. It encodes at least 11,809 genes, with an unusual intron size distribution, and new families of micro-exon genes that undergo frequent alternative splicing. As the first sequenced flatworm, and a representative of the Lophotrochozoa, it offers insights into early events in the evolution of the animals, including the development of a body pattern with bilateral symmetry, and the development of tissues into organs. Our analysis has been informed by the need to find new drug targets. The deficits in lipid metabolism that make schistosomes dependent on the host are revealed, and the identification of membrane receptors, ion channels and more than 300 proteases provide new insights into the biology of the life cycle and new targets. Bioinformatics approaches have identified metabolic chokepoints, and a chemogenomic screen has pinpointed schistosome proteins for which existing drugs may be active. The information generated provides an invaluable resource for the research community to develop much needed new control tools for the treatment and eradication of this important and neglected disease.
Minocycline mediates neuroprotection in experimental models of neurodegeneration. It inhibits the activity of caspase-1, caspase-3, inducible form of nitric oxide synthetase (iNOS) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Although minocycline does not directly inhibit these enzymes, the effects may result from interference with upstream mechanisms resulting in their secondary activation. Because the above-mentioned factors are important in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), we tested minocycline in mice with ALS. Here we report that minocycline delays disease onset and extends survival in ALS mice. Given the broad efficacy of minocycline, understanding its mechanisms of action is of great importance. We find that minocycline inhibits mitochondrial permeability-transition-mediated cytochrome c release. Minocycline-mediated inhibition of cytochrome c release is demonstrated in vivo, in cells, and in isolated mitochondria. Understanding the mechanism of action of minocycline will assist in the development and testing of more powerful and effective analogues. Because of the safety record of minocycline, and its ability to penetrate the blood-brain barrier, this drug may be a novel therapy for ALS.
Motor proteins move unidirectionally along cytoskeletal polymers by coupling translocation to cycles of ATP hydrolysis. The energy from ATP is required both to generate force and to dissociate the motor-filament complex in order to begin a new chemomechanical cycle. For myosin, force production is associated with phosphate release following ATP hydrolysis, whereas dissociation of actomyosin is tightly coupled to the binding of ATP. Dynein, a microtubule motor, uses a similar cycle, suggesting that all cytoskeletal motors might operate by a common mechanism. Here we investigate kinesin's chemomechanical cycle by assaying microtubule movement by single kinesin molecules when intermediate states in the hydrolysis cycle are prolonged with ATP analogues or inhibitors. In contrast to myosin and dynein, kinesin with bound ADP dissociates from microtubules during translocation, whereas kinesin with unhydrolysed nucleotide remains tightly associated with the polymer. These findings imply that kinesin converts ATP energy into mechanical work by a pathway distinct from that of myosin or dynein.
Fat tissue produces a variety of secreted proteins (adipocytokines) with important roles in metabolism. We isolated a newly identified adipocytokine, visfatin, that is highly enriched in the visceral fat of both humans and mice and whose expression level in plasma increases during the development of obesity. Visfatin corresponds to a protein identified previously as pre-B cell colony-enhancing factor (PBEF), a 52-kilodalton cytokine expressed in lymphocytes. Visfatin exerted insulin-mimetic effects in cultured cells and lowered plasma glucose levels in mice. Mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in the visfatin gene had modestly higher levels of plasma glucose relative to wild-type littermates. Surprisingly, visfatin binds to and activates the insulin receptor. Further study of visfatin's physiological role may lead to new insights into glucose homeostasis and/or new therapies for metabolic disorders such as diabetes.
The combination of specific probes and advanced optical microscopy now allows quantitative probing of biochemical reactions in living cells. On selected systems, one can detect and track a particular protein with single-molecule sensitivity, nanometer spatial precision, and millisecond time resolution. Metabolites, usually difficult to detect, can be imaged and monitored in living cells with coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering microscopy. Here, we describe the application of these techniques in studying gene expression, active transport, and lipid metabolism.
In the mouse circadian clock, a transcriptional feedback loop is at the centre of the clockwork mechanism. Clock and Bmal1 are essential transcription factors that drive the expression of three period genes (Per1-3) and two cryptochrome genes (Cry1 and Cry2). The Cry proteins feedback to inhibit Clock/Bmal1-mediated transcription by a mechanism that does not alter Clock/Bmal1 binding to DNA. Here we show that transcriptional regulation of the core clock mechanism in mouse liver is accompanied by rhythms in H3 histone acetylation, and that H3 acetylation is a potential target of the inhibitory action of Cry. The promoter regions of the Per1, Per2 and Cry1 genes exhibit circadian rhythms in H3 acetylation and RNA polymerase II binding that are synchronous with the corresponding steady-state messenger RNA rhythms. The histone acetyltransferase p300 precipitates together with Clock in vivo in a time-dependent manner. Moreover, the Cry proteins inhibit a p300-induced increase in Clock/Bmal1-mediated transcription. The delayed timing of the Cry1 mRNA rhythm, relative to the Per rhythms, is due to the coordinated activities of Rev-Erbalpha and Clock/Bmal1, and defines a new mechanism for circadian phase control.
There has been an increasing interest in the use of immobilized cells for the production of pharmaceuticals as well as for products such as high fructose syrup or ethanol. Some of these compounds are now produced on an industrial scale whereby the cells are used in a resting or growing state or in a nonviable form as natural carriers of the enzyme(s) involved in the synthesis. The advantages of immobilized cell technology should also apply to microorganisms modified by recombinant DNA techniques to produce a variety of eukaryotic proteins such as hormones. We describe here the properties of immobilized Bacillus subtilis cells carrying plasmids encoding rat proinsulin. Cell proliferation normally coupled to DNA replication is undesirable in immobilized cell systems as "clogging' of the system occurs due to cells growing outside the beads. Therefore, different ways were investigated to inhibit cell division while allowing continued protein synthesis. We found that the addition of certain antibiotics in the growth medium, such as novobiocin which inhibits DNA replication, fulfills these requirements, allowing proinsulin synthesis and excretion to take place over a period of several days.
The ability to express the genes of pathogenic human viruses, such as the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) virus (also called human immunodeficiency virus) in bacterial cells affords the opportunity to study proteins that are ordinarily difficult or inconvenient to obtain in amounts sufficient for detailed analysis. A segment of the AIDS virus pol gene was expressed in Escherichia coli. Expression resulted in the appearance of reverse transcriptase activity in the bacterial cell extracts. The extracts contained two virus-related polypeptides that have the same apparent molecular weights as the two processed forms of virion-derived reverse transcriptase (p66 and p51). The formation of these two polypeptides depended on the coexpression of sequences located near the 5' end of the pol gene, a region that is thought to encode a viral protease. This bacterial system appears to generate mature forms of the AIDS virus reverse transcriptase by a proteolytic pathway equivalent to that which occurs during virus infection of human cells.
The (Na(+)+K+)ATPase, an integral membrane protein located in virtually all animal cells, couples the hydrolysis of ATP to the countertransport of Na+ and K+ ions across the plasma membrane. In neurons, a large portion of cellular energy is expended by this enzyme to maintain the ionic gradients that underlie resting and action potentials. Although neurotransmitter regulation of the enzyme in brain has been reported, such regulation has been characterized either as a nonspecific phenomenon or as an indirect effect of neurotransmitter-induced changes in ionic gradients. We report here that the neurotransmitter dopamine, through a synergistic effect on D1 and D2 receptors, inhibits the (Na(+)+K+)ATPase activity of isolated striatal neurons. Our data provide unequivocal evidence for regulation by a neurotransmitter of a neuronal ion pump. They also demonstrate that synergism between D1 and D2 receptors, which underlies many of the electrophysical and behavioural effects of dopamine in the mammalian brain, can occur on the same neuron. In addition, the results support the possibility that dopamine and other neurotransmitters can regulate neuronal excitability through the novel mechanism of pump inhibition.
The protein sigma 54 associates with Escherichia coli core RNA polymerase to form a holoenzyme that binds promoters but is inactive in the absence of enhancer activation. Here, mutants of sigma 54 enabled polymerases to transcribe without enhancer protein and adenosine triphosphate. The mutations are in leucines within the NH2-terminal glutamine-rich domain of sigma 54. Multiple leucine substitutions mimicked the effect of enhancer protein, which suggests that the enhancer protein functions to disrupt a leucine patch. The results indicate that sigma 54 acts both as an inhibitor of polymerase activity and as a receptor that interacts with enhancer protein to overcome this inhibition, and that these two activities jointly confer enhancer responsiveness.
Calcium regulation of gene expression is critical for the long-lasting activity-dependent changes in cellular electrical properties that underlie important physiological functions such as learning and memory. Cellular electrical properties are diversified through the extensive alternative splicing of ion channel pre-messenger RNAs; however, the regulation of splicing by cell signalling pathways has not been well explored. Here we show that depolarization of GH3 pituitary cells represses splicing of the STREX exon in BK potassium channel transcripts through the action of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (CaMKs). Overexpressing constitutively active CaMK IV, but not CaMK I or II, specifically decreases STREX inclusion in the mRNA. This decrease is prevented by mutations in particular RNA repressor sequences. Transferring 54 nucleotides from the 3' splice site upstream of STREX to a heterologous gene is sufficient to confer CaMK IV repression on an otherwise constitutive exon. These experiments define a CaMK IV-responsive RNA element (CaRRE), which mediates the alternative splicing of ion channel pre-mRNAs. The CaRRE presents a unique molecular target for inducing long-term adaptive changes in cellular electrical properties. It also provides a model system for dissecting the effect of signal transduction pathways on alternative splicing.
A series of dipyridodiazepinones have been shown to be potent inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT). One compound, BI-RG-587, had a Ki of 200 nanomolar for inhibition of HIV-1 RT that was noncompetitive with respect to deoxyguanosine triphosphate. BI-RG-587 was specific for HIV-1 RT, having no effect on feline and simian RT or any mammalian DNA polymerases. BI-RG-587 inhibited HIV-1 replication in vitro as demonstrated by in situ hybridization, inhibition of protein p24 production, and the lack of syncytia formation in cultured human T cell lines and freshly isolated human peripheral blood lymphocytes. Cytotoxicity studies of BI-RG-587 on human cells showed a high therapeutic index (greater than 8000) in culture.
The product of the PET56 nuclear gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae was shown to be required for ribose methylation at a universally conserved nucleotide in the peptidyl transferase center of the mitochondrial large ribosomal RNA (21S rRNA). Cells reduced in this activity were deficient in formation of functional large subunits of the mitochondrial ribosome. The purified Pet56 protein catalyzed the site-specific formation of 2'-O-methylguanosine on in vitro transcripts of both mitochondrial 21S rRNA and Escherichia coli 23S rRNA. These results provide evidence for an essential modified nucleotide in rRNA.
The capacity to fine-tune cellular bioenergetics with the demands of stem-cell maintenance and regeneration is central to normal development and ageing, and to organismal survival during periods of acute stress. How energy metabolism and stem-cell homeostatic processes are coordinated is not well understood. Lkb1 acts as an evolutionarily conserved regulator of cellular energy metabolism in eukaryotic cells and functions as the major upstream kinase to phosphorylate AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and 12 other AMPK-related kinases. Whether Lkb1 regulates stem-cell maintenance remains unknown. Here we show that Lkb1 has an essential role in haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) homeostasis. We demonstrate that ablation of Lkb1 in adult mice results in severe pancytopenia and subsequent lethality. Loss of Lkb1 leads to impaired survival and escape from quiescence of HSCs, resulting in exhaustion of the HSC pool and a marked reduction of HSC repopulating potential in vivo. Lkb1 deletion has an impact on cell proliferation in HSCs, but not on more committed compartments, pointing to context-specific functions for Lkb1 in haematopoiesis. The adverse impact of Lkb1 deletion on haematopoiesis was predominantly cell-autonomous and mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1)-independent, and involves multiple mechanisms converging on mitochondrial apoptosis and possibly downregulation of PGC-1 coactivators and their transcriptional network, which have critical roles in mitochondrial biogenesis and function. Thus, Lkb1 serves as an essential regulator of HSCs and haematopoiesis, and more generally, points to the critical importance of coupling energy metabolism and stem-cell homeostasis.
The adenosine class of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors (GPCRs) mediates the important role of extracellular adenosine in many physiological processes and is antagonized by caffeine. We have determined the crystal structure of the human A2A adenosine receptor, in complex with a high-affinity subtype-selective antagonist, ZM241385, to 2.6 angstrom resolution. Four disulfide bridges in the extracellular domain, combined with a subtle repacking of the transmembrane helices relative to the adrenergic and rhodopsin receptor structures, define a pocket distinct from that of other structurally determined GPCRs. The arrangement allows for the binding of the antagonist in an extended conformation, perpendicular to the membrane plane. The binding site highlights an integral role for the extracellular loops, together with the helical core, in ligand recognition by this class of GPCRs and suggests a role for ZM241385 in restricting the movement of a tryptophan residue important in the activation mechanism of the class A receptors.
Cells subjected to a heat shock, or a variety of other stresses increase the synthesis of a set of proteins, known as heat shock proteins. This response is apparently universal, occurring in the entire range from bacterial to mammalian cells. In Escherichia coli heat shock protein synthesis transiently increases following a shift from 30 degrees C to 42 degrees C as a result of changes in transcription initiation at heat shock promoters. Heat shock promoters are recognized by RNA polymerase containing a sigma factor of relative molecular mass (Mr) 32,000 (32K) E sigma 32 and not E sigma 70, the major form of RNA polymerase holoenzyme. To determine whether changes in the concentration of sigma 32 regulate this response, we measured the amount of sigma 32 before and after shift to high temperature and found that it increased transiently during heat shock as a result of changes in sigma 32 synthesis and stability. Our results indicate that sigma 32 is directly responsible for regulation of the heat shock response.
Cellular DNA is subjected to continual attack, both by reactive species inside cells and by environmental agents. Toxic and mutagenic consequences are minimized by distinct pathways of repair, and 130 known human DNA repair genes are described here. Notable features presently include four enzymes that can remove uracil from DNA, seven recombination genes related to RAD51, and many recently discovered DNA polymerases that bypass damage, but only one system to remove the main DNA lesions induced by ultraviolet light. More human DNA repair genes will be found by comparison with model organisms and as common folds in three-dimensional protein structures are determined. Modulation of DNA repair should lead to clinical applications including improvement of radiotherapy and treatment with anticancer drugs and an advanced understanding of the cellular aging process.
Several laboratories, including our own have reported the synthesis and activity of certain low relative molecular mass inhibitors of mammalian serine proteases, especially human leukocyte elastase (HLE, EC 3.4.21.37), an enzyme whose degradative activity on lung elastin has been implicated as a major causative factor in the induction of pulmonary emphysema, and which is present in the azurophil granules of human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN). Normally, these granules fuse with phagosomes containing engulfed foreign material (such as bacteria), and HLE, in combination with other lysosomal enzymes, catabolizes the particles. Under certain pathological conditions, however, PMN become attached to host protein (elastin fibres, basement membrane, connective tissue, immune complexes), and in response to this adherence, the granules may fuse with the PMN outer membrane and release their contents, including HLE, directly onto the tissue. Besides emphysema, HLE may also contribute to the pathogenesis of disease states such as adult respiratory distress syndrome, and its potential involvement in rheumatoid arthritis makes HLE inhibitors of considerable interest. It is known that cephalosporin antibiotics (for example, cephalothin (compound I, Table 2)) are acylating inhibitors of bacterial serine proteases which help synthesize the cell wall by performing a transpeptidation reaction on a peptidyl substrate bearing a D-Ala-D-Ala terminus. We now report that neutral cephalosporins (that is, compounds not bearing a free carboxyl at position C-4) can be modified to become potent time-dependent inhibitors of HLE.
The Alu sequence family comprises the major dispersed repeat sequences of rodent and primate genomes, numbering greater than 300,000 copies in the human haploid genome. The function of these elements is unknown. The sequences can be transcribed by RNA polymerase III and represent a substantial fraction of total heterogeneous nuclear RNA. Alu sequences can be found both in the flanking regions and within the transcription units of several well-characterized genes. Here we show that some members of the mouse B1 Alu sequence family encode a small cytoplasmic RNA. The mouse B1 sequence is congruent to 130 nucleotides long and shows homology with the monomeric units of the dimeric 300-nucleotide primate sequence. By means of microinjection studies in the Xenopus laevis oocyte, we have elucidated a novel pathway leading to the appearance of a processed B1-type Alu RNA species in the cytoplasm. The abundance of this small Alu RNA differs between various mouse tissues, suggesting a role in tissue-specific gene expression.
Cyclin-dependent protein kinases (Cdks) in eukaryotic cells work as a key enzyme at various points in the cell cycle. At the onset of S phase, active S-phase Cdks (S-Cdks) are essential for chromosomal DNA replication. Although several replication proteins are phosphorylated in a Cdk-dependent manner, the biological effects of phosphorylation of these proteins on the activation of DNA replication have not been elucidated. Here we show that Sld2 (ref. 4) (also known as Drc1; ref. 5), one of the replication proteins of budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), is phosphorylated in S phase in an S-Cdk-dependent manner, and mutant Sld2 lacking all the preferred Cdk phosphorylation sites (All-A) is defective in chromosomal DNA replication. Moreover, the complex that contains, at least, Sld2 and Dpb11 (ref. 6) (the Sld2-Dpb11 complex) is formed predominantly in S phase; the All-A protein is defective in this complex formation. Because this complex is suggested to be essential for chromosomal DNA replication, it seems likely that S-Cdk positively regulates formation of the Sld2-Dpb11 complex and, consequently, chromosomal DNA replication.
In several well-characterized site-specific recombination systems it has been shown that, for efficient recombination, the two recombining sites must have identical DNA sequences across the region between the staggered points of exchange. The precise DNA sequence of this overlap region, however, appears to be of little importance (with the exception of one position in the loxP site of bacteriophage P1 (ref. 6]. In this report we characterize a mutant recombination site for the site-specific recombination enzyme gamma delta resolvase (encoded by the gamma delta transposon), in which the dinucleotide at the crossover point is changed from AT to CT. Our results indicate that identity of the two overlap regions is not sufficient for recombination. Although resolvase binds normally to the mutant site and induces the structural deformation characteristic of the wild-type recombination site, catalysis at the crossover point (cutting and rejoining of DNA strands) is effectively limited to just one of the two strands, allowing resolvase to act as a topoisomerase but not as a recombinational enzyme.
We used a maskless photolithography method to produce DNA oligonucleotide microarrays with unique probe sequences tiled throughout the genome of Drosophila melanogaster and across predicted splice junctions. RNA expression of protein coding and nonprotein coding sequences was determined for each major stage of the life cycle, including adult males and females. We detected transcriptional activity for 93% of annotated genes and RNA expression for 41% of the probes in intronic and intergenic sequences. Comparison to genome-wide RNA interference data and to gene annotations revealed distinguishable levels of expression for different classes of genes and higher levels of expression for genes with essential cellular functions. Differential splicing was observed in about 40% of predicted genes, and 5440 previously unknown splice forms were detected. Genes within conserved regions of synteny with D. pseudoobscura had highly correlated expression; these regions ranged in length from 10 to 900 kilobase pairs. The expressed intergenic and intronic sequences are more likely to be evolutionarily conserved than nonexpressed ones, and about 15% of them appear to be developmentally regulated. Our results provide a draft expression map for the entire nonrepetitive genome, which reveals a much more extensive and diverse set of expressed sequences than was previously predicted.
The first crystalline preparation of isocitrate dehydrogenase specific for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate has been obtained with enzyme isolated from Escherichia coli. Scanning electron microscopy was employed to elucidate the structure of the crystals, which were found to exist as regular octahedrons ranging in size from 5 to 90 micrometers.
The crystal structure of Thermus aquaticus RNA polymerase holoenzyme (alpha2betabeta'omegasigmaA) complexed with a fork-junction promoter DNA fragment has been determined by fitting high-resolution x-ray structures of individual components into a 6.5-angstrom resolution map. The DNA lies across one face of the holoenzyme, completely outside the RNA polymerase active site channel. All sequence-specific contacts with core promoter elements are mediated by the sigma subunit. A universally conserved tryptophan is ideally positioned to stack on the exposed face of the base pair at the upstream edge of the transcription bubble. Universally conserved basic residues of the sigma subunit provide critical contacts with the DNA phosphate backbone and play a role in directing the melted DNA template strand into the RNA polymerase active site. The structure explains how holoenzyme recognizes promoters containing variably spaced -10 and -35 elements and provides the basis for models of the closed and open promoter complexes.
Structural studies of the T7 bacteriophage DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (T7 RNAP) have shown that the conformation of the amino-terminal domain changes substantially between the initiation and elongation phases of transcription, but how this transition is achieved remains unclear. We report crystal structures of T7 RNAP bound to promoter DNA containing either a 7- or an 8-nucleotide (nt) RNA transcript that illuminate intermediate states along the transition pathway. The amino-terminal domain comprises the C-helix subdomain and the promoter binding domain (PBD), which consists of two segments separated by subdomain H. The structures of the intermediate complex reveal that the PBD and the bound promoter rotate by approximately 45 degrees upon synthesis of an 8-nt RNA transcript. This allows the promoter contacts to be maintained while the active site is expanded to accommodate a growing heteroduplex. The C-helix subdomain moves modestly toward its elongation conformation, whereas subdomain H remains in its initiation- rather than its elongation-phase location, more than 70 angstroms away.
Specialized DNA polymerases (DNA pols) are required for lesion bypass in human cells. Auxiliary factors have an important, but so far poorly understood, role. Here we analyse the effects of human proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and replication protein A (RP-A) on six different human DNA pols--belonging to the B, Y and X classes--during in vitro bypass of different lesions. The mutagenic lesion 8-oxo-guanine (8-oxo-G) has high miscoding potential. A major and specific effect was found for 8-oxo-G bypass with DNA pols lambda and eta. PCNA and RP-A allowed correct incorporation of dCTP opposite a 8-oxo-G template 1,200-fold more efficiently than the incorrect dATP by DNA pol lambda, and 68-fold by DNA pol eta, respectively. Experiments with DNA-pol-lambda-null cell extracts suggested an important role for DNA pol lambda. On the other hand, DNA pol iota, together with DNA pols alpha, delta and beta, showed a much lower correct bypass efficiency. Our findings show the existence of an accurate mechanism to reduce the deleterious consequences of oxidative damage and, in addition, point to an important role for PCNA and RP-A in determining a functional hierarchy among different DNA pols in lesion bypass.
The dietary induction of serine dehydrase, produced by the oral intubation of hydrolyzed casein to protein-depleted rats, is markedly inhibited by doses of gamma-radiation of 400 roentgens or higher provided the irradiation is given within an hour after the initial dose of casein. If the irradiation is delayed until 7 hours after the initial dose of casein, induction is not inhibited. In contrast, the cortisone induction of tyrosine alpha-ketoglutarate transaminase is not inhibited by doses of gamma-radiation up to 3200 roentgens; in some instances hormonal induction of this enzyme appears to be enhanced by irradiation.
As compared to that in normal children a decreased activity of beta gliucuronidase, a lysosomal enzyme associated with mucopolysaccharide metabolism and with salt transport, has been detected in the epidermis and sweat gland tissues of children with cystic fibrosis.
Phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) is a monomeric protein composed of two domains of approximately equal size, connected by a hinge. Substrate-induced conformational change results in the closure of the active site cleft, which is situated between these two domains. In a study of the relations between structure and function of this enzyme, two interspecies hybrids were constructed, each composed of one domain from the human enzyme and one domain from the yeast enzyme. Despite a 35% difference in the amino acid composition between human and yeast PGK, catalytic properties of the hybrid enzymes are very similar to those of the parental proteins. This result demonstrates that the evolutionary substitutions within these two distantly related molecules do not significantly affect formation of the active site cleft, mechanism of domain closure, or enzyme activity itself.
DNA methylation is an important epigenetic mark in many eukaryotes. In plants, 24-nucleotide small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) bound to the effector protein, Argonaute 4 (AGO4), can direct de novo DNA methylation by the methyltransferase DRM2 (refs 2, 4-6). Here we report a new regulator of RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) in Arabidopsis: RDM1. Loss-of-function mutations in the RDM1 gene impair the accumulation of 24-nucleotide siRNAs, reduce DNA methylation, and release transcriptional gene silencing at RdDM target loci. RDM1 encodes a small protein that seems to bind single-stranded methyl DNA, and associates and co-localizes with RNA polymerase II (Pol II, also known as NRPB), AGO4 and DRM2 in the nucleus. Our results indicate that RDM1 is a component of the RdDM effector complex and may have a role in linking siRNA production with pre-existing or de novo cytosine methylation. Our results also indicate that, although RDM1 and Pol V (also known as NRPE) may function together at some RdDM target sites in the peri-nucleolar siRNA processing centre, Pol II rather than Pol V is associated with the RdDM effector complex at target sites in the nucleoplasm.
The first chordates appear in the fossil record at the time of the Cambrian explosion, nearly 550 million years ago. The modern ascidian tadpole represents a plausible approximation to these ancestral chordates. To illuminate the origins of chordate and vertebrates, we generated a draft of the protein-coding portion of the genome of the most studied ascidian, Ciona intestinalis. The Ciona genome contains approximately 16,000 protein-coding genes, similar to the number in other invertebrates, but only half that found in vertebrates. Vertebrate gene families are typically found in simplified form in Ciona, suggesting that ascidians contain the basic ancestral complement of genes involved in cell signaling and development. The ascidian genome has also acquired a number of lineage-specific innovations, including a group of genes engaged in cellulose metabolism that are related to those in bacteria and fungi.
In thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) from Escherichia coli, cycles of reduction and reoxidation of the flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor depend on rate-limiting rearrangements of the FAD and NADPH (reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) domains. We describe the structure of the flavin-reducing conformation of E. coli TrxR at a resolution of 3.0 angstroms. The orientation of the two domains permits reduction of FAD by NADPH and oxidation of the enzyme dithiol by the protein substrate, thioredoxin. The alternate conformation, described by Kuriyan and co-workers, permits internal transfer of reducing equivalents from reduced FAD to the active-site disulfide. Comparison of these structures demonstrates that switching between the two conformations involves a "ball-and-socket" motion in which the pyridine nucleotide-binding domain rotates by 67 degrees.
Chromatin proteins are covalently modified by at least five different processes; in no case has the precise physiological function been established. One of these post-synthetic, covalent modifications is effected by the enzyme poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, which uses the coenzyme NAD+ to ADP-ribosylate chromatin proteins. The modification consists largely of mono(ADP-ribose), but long, homopolymer chains of (ADP-ribose) are also present. Various physiological functions have been suggested for (ADP-ribose)n. Here we demonstrate that one function of (ADP-ribose)n is to participate in the cellular recovery from DNA damage. Specific inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase prevent rejoining of DNA strand breaks caused by dimethyl sulphate and cytotoxicity is enhanced thereby. The rejoining of strand breaks is prevented also by nutritionally depleting the cells of NAD.
Metal ions in the active sites of many metalloenzymes exhibit distinctive spectral and chemical features which are different from those of small inorganic complexes. These features are the result of the unusual geometric and electronic constraints that are imposed on the metal ion within the protein environment. Much effort has been invested to try to mimic this feature of metalloenzymes in synthetic systems, but this remains a formidable task. Here we show that one of the key lessons learned from the science of catalytic antibodies--that binding energy can be converted into chemical energy--can be exploited to 'fine-tune' the physicochemical properties of a metal complex. We show that an antibody's binding site can reversibly perturb the coordination geometry of a metal ion, and can stabilize a high-energy coordinated species. Specifically, antibodies designed to bind the organosilicon compound 1 also bind the geometrically similar Cu(I) complex 2. However, the antibody binds a slightly compressed form of 2, which is closer in size to 1. This distortion is manifested by a spectral shift--an 'immunochromic' effect.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), the most common and severe form of the muscular dystrophies, is an X-linked inborn error of metabolism with multiple tissue involvement. Although the major pathological changes are observed in skeletal muscle, abnormalities have also been detected in the heart, nervous system, red blood cells, lymphocytes and cultured skin fibroblasts. For many reasons, such as readily available tissue material, fewer secondary changes and the potential for prenatal diagnosis, cultured skin fibroblasts should be the tissue of choice to search for the primary defect. Several abnormalities have been reported in DMD fibroblasts, suggesting that the genetic abnormality is expressed in these cells. To search for potentially mutant protein(s) we have compared the protein composition of normal and DMD fibroblasts by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and have now found one protein spot consistently missing in DMD cells. The nature of this protein and its relation to the DMD gene are unknown.
Taste can be divided into four primary sensations: salty, sour, sweet and bitter. Salty and sour are directly transduced by apical channels, whereas sweet and bitter utilize cyclic nucleotide second messengers. We have shown that rod transducin is present in mammalian taste receptor cells, where it is activated by a bitter receptor and in turn activates a phosphodiesterase. Here we introduce into frog taste cells peptides derived from transducin's phosphodiesterase-interaction region, which cause an inward whole-cell current in a subset of cells. We find that the peptides' effects are reversibly suppressed by IBMX and forskolin, indicative of a transducin-activated phosphodiesterase. Cyclic nucleotides suppress the whole-cell current, indicating that cyclic nucleotides may regulate taste-cell conductance. IBMX modifies taste-cell responses to two taste stimuli, implicating phosphodiesterase in taste transduction. Submicromolar cyclic nucleotides directly suppress the conductance of inside-out patches derived from the taste-cell plasma membrane, independently of protein phosphorylation. The channels are unusual in that they are suppressed, rather than activated by cyclic nucleotides. We propose that transducin, via phosphodiesterase, decreases cyclic nucleotide levels to activate the cyclic-nucleotide-suppressible conductance, leading to Ca2+ influx and taste-cell depolarization.
Many bacterial pathogens secrete proteins that activate host trypsinogen-like enzyme precursors, most notably the proenzymes of the blood coagulation and fibrinolysis systems. Staphylococcus aureus, an important human pathogen implicated in sepsis and endocarditis, secretes the cofactor staphylocoagulase, which activates prothrombin, without the usual proteolytic cleavages, to directly initiate blood clotting. Here we present the 2.2 A crystal structures of human alpha-thrombin and prethrombin-2 bound to a fully active staphylocoagulase variant. The cofactor consists of two domains, each with three-helix bundles; this is a novel fold that is distinct from known serine proteinase activators, particularly the streptococcal plasminogen activator streptokinase. The staphylocoagulase fold is conserved in other bacterial plasma-protein-binding factors and extracellular-matrix-binding factors. Kinetic studies confirm the importance of isoleucine 1 and valine 2 at the amino terminus of staphylocoagulase for zymogen activation. In addition to making contacts with the 148 loop and (pro)exosite I of prethrombin-2, staphylocoagulase inserts its N-terminal peptide into the activation pocket of bound prethrombin-2, allosterically inducing functional catalytic machinery. These investigations demonstrate unambiguously the validity of the zymogen-activation mechanism known as 'molecular sexuality'.
It is generally believed that proteins with promiscuous functions divergently evolved to acquire higher specificity and activity, and that this process was highly dependent on the ability of proteins to alter their functions with a small number of amino acid substitutions (plasticity). The application of this theory of divergent molecular evolution to promiscuous enzymes may allow us to design enzymes with more specificity and higher activity. Many structural and biochemical analyses have identified the active or binding site residues important for functional plasticity (plasticity residues). To understand how these residues contribute to molecular evolution, and thereby formulate a design methodology, plasticity residues were probed in the active site of the promiscuous sesquiterpene synthase gamma-humulene synthase. Identified plasticity residues were systematically recombined based on a mathematical model in order to construct novel terpene synthases, each catalysing the synthesis of one or a few very different sesquiterpenes. Here we present the construction of seven specific and active synthases that use different reaction pathways to produce the specific and very different products. Creation of these enzymes demonstrates the feasibility of exploiting the underlying evolvability of this scaffold, and provides evidence that rational approaches based on these ideas are useful for enzyme design.
By amplifying the melanocortin type 1 receptor from the woolly mammoth, we can report the complete nucleotide sequence of a nuclear-encoded gene from an extinct species. We found two alleles and show that one allele produces a functional protein whereas the other one encodes a protein with strongly reduced activity. This finding suggests that mammoths may have been polymorphic in coat color, with both dark- and light-haired individuals co-occurring.
Two enzymes are now known that catalyse slow steps in protein folding. Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase catalyses the cis-trans isomerization of Xaa-Pro peptide bonds in oligopeptides and during the refolding of several proteins. The other enzyme, protein-disulphide isomerase, accelerates the reactivation of reduced proteins, presumably by catalysis of thiol-disulphide exchange reactions. Recent evidence indicates that the beta-subunit of prolyl 4-hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in collagen biosynthesis, is identical with disulphide isomerase. On the basis of this important finding, it was suggested that disulphide isomerase accelerates protein folding, not by 'reshuffling' incorrect disulphide bonds, but in the same way as prolyl isomerase by catalysing proline isomerization which is known to be important for the folding of collagen and other proteins. Here we show that the catalytic activities of these two enzymes are different. Disulphide isomerase accelerates the reformation of native disulphide bonds during protein reoxidation. We find no evidence that this enzyme can catalyse the isomerization of proline peptide bonds, a reaction efficiently accelerated by prolyl isomerase. When both enzymes are present simultaneously during protein folding, they act independently of one another.
Reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide oxidase of normal human polymorphonuclear leukocytes has properties that would qualify it as the enzyme responsible for the respiratory burst during phagocytosis. The enzyme was deficient in leukocytes of five patients with chronic granulomatous disease. This lack of adequate reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide oxidase could be the basis for the metabolic abnormalities characteristic of these leukocytes and for their diminished bactericidal activity.
The mammalian renal collecting ducts are responsible for secreting potassium ions into the urine and are a major regulatory site for potassium homeostasis, in which a voltage-independent pH-sensitive K+ channel in the apical membrane plays a central role. Here we describe a complementary DNA encoding a novel K+ channel from rabbit renal cortical collecting tubule cells (RACTK1). RACTK1 has the functional characteristics of the apical K(+)-permeable channel and consists of 284 amino acids, putatively with two transmembrane segments. The sequence of RACTK1, however, shows no homology to known voltage-dependent or -independent K+ channels, and has a different K(+)-driving path and regulatory sites. The study of this protein should provide insight into K+ homeostasis and diseases of K+ metabolism.
The cyc- variants of S49 lymphoma cells have served as powerful tools for studying the components and mechanisms of hormone-induced adenylate cyclase stimulation, as these cells are deficient in the guanine nucleotide regulatory site (Ns) mediating hormone, guanine nucleotide, cholera toxin and fluoride-induced stimulations of the enzyme. Because of this deficiency, membranes of these cells have been used for reconstitution of the system by inserting the coupling component derived from other cell types. The hormone-sensitive adenylate cyclase is not only stimulated by hormones but can also be inhibited by a wide variety of hormones and neurotransmitters, and there is some evidence that hormonal inhibition may be mediated by a distinct guanine nucleotide regulatory site. Studies in cyc- cells lacking a functional Ns may therefore answer this unresolved, important question. We have recently observed that stable GTP analogues can inhibit cyc- adenylate cyclase stimulated by purified, preactivated Ns or forskolin, which can activate adenylate cyclase even in the absence of a functional Ns (ref. 10). The data indicated that these Ns-deficient cells contain an inhibitory guanine nucleotide site, Ni. To strengthen this concept, we investigated whether the cyc- adenylate cyclase can be inhibited by a hormone. We report here that somatostatin decreases cyclic AMP levels in cyc- cells, inhibits the forskolin-stimulated adenylate cyclase and causes a concomitant increase in a high affinity GTPase activity in cyc- membranes. The data strongly suggest that both the hormone- and guanine nucleotide-induced adenylate cyclase inhibitions in cyc- cells are mediated by Ni and that the mechanisms of activation and inactivation of Ni are similar to those established for Ns.
Ribozymes are RNA molecules that catalyze biochemical reactions. Fe(II)-EDTA, a solvent-based reagent which cleaves both double- and single-stranded RNA, was used to investigate the structure of the Tetrahymena ribozyme. Regions of cleavage alternate with regions of substantial protection along the entire RNA molecule. In particular, most of the catalytic core shows greatly reduced cleavage. These data constitute experimental evidence that an RNA enzyme, like a protein enzyme, has an interior and an exterior. Determination of positions where the phosphodiester backbone of the RNA is on the inside or on the outside of the molecule provides major constraints for modeling the three-dimensional structure of the Tetrahymena ribozyme. This approach should be generally informative for structured RNA molecules.
Interleukin-8 (IL-8) is a member of a family of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Although the best characterized activities of IL-8 include the chemoattraction and activation of neutrophils, other members of this family have a wide range of specific actions including the chemotaxis and activation of monocytes, the selective chemotaxis of memory T cells, the inhibition of hematopoietic stem cell proliferation, and the induction of neutrophil infiltration in vivo. A complementary DNA encoding the IL-8 receptor from human neutrophils has now been isolated. The amino acid sequence shows that the receptor is a member of the superfamily of receptors that couple to guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins). The sequence is 29% identical to that of receptors for the other neutrophil chemoattractants, fMet-Leu-Phe and C5a. Mammalian cells transfected with the IL-8 receptor cDNA clone bind IL-8 with high affinity and respond specifically to IL-8 by transiently mobilizing calcium. The IL-8 receptor may be part of a subfamily of related G protein-coupled receptors that transduce signals for the IL-8 family of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
We investigated extraneural manifestations in scrapie-infected transgenic mice expressing prion protein lacking the glycophosphatydylinositol membrane anchor. In the brain, blood, and heart, both abnormal protease-resistant prion protein (PrPres) and prion infectivity were readily detected by immunoblot and by inoculation into nontransgenic recipients. The titer of infectious scrapie in blood plasma exceeded 10(7) 50% infectious doses per milliliter. The hearts of these transgenic mice contained PrPres-positive amyloid deposits that led to myocardial stiffness and cardiac disease.
Acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) synthetase (Acs) is an enzyme central to metabolism in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Acs synthesizes acetyl CoA from acetate, adenosine triphosphate, and CoA through an acetyl-adenosine monophosphate (AMP) intermediate. Immunoblotting and mass spectrometry analysis showed that Salmonella enterica Acs enzyme activity is posttranslationally regulated by acetylation of lysine-609. Acetylation blocks synthesis of the adenylate intermediate but does not affect the thioester-forming activity of the enzyme. Activation of the acetylated enzyme requires the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-dependent protein deacetylase activity of the CobB Sir2 protein from S. enterica. We propose that acetylation modulates the activity of all the AMP-forming family of enzymes, including nonribosomal peptide synthetases, luciferase, and aryl- and acyl-CoA synthetases. These findings extend our knowledge of the roles of Sir2 proteins in gene silencing, chromosome stability, and cell aging and imply that lysine acetylation is a common regulatory mechanism in eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
1,3-beta-D-glucan synthase [also known as beta(1-->3) glucan synthase] is a multi-enzyme complex that catalyzes the synthesis of 1,3-beta-linked glucan, a major structural component of the yeast cell wall. Temperature-sensitive mutants in the essential Rho-type guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase), Rho1p, displayed thermolabile glucan synthase activity, which was restored by the addition of recombinant Rho1p. Glucan synthase from mutants expressing constitutively active Rho1p did not require exogenous guanosine triphosphate for activity. Rho1p copurified with beta(1-->3)glucan synthase and associated with the Fks1p subunit of this complex in vivo. Both proteins were localized predominantly at sites of cell wall remodeling. Therefore, it appears that Rho1p is a regulatory subunit of beta(1-->3)glucan synthase.
Full-length poliovirus complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized by assembling oligonucleotides of plus and minus strand polarity. The synthetic poliovirus cDNA was transcribed by RNA polymerase into viral RNA, which translated and replicated in a cell-free extract, resulting in the de novo synthesis of infectious poliovirus. Experiments in tissue culture using neutralizing antibodies and CD155 receptor-specific antibodies and neurovirulence tests in CD155 transgenic mice confirmed that the synthetic virus had biochemical and pathogenic characteristics of poliovirus. Our results show that it is possible to synthesize an infectious agent by in vitro chemical-biochemical means solely by following instructions from a written sequence.
Telomeric ends of chromosomes, which comprise noncoding repeat sequences of guanine-rich DNA, are fundamental in protecting the cell from recombination and degradation. Disruption of telomere maintenance leads to eventual cell death, which can be exploited for therapeutic intervention in cancer. Telomeric DNA sequences can form four-stranded (quadruplex) structures, which may be involved in the structure of telomere ends. Here we describe the crystal structure of a quadruplex formed from four consecutive human telomeric DNA repeats and grown at a K(+) concentration that approximates its intracellular concentration. K(+) ions are observed in the structure. The folding and appearance of the DNA in this intramolecular quadruplex is fundamentally different from the published Na(+)-containing quadruplex structures. All four DNA strands are parallel, with the three linking trinucleotide loops positioned on the exterior of the quadruplex core, in a propeller-like arrangement. The adenine in each TTA linking trinucleotide loop is swung back so that it intercalates between the two thymines. This DNA structure suggests a straightforward path for telomere folding and unfolding, as well as ways in which it can recognize telomere-associated proteins.
The structure of this pleiotropic activator of gene transcription in bacteria and its interaction sites at promoter DNA's as well as the role of this protein in the RNA polymerase-promoter interactions are reviewed.
The primary structure of a precursor protein that contains beta-neo-endorphin, dynorphin and a third leucine-enkephalin sequence with a carboxyl extension has been deduced from the nucleotide sequence of cloned DNA complementary to the porcine hypothalamic mRNA encoding it. The three peptides are each bounded by Lys-Arg. This precursor protein, like adrenal preproenkephalin and the corticotropin/beta-lipotropin precursor, comprises multiple repetitive units and a cysteine-containing amino-terminal sequence preceded by a signal peptide.
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is a mitogen for epidermal cells in vivo and for a wide variety of cells in culture. Recently, we and others have reported that EGF can also regulate the cellular levels of various hormones and fibronectin at concentrations which only minimally influence cell division. In addition, EGF treatment of GH3 cells affects chromatin structure such that isolated nuclei from treated cells have an increased capacity to bind bacterial RNA polymerase in initiation site complexes. Thus, the data suggest that various nuclear functions are modulated by EGF in GH3 cells despite its failure to affect DNA synthesis or cell proliferation. Recently, Yanker and Shooter have reported on the nuclear accumulation of nerve growth factor (NGF) in PC12 cells in which NGF does not promote cell division but does influence RNA and protein synthesis while inducing overt differentiation (neurite outgrowth). The similarities between the two systems and the various theories regarding the mechanism by which mitogens exert their growth-promoting and other effects led us to investigate whether an interaction between EGF and the cell nucleus can be demonstrated after surface binding and internalization of EGF in GH3 cells. We report here that when its lysosomal degradation is inhibited by chloroquine, EGF accumulates in the nucleus.
The expression of immunodeficiency in patients with specific purine enzyme defects indicates a crucial role of the purine salvage pathway in the acquisition and expression of normal immune function. One current hypothesis links the failure of normal lymphocyte development in these diseases to the accumulation of deoxynucleotide triphosphates. In our studies of human in vitro IgM responses, we observed that antigen-induced T-suppressor cell activity was abrogated in the presence of micromolar concentrations of deoxyguanosine (dGuo). In contrast, more than 1,000-fold higher resistance to dGuo was found for both noin-proliferative T-helper cell activity and the differentiation and proliferation of the precursor B lymphocytes for direct haemolytic plaque forming cells (PFC). To determine whether these observations could have in vivo relevance, we monitored the generation of murine T-suppressor cells, capable of abrogating a primary IgM response. It was found that dGuo (but not guanosine) selectively inhibited the in vivo development of T-suppressor cells.
The complete nucleotide sequence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromosome VIII reveals that it contains 269 predicted or known genes (300 base pairs or larger). Fifty-nine of these genes (22 percent) were previously identified. Of the 210 novel genes, 65 are predicted to encode proteins that are similar to other proteins of known or predicted function. Sixteen genes appear to be relatively recently duplicated. On average, there is one gene approximately every 2 kilobases. Although the coding density and base composition across the chromosome are not uniform, no regular pattern of variation is apparent.
The methylene-C(14) group is hydroxylated yielding formate-C(14) in the microsome-reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate system in vitro and yielding expired C(14)O(2), in living mice and houseflies. Methylenedioxyphenyl compounds apparently serve as alternate substrates for this enzymatic hydroxylation system of microsomes, and thus reduce the rate of metabolism and prolong the action of certain drugs and insecticide chemicals.
The mevalonate pathway produces isoprenoids that are vital for diverse cellular functions, ranging from cholesterol synthesis to growth control. Several mechanisms for feedback regulation of low-density-lipoprotein receptors and of two enzymes involved in mevalonate biosynthesis ensure the production of sufficient mevalonate for several end-products. Manipulation of this regulatory system could be useful in treating certain forms of cancer as well as heart disease.
The human genome is rich in sequences which are structurally related to the 7SL RNA component of the signal recognition particle. The 7SL DNA sequence family consists of four 7SL genes, 500 7SL pseudogenes (which are truncated at one or both ends of the 7SL sequence) and 500,000 Alu sequences. Both 7SL genes and Alu elements are transcribed by RNA polymerase III, and we show here that the internal 7SL promoter lies within the Alu-like part of the 7SL gene. Why then does RNA polymerase III transcribe the few 7SL genes so efficiently, while transcripts from the far more abundant Alu elements are not readily detectable? We find that a human 7SL gene and a synthetic Alu sequence derived from it are expressed 50-100-fold more efficiently in vitro than either a representative Alu element or two 7SL pseudogenes. 5' Deletion and insertion mutants of the 7SL gene demonstrate that, in conjunction with the internal promoter, the first 37 nucleotides upstream from the transcription start site are essential for efficient and accurate initiation in vitro. We suggest that the genomic sequences upstream from most Alu elements and 7SL pseudogenes do not contain this element, and consequently that only a small subset of such sequences can be transcribed in vivo. This may help to explain the homogeneity of the Alu family within each mammalian genome, as well as the species-specific differences between mammalian Alu families.
Cation pumps bind and translocate ions with the intermediate formation of a phosphoenzyme. In spite of extensive knowledge of the primary and even secondary structures of several of these cation transport enzymes, however, no high affinity cation binding sites have yet been determined. Here we report the use of oligonucleotide-directed, site-specific mutagenesis to identify the amino acids involved in Ca2+ binding in one of these transport enzymes, the Ca2+-ATPase of sarcoplasmic reticulum. Alteration of Glu 309, Glu 771, Asn 796, Thr 799, Asp 800 or Glu 908, each of which is predicted to lie near the centre of the transmembrane domain in putative transmembrane sequences M4, M5, M6 and M8 resulted in complete loss of Ca2+ transport function and of Ca2+-dependent phosphorylation of the enzyme by ATP. Phosphorylation of each of the mutant enzymes with inorganic phosphate was observed, however, even in the presence of Ca2+, which inhibits phosphorylation in the wild-type enzyme possessing an intact high affinity Ca2+-binding site. These results suggest that at least six polar, oxygen-containing residues lying near the centre of the transmembrane domain provide ligands for one or both of the two high affinity Ca2+ binding sites in the Ca2+-ATPase.
Methanogenic and acetogenic bacteria metabolize carbon monoxide, methanol, formate, hydrogen and carbon dioxide gases and, in the case of certain methanogens, acetate, by single-carbon (C1) biochemical mechanisms. Many of these reactions occur while the C1 compounds are linked to pteridine derivatives and tetrapyrrole coenzymes, including corrinoids, which are used to generate, reduce, or carbonylate methyl groups. Several metalloenzymes, including a nickel-containing carbon monoxide dehydrogenase, are used in both catabolic and anabolic oxidoreductase reactions. We propose biochemical models for coupling carbon and electron flow to energy conservation during growth on C1 compounds based on the carbon flow pathways inherent to acetogenic and methanogenic metabolism. Biological catalysts are therefore available which are comparable to those currently in use in the Monsanto process. The potentials and limitations of developing biotechnology based on these organisms or their enzymes and coenzymes are discussed.
The reconstitution of an apo-flavoenzyme, apo-glucose oxidase, on a 1.4-nanometer gold nanocrystal functionalized with the cofactor flavin adenine dinucleotide and integrated into a conductive film yields a bioelectrocatalytic system with exceptional electrical contact with the electrode support. The electron transfer turnover rate of the reconstituted bioelectrocatalyst is approximately 5000 per second, compared with the rate at which molecular oxygen, the natural cosubstrate of the enzyme, accepts electrons (approximately 700 per second). The gold nanoparticle acts as an electron relay or "electrical nanoplug" for the alignment of the enzyme on the conductive support and for the electrical wiring of its redox-active center.
Severe deficiency of hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) in man results in the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, an X-linked neurological disorder characterized by mental retardation, choreoathetosis and a compulsive tendency towards self-mutilation. Although the HPRT gene is normally constitutively expressed in all tissues at low levels, expression is elevated approximately fourfold in several regions of the central nervous system, particularly in the basal ganglia. The relationships between HPRT deficiency, tissue-specific alterations of nucleotide metabolism and the neuropathology of the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome remain unclear. Here we have microinjected recombinant molecules containing human HPRT (hHPRT) complementary DNA, the mouse metallothionein-I (MT-I) promoter and the 3'-untranslated portion of the human growth hormone (hGH) gene into mouse embryos to produce transgenic animals that express hHPRT on induction by cadmium. The hHPRT cDNA in these experiments contained 88 base pairs (bp) of 5'-untranslated and 190 bp of 3'-untranslated sequences, and the full-length coding sequence. We studied the in vivo expression of this MT-hHPRT fusion gene and observed preferential hHPRT expression in tissues of the central nervous system (CNS). This study suggests that sequences within the hHPRT transcript (cDNA) influence CNS expression via increased synthesis or stability of messenger RNA.
Mononuclear blood cells were obtained from a patient with type A insulin resistance. The cells showed a normal ability to bind iodine 125-labeled insulin. Analysis of solubilized insulin receptors from the patient's cells revealed a defect in insulin-stimulated tyrosine kinase activity, which is closely associated with the receptor itself. The enzyme failed to phosphorylate the insulin receptor and showed a markedly reduced ability to phosphorylate exogenously added substrates. It appears that receptors from this insulin-resistant patient have a defect distal to the insulin-binding site (the alpha subunit of the receptor). The defect could be located in the beta subunit, which has an adenosine triphosphate-binding site, or in another receptor component that transfers a signal of insulin binding into kinase activity. This dissociation between the normal binding and the defective protein kinase component of the insulin receptor represents the first biochemical defect of the receptor distal to ligand binding.
A current view is that cytotoxic stress, such as DNA damage, induces apoptosis by regulating the permeability of mitochondria. Mitochondria sequester several proteins that, if released, kill by activating caspases, the proteases that disassemble the cell. Cytokines activate caspases in a different way, by assembling receptor complexes that activate caspases directly; in this case, the subsequent mitochondrial permeabilization accelerates cell disassembly by amplifying caspase activity. We found that cytotoxic stress causes activation of caspase-2, and that this caspase is required for the permeabilization of mitochondria. Therefore, we argue that cytokine-induced and stress-induced apoptosis act through conceptually similar pathways in which mitochondria are amplifiers of caspase activity rather than initiators of caspase activation.
The assumptions underlying the use of the Poisson distribution are essentially that the probability of an event is small but nearly identical for all occurrences and that the occurrence of an event does not alter the probability of recurrence of such events. These assumptions do not seem to be met for evolutionary events since (i) the probability of fixing nucleotide codon substitutions is not equal for all substitutions at a codon, and probably varies for the same substitution in different lineages; (ii) the probability of fixing codon substitutions varies among positions of a cistron; and (iii) the fixation of a nucleotide codon substitution at one position in a cistron modifies, and may even promote, the fixation of a codon substitution elsewhere along the cistron. Natural selection presumably is the causative factor that acts to modify the probability of a nucleotide codon substitution's being fixed in a population. The use of the negative binomial distribution is consistent with the evidence that selective pressure on amino acid or nucleotide codon positions varies both among codon positions of a cistron and at a particular position during evolutionary time. If the number of fixations of nucleotide codon substitutions per position of cistrons encoding cytochromes c are phyletically inferred (phylogeny based on a paleontological record) rather than phenetically inferred (based on paired comparisons of extant species' differences in the absence of a phylogeny) the distribution of these fixation data cannot be described adequately by a single Poisson distribution. The fit of these same data to a negative binomial distribution is very satisfactory. It has been argued that the fit of phenetically inferred fixation data, which do not take account of parallel or reverse fixations, to the Poisson distribution was supportive evidence for the hypothesis that protein evolution results from the fixation of selectively neutral codon substitutions. This argument now appears to be undercut by the evidence that data on nucleotide codon fixation are more probably distributed according to the negative binomial distribution. The fact that fixation data can be described by a particular discrete probability distribution does not of itself provide insight into the mechanisms of the evolutionary process. However, the facts-(i) that the assumptions underlying the use of the negative binomial distribution adequately deal with the varying probability of fixing amino acid or nucleotide codon substitutions at and among the positions of a cistron and (ii) that the negative binomial distribution provides an excellent fit for the phyletically inferred fixation data-suggest that the negative binomial is a very appropriate discrete probability distribution for describing evolutionary events. Amino acids or their nucleotide codon substitutions may be fixed at a position of a cistron as though selectively neutral relative to the codon being replaced, even though the codon position will not be selectively neutral, since many amino acids cannot function there. The negative binomial distribution treats this situation well whereas a single Poisson distribution could only be satisfactory if all codon positions that could vary were selectively neutral.
Plasmodium vivax is one of the four malaria parasites that cause disease in humans. The structure of the immunodominant repeating peptide of the circumsporozoite (CS) protein of P. vivax was determined. A fragment of P. vivax DNA that encodes this tandemly repeating epitope was isolated by use of an oligonucleotide probe whose sequence is thought to be conserved in CS protein genes. DNA sequence analysis of the P. vivax clone indicates that the CS repeat is nine amino acids in length (Gly-Asp-Arg-Ala-Asp-Gly-Gln-Pro-Ala). The structure of the repeating region was confirmed with synthetic peptides and monoclonal antibodies directed against P. vivax sporozoites. This information should allow synthesis of a vaccine for P. vivax that is similar to the one being tested for P. falciparum.
A cytoplasmic RNA moiety is necessary for posttranslational uptake of nuclear-encoded mammalian proteins destined for the mitochondrial matrix. Post-translational addition of ribonuclease to a reticulocyte lysate-programmed cell-free translation mixture inhibited subsequent import of six different mitochondrial matrix enzyme precursors into rat liver mitochondria. The required RNA is highly protected, as indicated by the high concentrations of ribonuclease necessary to produce this inhibition. The dependence of the inhibitory effect on temperature, duration of exposure to ribonuclease, and availability of divalent cations is characteristic of the nuclease susceptibility of ribonucleoproteins. The ribonuclease-sensitive component was found in a 400-kilodalton fraction which contains the mitochondrial protein precursors.
Covalent modification of histones is important in regulating chromatin dynamics and transcription. One example of such modification is ubiquitination, which mainly occurs on histones H2A and H2B. Although recent studies have uncovered the enzymes involved in histone H2B ubiquitination and a 'cross-talk' between H2B ubiquitination and histone methylation, the responsible enzymes and the functions of H2A ubiquitination are unknown. Here we report the purification and functional characterization of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that is specific for histone H2A. The complex, termed hPRC1L (human Polycomb repressive complex 1-like), is composed of several Polycomb-group proteins including Ring1, Ring2, Bmi1 and HPH2. hPRC1L monoubiquitinates nucleosomal histone H2A at lysine 119. Reducing the expression of Ring2 results in a dramatic decrease in the level of ubiquitinated H2A in HeLa cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated colocalization of dRing with ubiquitinated H2A at the PRE and promoter regions of the Drosophila Ubx gene in wing imaginal discs. Removal of dRing in SL2 tissue culture cells by RNA interference resulted in loss of H2A ubiquitination concomitant with derepression of Ubx. Thus, our studies identify the H2A ubiquitin ligase, and link H2A ubiquitination to Polycomb silencing.
The ABC excision nuclease of Escherichia coli is an ATP-dependent DNA repair enzyme composed of three protein subunits, UvrA, UvrB and UvrC. The DNA sequences of all three genes have been reported. UvrA, the component that binds directly to the DNA, and UvrB, which attaches itself to the UvrA-DNA complex, both contain consensus sequences though to be diagnostic of ATP-binding sites, although the UvrC sequence does not. We now report that a computer analysis of the UvrA sequence has revealed an unusual series of internal duplications centering around putative metal-binding sites which may be involved in the interaction with DNA. We also find a strong evolutionary relationship to a family of prokaryotic membrane-associated active-transport proteins.
The acellular slime mold Physarum polycephalum releases a soluble adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate phosphodiesterase into the growth medium. Although this enzyme resembles the particulate diesterase of the same organism in kinetic properties and in inhibition by methyl purines, its greater stability, its insensitivity to stimulation by imidazole and to inhibition by adenosine triphosphate,- and its selective release into the medium indicate a specific function, perhaps protection against exogenous cyclic nucleotide, for the soluble enzyme.
The complete nucleotide sequence of the gamma 2b constant region gene cloned from BALB/c liver DNA is reported. The sequence of approximately 1870 base pairs includes the 5' flanking, 3' untranslated, and 3' flanking regions and three introns. The C gamma 2b coding region is divided by these introns into four segments corresponding to the homology domains and hinge region of the protein. The introns separating the hinge from the CH2 domain and the CH2 from the CH3 domain are small (106 and 119 base pairs). A larger intervening sequence of 314 base pairs separates the CH1  and hinge regions. The stretch of DNA comprising this large intron plus the hinge shows a strong homology with the other CH domains.
The inhibitor-of-apoptosis proteins (IAPs) regulate programmed cell death by inhibiting members of the caspase family of enzymes. Recently, a mammalian protein called Smac (also named DIABLO) was identified that binds to the IAPs and promotes caspase activation. Although undefined in the X-ray structure, the amino-terminal residues of Smac are critical for its function. To understand the structural basis for molecular recognition between Smac and the IAPs, we determined the solution structure of the BIR3 domain of X-linked IAP (XIAP) complexed with a functionally active nine-residue peptide derived from the N terminus of Smac. The peptide binds across the third beta-strand of the BIR3 domain in an extended conformation with only the first four residues contacting the protein. The complex is stabilized by four intermolecular hydrogen bonds, an electrostatic interaction involving the N terminus of the peptide, and several hydrophobic interactions. This structural information, along with the binding data from BIR3 and Smac peptide mutants reported here, should aid in the design of small molecules that may be used for the treatment of cancers that overexpress IAPs.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a metabolic fuel gauge conserved along the evolutionary scale in eukaryotes that senses changes in the intracellular AMP/ATP ratio. Recent evidence indicated an important role for AMPK in the therapeutic benefits of metformin, thiazolidinediones and exercise, which form the cornerstones of the clinical management of type 2 diabetes and associated metabolic disorders. In general, activation of AMPK acts to maintain cellular energy stores, switching on catabolic pathways that produce ATP, mostly by enhancing oxidative metabolism and mitochondrial biogenesis, while switching off anabolic pathways that consume ATP. This regulation can take place acutely, through the regulation of fast post-translational events, but also by transcriptionally reprogramming the cell to meet energetic needs. Here we demonstrate that AMPK controls the expression of genes involved in energy metabolism in mouse skeletal muscle by acting in coordination with another metabolic sensor, the NAD+-dependent type III deacetylase SIRT1. AMPK enhances SIRT1 activity by increasing cellular NAD+ levels, resulting in the deacetylation and modulation of the activity of downstream SIRT1 targets that include the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1alpha and the forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) and O3 (FOXO3a) transcription factors. The AMPK-induced SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of these targets explains many of the convergent biological effects of AMPK and SIRT1 on energy metabolism.
The electric fields produced in folded proteins influence nearly every aspect of protein function. We present a vibrational spectroscopy technique that measures changes in electric field at a specific site of a protein as shifts in frequency (Stark shifts) of a calibrated nitrile vibration. A nitrile-containing inhibitor is used to deliver a unique probe vibration to the active site of human aldose reductase, and the response of the nitrile stretch frequency is measured for a series of mutations in the enzyme active site. These shifts yield quantitative information on electric fields that can be directly compared with electrostatics calculations. We show that extensive molecular dynamics simulations and ensemble averaging are required to reproduce the observed changes in field.
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) encodes a protease that is essential for viral replication and is a member of the aspartic protease family. The recently determined three-dimensional structure of the related protease from Rous sarcoma virus has been used to model the smaller HIV-1 dimer. The active site has been analyzed by comparison to the structure of the aspartic protease, rhizopuspepsin, complexed with a peptide inhibitor. The HIV-1 protease is predicted to interact with seven residues of the protein substrate. This information can be used to design protease inhibitors and possible antiviral drugs.
The Perigord black truffle (Tuber melanosporum Vittad.) and the Piedmont white truffle dominate today's truffle market. The hypogeous fruiting body of T. melanosporum is a gastronomic delicacy produced by an ectomycorrhizal symbiont endemic to calcareous soils in southern Europe. The worldwide demand for this truffle has fuelled intense efforts at cultivation. Identification of processes that condition and trigger fruit body and symbiosis formation, ultimately leading to efficient crop production, will be facilitated by a thorough analysis of truffle genomic traits. In the ectomycorrhizal Laccaria bicolor, the expansion of gene families may have acted as a 'symbiosis toolbox'. This feature may however reflect evolution of this particular taxon and not a general trait shared by all ectomycorrhizal species. To get a better understanding of the biology and evolution of the ectomycorrhizal symbiosis, we report here the sequence of the haploid genome of T. melanosporum, which at approximately 125 megabases is the largest and most complex fungal genome sequenced so far. This expansion results from a proliferation of transposable elements accounting for approximately 58% of the genome. In contrast, this genome only contains approximately 7,500 protein-coding genes with very rare multigene families. It lacks large sets of carbohydrate cleaving enzymes, but a few of them involved in degradation of plant cell walls are induced in symbiotic tissues. The latter feature and the upregulation of genes encoding for lipases and multicopper oxidases suggest that T. melanosporum degrades its host cell walls during colonization. Symbiosis induces an increased expression of carbohydrate and amino acid transporters in both L. bicolor and T. melanosporum, but the comparison of genomic traits in the two ectomycorrhizal fungi showed that genetic predispositions for symbiosis-'the symbiosis toolbox'-evolved along different ways in ascomycetes and basidiomycetes.
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) comprises a superfamily of enzymes that hydrolyse the ester bond of phospholipids at the sn-2 position. Among the members of this superfamily, cytosolic PLA2 has attracted attention because it preferentially hydrolyses arachidonoyl phospholipids and is activated by submicromolar concentrations of Ca2+ ions and by phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP kinases). Here we investigate the function of cytosolic PLA2 in vivo by using homologous recombination to generate mice deficient in this enzyme. These mice showed a marked decrease in their production of eicosanoids and platelet-activating factor in peritoneal macrophages. Their ovalbumin-induced anaphylactic responses were significantly reduced, as was their bronchial reactivity to methacholine. Female mutant mice failed to deliver offspring, but these could be rescued by administration of a progesterone-receptor antagonist to the mother at term. Considered together with previous findings, our results indicate that cytosolic PLA2 plays a non-redundant role in allergic responses and reproductive physiology.
RNA polymerase II requires multiple general transcription factors to initiate site-specific transcription. These proteins can assemble in an ordered fashion onto promoter DNA in vitro, and such ordered assembly may occur in vivo (Fig. 1a). Some general transcription factors can interact with RNA polymerase II in the absence of DNA, however, suggesting that RNA polymerase II may also assemble into a multi-component complex containing a subset of initiation factors before binding to promoter DNA (Fig. 1b). Here we present evidence from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae for such an RNA polymerase II holoenzyme, a multi-subunit complex containing roughly equimolar amounts of RNA polymerase II, a subset of general transcription factors, and SRB regulatory proteins. Transcription by this holoenzyme is stimulated by the activator protein GAL4-VP16, a feature not observed with purified RNA polymerase II and general transcription factors alone. We propose that the holoenzyme is a form of RNA polymerase II readily recruited to promoters in vivo.
TRAIL, also called Apo2L, is a cytotoxic protein that induces apoptosis of many transformed cell lines but not of normal tissues, even though its death domain-containing receptor, DR4, is expressed on both cell types. An antagonist decoy receptor (designated as TRID for TRAIL receptor without an intracellular domain) that may explain the resistant phenotype of normal tissues was identified. TRID is a distinct gene product with an extracellular TRAIL-binding domain and a transmembrane domain but no intracellular signaling domain. TRID transcripts were detected in many normal human tissues but not in most cancer cell lines examined. Ectopic expression of TRID protected mammalian cells from TRAIL-induced apoptosis, which is consistent with a protective role. Another death domain-containing receptor for TRAIL (designated as death receptor-5), which preferentially engaged a FLICE (caspase-8)-related death protease, was also identified.
Insulin receptors (IRs) and insulin signaling proteins are widely distributed throughout the central nervous system (CNS). To study the physiological role of insulin signaling in the brain, we created mice with a neuron-specific disruption of the IR gene (NIRKO mice). Inactivation of the IR had no impact on brain development or neuronal survival. However, female NIRKO mice showed increased food intake, and both male and female mice developed diet-sensitive obesity with increases in body fat and plasma leptin levels, mild insulin resistance, elevated plasma insulin levels, and hypertriglyceridemia. NIRKO mice also exhibited impaired spermatogenesis and ovarian follicle maturation because of hypothalamic dysregulation of luteinizing hormone. Thus, IR signaling in the CNS plays an important role in regulation of energy disposal, fuel metabolism, and reproduction.
The p27 mammalian cell cycle protein is an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases. Both in vivo and in vitro, p27 was found to be degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The human ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes Ubc2 and Ubc3 were specifically involved in the ubiquitination of p27. Compared with proliferating cells, quiescent cells exhibited a smaller amount of p27 ubiquitinating activity, which accounted for the marked increase of p27 half-life measured in these cells. Thus, the abundance of p27 in cells is regulated by degradation. The specific proteolysis of p27 may represent a mechanism for regulating the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases.
With the discovery in the late 1980s that the DNA-repair gene RAD6 encodes a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, it became clear that protein modification by ubiquitin conjugation has a much broader significance than had previously been assumed. Now, two decades later, ubiquitin and its cousin SUMO are implicated in a range of human diseases, including breast cancer and Fanconi anaemia, giving fresh momentum to studies focused on the relationships between ubiquitin, SUMO and DNA-repair pathways.
Pacemaker activity of spontaneously active neurons and heart cells is controlled by a depolarizing, mixed Na+/K+ current, named Ih (or I(f) in the sinoatrial node of the heart). This current is activated on hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane. In addition to depolarizing pacemaker cells, Ih is involved in determining the resting membrane potential of neurons and provides a mechanism to limit hyperpolarizing currents in these cells. Hormones and neurotransmitters that induce a rise in cyclic AMP levels increase Ih by a mechanism that is independent of protein phosphorylation, and which involves direct binding of the cyclic nucleotide to the channel that mediates Ih. Here we report the molecular cloning and functional expression of the gene encoding a hyperpolarization-activated cation channel (HAC1) that is present in brain and heart. This channel exhibits the general properties of Ih channels. We have also identified full-length sequences of two related channels, HAC2 and HAC3, that are specifically expressed in the brain, indicating the existence of a family of hyperpolarization-activated cation channels.
Transcriptional competence of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus (IgH) is established at an early stage of lymphoid cell development, leading to the appearance of RNA components, previously called C mu RNA1 or sterile-mu RNA2, which contain constant-region sequences but lack variable-region sequences. These components are of two types: those which initiate in the D region of alleles that have undergone DJH (diversity-joining region) rearrangement (D mu transcripts) and those which initiate within the JH-C mu intron (hereafter termed I mu transcripts). In pre-B and early B cells, D mu and I mu transcripts are nearly as abundant as the messenger RNA encoding mu heavy chain. The D mu transcripts are spliced into RNAs containing D, JH and C mu sequences, and in some, but not all, cases these RNAs are translated into D mu proteins. To establish whether the I mu transcripts have any translational potential and to elucidate the structure of their promoter region, we have determined their transcription initiation sites and their mode of splicing. As reported here, by using sequence analysis of cloned I mu complementary DNAs, primer extension and S1 nuclease mapping, we have found that these transcripts have remarkable 5' heterogeneity: there are more than five distinct start sites spanning a region of 44 nucleotides that is located downstream of an octanucleotide found in all variable-region promoters. Such imprecise initiation may result from the lack of a well-defined TATAA motif and the unusual proximity of the octanucleotide to the enhancer region. Approximately 700 nucleotides downstream from these initiation sites, a cryptic splice site is used to create a nontranslatable exon ('nontron') which is joined to the C mu 1 domain. The properties of the nontron may be important for the mechanism of allelic exclusion.
Each individual excretes roughly 10 kg of urea per year, as a result of the hydrolysis of arginine in the final cytosolic step of the urea cycle. This reaction allows the disposal of nitrogenous waste from protein catabolism, and is catalysed by the liver arginase enzyme. In other tissues that lack a complete urea cycle, arginase regulates cellular arginine and ornithine concentrations for biosynthetic reactions, including nitric oxide synthesis: in the macrophage, arginase activity is reciprocally coordinated with that of NO synthase to modulate NO-dependent cytotoxicity. The bioinorganic chemistry of arginase is particularly rich because this enzyme is one of very few that specifically requires a spin-coupled Mn2+-Mn2+ cluster for catalytic activity in vitro and in vivo. The 2.1 angstrom-resolution crystal structure of trimeric rat liver arginase reveals that this unique metal cluster resides at the bottom of an active-site cleft that is 15 angstroms deep. Analysis of the structure indicates that arginine hydrolysis is achieved by a metal-activated solvent molecule which symmetrically bridges the two Mn2+ ions.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are key players in lipid and glucose metabolism and are implicated in metabolic disorders predisposing to atherosclerosis, such as dyslipidaemia and diabetes. Whereas PPARgamma promotes lipid storage by regulating adipocyte differentiation, PPARalpha stimulates the beta-oxidative degradation of fatty acids. PPARalpha-deficient mice show a prolonged response to inflammatory stimuli, suggesting that PPARalpha is also a modulator of inflammation. Hypolipidaemic fibrate drugs are PPARalpha ligands that inhibit the progressive formation of atherosclerotic lesions, which involves chronic inflammatory processes, even in the absence of their atherogenic lipoprotein-lowering effect. Here we show that PPARalpha is expressed in human aortic smooth-muscle cells, which participate in plaque formation and post-angioplasty re-stenosis. In these smooth-muscle cells, we find that PPARalpha ligands, and not PPARgamma ligands, inhibit interleukin-1-induced production of interleukin-6 and prostaglandin and expression of cyclooxygenase-2. This inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 induction occurs transcriptionally as a result of PPARalpha repression of NF-kappaB signalling. In hyperlipidaemic patients, fenofibrate treatment decreases the plasma concentrations of interleukin-6, fibrinogen and C-reactive protein. We conclude that activators of PPARalpha inhibit the inflammatory response of aortic smooth-muscle cells and decrease the concentration of plasma acute-phase proteins, indicating that PPARalpha in the vascular wall may influence the process of atherosclerosis and re-stenosis.
A key component of the RNA polymerase II transcriptional apparatus, TFIID, is a multi-protein complex containing the TATA box-binding protein (TBP) and at least seven tightly associated factors (TAFs). Although the functions of most TFIID subunits are unknown, it is clear that TAFs are not necessary for basal activity but that one or more are required for regulated transcription, and so behave as coactivators. The presence of multiple subunits indicates that there is an intricate assembly process and that TAFs may be responsible for other activities. We have described the properties of the subunit dTAFII110, which can interact directly with the transcriptional activator Sp1 (ref. 5). In addition, the largest subunit, dTAFII250, binds directly to TBP and links other TAFs to the complex. Here we describe the cloning, expression and partial characterization of the Drosophila TAF of M(r) 80,000, dTAFII80. Sequence analysis reveals that dTAFII80 contains several copies of the WD40 (beta-transducin) repeat. Moreover, dTAFII80 shares extended sequence similarity with an Arabidopsis gene, COP1, which encodes a putative transcription factor that is though to regulate development. We have expressed recombinant dTAFII80 and begun to characterize its interaction with other members of the TFIID complex. Purified recombinant dTAFII80 is unable to bind TBP directly or to interact strongly with the C-terminal domain of dTAFII250 (delta N250). Instead, dTAFII80 is only able to recognize and interact with a higher-order complex containing TBP, delta N250, 110 and 60. These findings suggest the formation of TFIID may require an ordered assembly of the TAFs, some of which bind directly to TBP and others that are tethered to the complex as a result of specific TAF/TAF interactions.
A large amount of chromosomal DNA is degraded during programmed cell death and definitive erythropoiesis. DNase II is an enzyme that digests the chromosomal DNA of apoptotic cells and nuclei expelled from erythroid precursor cells after macrophages have engulfed them. Here we show that DNase II-/-IFN-IR-/- mice and mice with an induced deletion of the DNase II gene develop a chronic polyarthritis resembling human rheumatoid arthritis. A set of cytokine genes was strongly activated in the affected joints of these mice, and their serum contained high levels of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, rheumatoid factor and matrix metalloproteinase-3. Early in the pathogenesis, expression of the gene encoding tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha was upregulated in the bone marrow, and administration of anti-TNF-alpha antibody prevented the development of arthritis. These results indicate that if macrophages cannot degrade mammalian DNA from erythroid precursors and apoptotic cells, they produce TNF-alpha, which activates synovial cells to produce various cytokines, leading to the development of chronic polyarthritis.
Signal peptide peptidase (SPP) catalyzes intramembrane proteolysis of some signal peptides after they have been cleaved from a preprotein. In humans, SPP activity is required to generate signal sequence-derived human lymphocyte antigen-E epitopes that are recognized by the immune system, and to process hepatitis C virus core protein. We have identified human SPP as a polytopic membrane protein with sequence motifs characteristic of the presenilin-type aspartic proteases. SPP and potential eukaryotic homologs may represent another family of aspartic proteases that promote intramembrane proteolysis to release biologically important peptides.
DEAD-box helicases are conserved enzymes involved in nearly all aspects of RNA metabolism, but their mechanisms of action remain unclear. Here, we investigated the mechanism of the DEAD-box protein Mss116 on its natural substrate, the group II intron ai5g. Group II introns are structurally complex catalytic RNAs considered evolutionarily related to the eukaryotic spliceosome, and an interesting paradigm for large RNA folding. We used single-molecule fluorescence to monitor the effect of Mss116 on folding dynamics of a minimal active construct, ai5g-D135. The data show that Mss116 stimulates dynamic sampling between states along the folding pathway, an effect previously observed only with high Mg(2+) concentrations. Furthermore, the data indicate that Mss116 promotes folding through discrete ATP-independent and ATP-dependent steps. We propose that Mss116 stimulates group II intron folding through a multi-step process that involves electrostatic stabilization of early intermediates and ATP hydrolysis during the final stages of native state assembly.
The covalent attachment of ubiquitin to cellular proteins is a powerful mechanism for controlling protein activity and localization. Ubiquitination is a reversible modification promoted by ubiquitin ligases and antagonized by deubiquitinating proteases. Ubiquitin-dependent mechanisms regulate many important processes including cell-cycle progression, apoptosis and transcriptional regulation. Here we show that ubiquitin-dependent mechanisms regulate synaptic development at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Neuronal overexpression of the deubiquitinating protease fat facets leads to a profound disruption of synaptic growth control; there is a large increase in the number of synaptic boutons, an elaboration of the synaptic branching pattern, and a disruption of synaptic function. Antagonizing the ubiquitination pathway in neurons by expression of the yeast deubiquitinating protease UBP2 (ref. 5) also produces synaptic overgrowth and dysfunction. Genetic interactions between fat facets and highwire, a negative regulator of synaptic growth that has structural homology to a family of ubiquitin ligases, suggest that synaptic development may be controlled by the balance between positive and negative regulators of ubiquitination.
GTPases of the Ras superfamily regulate many aspects of cell growth, differentiation and action. Their functions depend on their ability to alternate between inactive and active forms, and on their cellular localization. Numerous proteins affecting the GTPase activity, nucleotide exchange rates and membrane localization of Ras superfamily members have now been identified. Many of these proteins are much larger and more complex than their targets, containing multiple domains capable of interacting with an intricate network of cellular enzymes and structures.
There have been many reports that eukaryotic cells contain ring-shaped 19S or 20S particles which are composed of numerous polypeptide subunits ranging in size between 25 and 35 kilodaltons. Because these particles seemed to copurify with inactive mRNA, they were assumed to function in regulating mRNA translation and hence were named 'prosomes' (for 'programmed-o-some'). A number of properties have been reported for these structures, including an association with specific RNA species or with certain heat-shock proteins and involvement in tRNA processing or aminoacyl tRNA synthesis. However, these proposed activities have not been supported by definitive evidence. During studies of the proteolytic systems in mammalian tissues, we noted many similarities between these 19S particles and the high molecular weight protease complexes that are present in most or all eukaryotic cells. This (700 kilodalton) enzyme complex, designated here as LAMP for 'large alkaline multi-functional protease', contains three distinct endoproteolytic sites which function at neutral or alkaline pH and are specific for hydrolysis of proteins, hydrophobic peptides, or basic peptides. This protease also exists in a latent form which can be activated by polylysine, fatty acids, or ATP. In this report, we show that the prosomes and these protease complexes are very similar or identical with respect to their size, polypeptide composition, immunological cross-reactivity, appearance in the electron microscope, radial symmetry of subunits, subcellular localization, and proteolytic activities. Therefore, the 'prosome' probably plays a critical role in intracellular protein breakdown, and we propose that it be renamed 'proteasome'.
Transport of RNAs within nuclei and through nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are essential, but poorly understood, steps in gene expression. In experiments with mammalian cells, RCC1, the abundant nuclear guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the guanosine triphosphatase Ran/TC4, was shown to be required for nucleocytoplasmic transport of precursors of spliceosomal small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), intranuclear transport of U3 snRNA, and processing of ribosomal RNAs, but not for export of transfer RNAs. It is proposed that guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-bound Ran/TC4 associates with ribonucleoprotein particles (RNPs) during intranuclear movement, and that GTP hydrolysis promotes deposition of RNPs at targeted sites such as NPCs or nucleoli.
Kinesin is the founding member of a superfamily of microtubule based motor proteins that perform force-generating tasks such as organelle transport and chromosome segregation. It has two identical approximately 960-amino-acid chains containing an amino-terminal globular motor domain, a central alpha-helical region that enables dimer formation through a coiled-coil, and a carboxy-terminal tail domain that binds light chains and possibly an organelle receptor. The kinesin motor domain of approximately 340 amino acids, which can produce movement in vitro, is much smaller than that of myosin (approximately 850 amino acids) and dynein (1,000 amino acids), and is the smallest known molecular motor. Here, we report the crystal structure of the human kinesin motor domain with bound ADP determined to 1.8-A resolution by X-ray crystallography. The motor consists primarily of a single alpha/beta arrowhead-shaped domain with dimensions of 70 x 45 x 45 A. Unexpectedly, it has a striking structural similarity to the core of the catalytic domain of the actin-based motor myosin. Although kinesin and myosin have virtually no amino-acid sequence++ identity, and exhibit distinct enzymatic and motile properties, our results suggest that these two classes of mechanochemical enzymes evolved from a common ancestor and share a similar force-generating strategy.
The intraventricular injection of methionine-enkephalin (50 to 100 micrograms) or [d-Ala2]-methionine-enkephalinamide (1.5 to 12 micrograms), a synthetic enkephalin analog resistant to enzyme degradation, caused a marked dose-dependent increase in dihydroxyphenylacetic acid and homovanillic acid concentrations in the rat striatum. The [d-Ala2] analog increased the accumulation of dopa in the striatum after aromatic amino acid decarboxylase inhibition, indicating that it increased dopamine synthesis. At the highest doses used both enkephalins failed to modify brain serotonin metabolism. The monolateral microinjection of the [d-Ala2]] analog (3 to 6 micrograms) into the caudate nucleus increased the concentration of dihydroxyphenylacetic acid in the injected side, whereas bilateral injection increased the concentration of this compound in both caudate nuclei and caused catalepsy. The stimulant effect of the [d-Ala2] analog on dopamine synthesis in the striatum persisted after destruction of striatal postsynaptic dopamine receptors with kainic acid. The biochemical and behavioral effects of enkephalins were prevented by naloxone, a specific narcotic antagonist. The results indicate that enkephalins stimulate dopamine synthesis by an action on opioid receptors localized on dopaminergic nerve terminals.
Modification of specific intracellular proteins by ubiquitin targets them for degradation. We describe a yeast enzyme, Doa4, that is integral to the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins and is required in diverse physiological processes. Doa4 appears to function late in the proteolytic pathway by cleaving ubiquitin from substrate remnants still bound to protease. The human tre-2 oncogene encodes a deubiquitinating enzyme similar to Doa4, indicating a role for the ubiquitin system in mammalian growth control.
The Harvey murine sarcoma virus (Ha-MuSV) transforming gene, v-rasH, encodes a 21,000 molecular weight protein (p21) that is closely related to the p21 proteins encoded by the cellular transforming genes of the ras gene family. The primary translation product (prop21), which is found in the cytosol, undergoes posttranslational modification and the mature protein subsequently becomes associated with the inner surface of the plasma membrane and binds lipid tightly. The p21 proteins have the capacity to bind guanine nucleotides non-covalently in vitro. To assess the biological relevance of these biochemical features of the protein, we have now studied a series of deletion mutants located at or near the C-terminus of the viral p21 protein. Our tissue culture studies indicate that amino acids located at or near the C-terminus are required for cellular transformation, membrane association and lipid binding.
Fashions come and go in biochemistry. The discovery that some RNAs are enzymes is reviving interest in the long-neglected ribosome.
A mutant of Salmonella typhimurium, resistant to inhibition by 2, 6-diaminopurine, differs from its sensitive wild-type parent by an altered adenylic acid pyrophosphorylase. The altered enzyme, though still active with adenine as substrate, is inactive in the conversion of diaminopurine to its nucleotide. It also differs from the wildtype enzyme in a number of physical and chemical properties.
The crystal structure of Bacillus subtilis ribonuclease P protein is reported at 2.6 angstroms resolution. This protein binds to ribonuclease P RNA to form a ribonucleoprotein holoenzyme with optimal catalytic activity. Mutagenesis and biochemical data indicate that an unusual left-handed betaalphabeta crossover connection and a large central cleft in the protein form conserved RNA binding sites; a metal binding loop may comprise a third RNA binding site. The unusual topology is partly shared with ribosomal protein S5 and the ribosomal translocase elongation factor G, which suggests evolution from a common RNA binding ancestor in the primordial translational apparatus.
The NF-kappaB p50/p65 heterodimer is the classical member of the Rel family of transcription factors which regulate diverse cellular functions such as immune response, cell growth, and development. Other mammalian Rel family members, including the proteins p52, proto-oncoprotein c-Rel, and RelB, all have amino-terminal Rel-homology regions (RHRs). The RHR is responsible for the dimerization, DNA binding and cytosolic localization of these proteins by virtue of complex formation with inhibitor kappaB proteins. Signal-induced removal of kappaB inhibitors allows translocation of dimers to the cell nucleus and transcriptional regulation of kappaB DNA-containing genes. NF-kappaB specifically recognizes kappaB DNA elements with a consensus sequence of 5'-GGGRNYYYCC-3' (R is an unspecified purine; Y is an unspecified pyrimidine; and N is any nucleotide). Here we report the crystal structure at 2.9 A resolution of the p50/p65 heterodimer bound to the kappaB DNA of the intronic enhancer of the immunoglobulin light-chain gene. Our structure reveals a 5-base-pair 5' subsite for p50, and a 4-base-pair 3' subsite for p65. This structure indicates why the p50/p65 heterodimer interface is stronger than that of either homodimer. A comparison of this structure with those of other Rel dimers reveals that both subunits adopt variable conformations in a DNA-sequence-dependent manner. Our results explain the different behaviour of the p50/p65 heterodimer with heterologous promoters.
The heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are signal transducers that communicate signals from many hormones, neurotransmitters, chemokines, and autocrine and paracrine factors. The extracellular signals are received by members of a large superfamily of receptors with seven membrane-spanning regions that activate the G proteins, which route the signals to several distinct intracellular signaling pathways. These pathways interact with one another to form a network that regulates metabolic enzymes, ion channels, transporters, and other components of the cellular machinery controlling a broad range of cellular processes, including transcription, motility, contractility, and secretion. These cellular processes in turn regulate systemic functions such as embryonic development, gonadal development, learning and memory, and organismal homeostasis.
Metallothioneins are small cysteine-rich proteins that bind heavy metals such as zinc, cadmium, copper and mercury. Recent interest in these proteins has focused on the part they play in zinc metabolism and heavy metal detoxification. Our interest in metallothionein genes stems largely from the observations that these proteins are inducible by both heavy metals and glucocorticoid hormones. To explore the regulation of these genes, we have isolated cDNA and genomic clones corresponding to mouse metallothionein-I (MT-I), and have used them to show that both inducers act at the transcriptional level in vivo and in a wide variety of cell lines. We have also shown that the MT-I gene is amplified during selection for cadmium resistance. To investigate the mechanisms of gene regulation, knowledge of the primary DNA sequence is necessary. Here we present the entire sequence of mouse MT-I gene along with approximately 300 bases of 5' flanking region that presumably includes promoter and regulatory sites. The 5' mRNA sequence, defined by S1 nuclease mapping, was combined with sequences of the coding and 3' untranslated regions obtained previously to allow a computer prediction of the most stable secondary structure of MT-I mRNA.
Large alveolar cells of normal dog lung are rich in enzymes concerned with oxidative and synthetic pathways. In three experimental situations where ability of the lung to produce surfactant was impaired, the enzyme-rich cells were lacking or absent. Findings support the concept that these cells are sites of active metabolism, possibly including production of surfactant.
The mechanism of insulin action is only partly understood. At one end of the signalling chain, the structure of the insulin receptor is known in detail, and at the other end, insulin controls cellular metabolism by regulating the phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues in key target enzymes. The molecular events linking the occupied receptor to changes in target enzyme phosphorylation have remained obscure. Recently, insulin was shown to promote the hydrolysis of a phosphatidylinositol glycan with release of its polar head-group. The head group was reported to activate a high-affinity cyclic AMP-phosphodiesterase and pyruvate dehydrogenase, to inhibit catecholamine-stimulated lipolysis, and also to inhibit phospholipid methyltransferase and adenylate cyclase. We report here that in intact adipocytes this head-group faithfully copies the insulin-directed effects on the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of target proteins of the hormone.
A high proportion of purebred Hampshire pigs carries the dominant RN- mutation, which causes high glycogen content in skeletal muscle. The mutation has beneficial effects on meat content but detrimental effects on processing yield. Here, it is shown that the mutation is a nonconservative substitution (R200Q) in the PRKAG3 gene, which encodes a muscle-specific isoform of the regulatory gamma subunit of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Loss-of-function mutations in the homologous gene in yeast (SNF4) cause defects in glucose metabolism, including glycogen storage. Further analysis of the PRKAG3 signaling pathway may provide insights into muscle physiology as well as the pathogenesis of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in humans, a metabolic disorder associated with impaired glycogen synthesis.
Familial British dementia (FBD), previously designated familial cerebral amyloid angiopathy-British type, is an autosomal dominant disorder of undetermined origin characterized by progressive dementia, spasticity, and cerebellar ataxia, with onset at around the fifth decade of life. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, non-neuritic and perivascular plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are the predominant pathological lesions. Here we report the identification of a unique 4K protein subunit named ABri from isolated amyloid fibrils. This highly insoluble peptide is a fragment of a putative type-II single-spanning transmembrane precursor that is encoded by a novel gene, BRI, located on chromosome 13. A single base substitution at the stop codon of this gene generates a longer open reading frame, resulting in a larger, 277-residue precursor. Release of the 34 carboxy-terminal amino acids from the mutated precursor generates the ABri amyloid subunit. The mutation creates a cutting site for the restriction enzyme XbaI, which is useful for detecting asymptomatic carriers. Antibodies against the amyloid or homologous synthetic peptides recognize both parenchymal and vascular lesions in FBD patients. A point mutation at the stop codon of BRI therefore results in the generation of the ABri peptide, which is deposited as amyloid fibrils causing neuronal disfunction and dementia.
Congenital generalized lipodystrophy (CGL) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a paucity of adipose (fat) tissue which is evident at birth and is accompanied by a severe resistance to insulin, leading to hyperinsulinaemia, hyperglycaemia and enlarged fatty liver. We have developed a mouse model that mimics these features of CGL: the syndrome occurs in transgenic mice expressing a truncated version of a nuclear protein known as nSREBP-1c (for sterol-regulatory-element-binding protein-1c) under the control of the adipose-specific aP2 enhancer. Adipose tissue from these mice was markedly deficient in messenger RNAs encoding several fat-specific proteins, including leptin, a fat-derived hormone that regulates food intake and energy metabolism. Here we show that insulin resistance in our lipodystrophic mice can be overcome by a continuous systemic infusion of low doses of recombinant leptin, an effect that is not mimicked by chronic food restriction. Our results support the idea that leptin modulates insulin sensitivity and glucose disposal independently of its effect on food intake, and that leptin deficiency accounts for the insulin resistance found in CGL.
NS3, an essential helicase for replication of hepatitis C virus, is a model enzyme for investigating helicase function. Using single-molecule fluorescence analysis, we showed that NS3 unwinds DNA in discrete steps of about three base pairs (bp). Dwell time analysis indicated that about three hidden steps are required before a 3-bp step is taken. Taking into account the available structural data, we propose a spring-loaded mechanism in which several steps of one nucleotide per adenosine triphosphate molecule accumulate tension on the protein-DNA complex, which is relieved periodically via a burst of 3-bp unwinding. NS3 appears to shelter the displaced strand during unwinding, and, upon encountering a barrier or after unwinding >18 bp, it snaps or slips backward rapidly and repeats unwinding many times in succession. Such repetitive unwinding behavior over a short stretch of duplex may help to keep secondary structures resolved during viral genome replication.
A small protein, VPg, is covalently linked to the 5' end of the plus-stranded poliovirus genomic RNA. Poliovirus messenger RNA, identical in nucleotide sequence to genomic RNA, is not capped at its 5' end by the methylated structure that is common to most eukaryotic mRNAs. These discoveries presented two problems. First, as cap structures are usually required for translation of mRNA into protein, how does this uncapped viral RNA act as a template for translation? Second, what is the function of VPg? The identification of the internal ribosomal-entry site, which allows the entry of ribosomes into viral mRNA independently of the 5' mRNA end, has solved the first conundrum. Here we describe the resolution of the second problem. VPg is linked to the genomic RNA through the 5'-terminal uridylic acid of the RNA. We show that VPg can be uridylylated by the poliovirus RNA polymerase 3Dpol. Uridylylated VPg can then prime the transcription of polyadenylate RNA by 3Dpol to produce VPg-linked poly(U). Initiation of transcription of the poliovirus genome from the polyadenylated 3' end therefore depends on VPg.
Interferons are immunomodulatory cytokines that mediate anti-pathogenic and anti-proliferative effects in cells. Interferon-gamma-inducible human guanylate binding protein 1 (hGBP1) belongs to the family of dynamin-related large GTP-binding proteins, which share biochemical properties not found in other families of GTP-binding proteins such as nucleotide-dependent oligomerization and fast cooperative GTPase activity. hGBP1 has an additional property by which it hydrolyses GTP to GMP in two consecutive cleavage reactions. Here we show that the isolated amino-terminal G domain of hGBP1 retains the main enzymatic properties of the full-length protein and can cleave GDP directly. Crystal structures of the N-terminal G domain trapped at successive steps along the reaction pathway and biochemical data reveal the molecular basis for nucleotide-dependent homodimerization and cleavage of GTP. Similar to effector binding in other GTP-binding proteins, homodimerization is regulated by structural changes in the switch regions. Homodimerization generates a conformation in which an arginine finger and a serine are oriented for efficient catalysis. Positioning of the substrate for the second hydrolysis step is achieved by a change in nucleotide conformation at the ribose that keeps the guanine base interactions intact and positions the beta-phosphates in the gamma-phosphate-binding site.
Theory suggests it should be difficult for asexual organisms to adapt to a changing environment because genetic diversity can only arise from mutations accumulating within direct antecedents and not through sexual exchange. In an asexual microinvertebrate, the bdelloid rotifer, we have observed a mechanism by which such organisms could acquire the diversity needed for adaptation. Gene copies most likely representing former alleles have diverged in function so that the proteins they encode play complementary roles in survival of dry conditions. One protein prevents desiccation-sensitive enzymes from aggregating during drying, whereas its counterpart does not have this activity, but is able to associate with phospholipid bilayers and is potentially involved in maintenance of membrane integrity. The functional divergence of former alleles observed here suggests that adoption of asexual reproduction could itself be an evolutionary mechanism for the generation of diversity.
Tonin, an esteroprotease isolated from rat submaxillary gland, is a serine protease with trypsin- and chymotrypsin-like activity. The substrate specificity of tonin shows that it differs from kallikreins and is definitely not a renin-like enzyme or an angiotensin-converting enzyme. Tonin can produce directly the vasoactive peptide angiotensin II, from angiotensin I, angiotensinogen and the synthetic tetradecapeptide substrate of renin by cleavage of a Phe-His bond. It has also been found to cleave some Phe and Arg bonds in various substrates such as beta-lipotropin (beta-LPH), adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and substance P. Here we describe the complete amino acid sequence of rat submaxillary gland, tonin. Comparison of the sequence of 219 amino acids with other serine proteases, particularly kallikreins, gamma-subunit of nerve growth factor (NGF) and the recently described gamma-renin, reveals extensive similarities. More interestingly, it also reveals the substitution of an Asp residue always found in the serine protease active site triad (Asp, His, Ser) by a Leu residue. This unusual substitution does not seem to affect the proteolytic activity of the enzyme.
Circadian rhythms are ubiquitous in eukaryotes, and coordinate numerous aspects of behaviour, physiology and metabolism, from sleep/wake cycles in mammals to growth and photosynthesis in plants. This daily timekeeping is thought to be driven by transcriptional-translational feedback loops, whereby rhythmic expression of 'clock' gene products regulates the expression of associated genes in approximately 24-hour cycles. The specific transcriptional components differ between phylogenetic kingdoms. The unicellular pico-eukaryotic alga Ostreococcus tauri possesses a naturally minimized clock, which includes many features that are shared with plants, such as a central negative feedback loop that involves the morning-expressed CCA1 and evening-expressed TOC1 genes. Given that recent observations in animals and plants have revealed prominent post-translational contributions to timekeeping, a reappraisal of the transcriptional contribution to oscillator function is overdue. Here we show that non-transcriptional mechanisms are sufficient to sustain circadian timekeeping in the eukaryotic lineage, although they normally function in conjunction with transcriptional components. We identify oxidation of peroxiredoxin proteins as a transcription-independent rhythmic biomarker, which is also rhythmic in mammals. Moreover we show that pharmacological modulators of the mammalian clock mechanism have the same effects on rhythms in Ostreococcus. Post-translational mechanisms, and at least one rhythmic marker, seem to be better conserved than transcriptional clock regulators. It is plausible that the oldest oscillator components are non-transcriptional in nature, as in cyanobacteria, and are conserved across kingdoms.
The NF-kappaB family of transcription factors is activated in response to many stimuli, including pro-inflammatory cytokines, environmental stresses and, in the case of B and T lymphocytes, by antigenic stimulation. Bcl10 is essential for NF-kappaB activation by T- and B-cell receptors. T and B lymphocytes from Bcl10-deficient mice fail to activate NF-kappaB in response to antigen-receptor stimulation and, as a consequence, are unable to proliferate. Bcl10 overexpression is sufficient to activate NF-kappaB, a process that requires the NF-kappaB essential modulator NEMO (also known as IKK-gamma), which is the regulatory subunit of the IkappaB kinase complex. However, the cellular mechanism by which Bcl10 activates the NF-kappaB pathway remains unclear. Here we show that Bcl10 targets NEMO for lysine-63-linked ubiquitination. Notably, a mutant form of NEMO that cannot be ubiquitinated inhibited Bcl10-induced NF-kappaB activation. Paracaspase and a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (UBC13) were both required for Bcl10-induced NEMO ubiquitination and subsequent NF-kappaB activation. Furthermore, short interfering RNAs that reduced the expression of paracaspase and UBC13 abrogated the effects of Bcl10. Thus, the adaptor protein Bcl10 promotes activation of NF-kappaB transcription factors through paracaspase- and UBC13-dependent ubiquitination of NEMO.
Triosephosphate dehydrogenase was purified extensively from the obligately phototrophic bacterium Chromatium. Enzyme prepared from photolithotrophically grown cells differed in several properties from enzyme prepared from photoorganotrophically grown cells. Either form of the enzyme could be transformed in vitro to the other by mild oxidation or reduction, which effected both Michaelis constants and reactive -SH contents of the proteins.
The RNA polymerase II large subunit contains an essential carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) believed to be involved in the response to regulators during transcription initiation. The CTD is phosphorylated on a portion of RNA polymerase II molecules in vivo and it can be phosphorylated by the general transcription factor TFIIH in vitro. A highly purified TFIIH from rat liver has been described; this, like human and yeast TFIIH, contains associated CTD kinase and helicase activities. We report here that two polypeptides of the purified mammalian TFIIH are the MO15/Cdk7 kinase and cyclin H subunits of the Cdk-activating kinase Cak, previously identified as a positive regulator of Cdc2 and Cdk2. TFIIH and Cak preparations are each capable of phosphorylating recombinant CTD and recombinant Cdk2 proteins. The presence of Cak in TFIIH indicates that Cak may have roles in transcriptional regulation and in cell-cycle control.
In Escherichia coli, the small ribosomal subunit has a sedimentation coefficient of 30S, and consists of a 16S RNA molecule of 1541 nucleotides complexed with 21 proteins. Over the last few years, a controversy has emerged regarding the spatial distribution of RNA and protein in the 30S subunit. Contrast variation with neutron scattering was used to suggest that the RNA was located in a central core of the subunit and the proteins mainly in the periphery, with virtually no separation between the centers of mass of protein and RNA. However, these findings are incompatible with the results of efforts to locate individual ribosomal proteins by immune electron microscopy and triangulation with interprotein distance measurements. The conflict between these two views is resolved in this report of small-angle neutron scattering measurements on 30S subunits with and without protein S1, and on subunits reconstituted from deuterated 16S RNA and unlabeled proteins. The results show that (i) the proteins and RNA are intermingled, with neither component dominating at the core or the periphery, and (ii) the spatial distribution of protein and RNA is asymmetrical, with a separation between their centers of mass of about 25 angstroms.
Viroids are very small, unencapsidated RNAs that replicate and induce severe disease in plants without encoding for any proteins. The mechanisms by which the viroid RNA regulates these events and interacts with host factors are unknown. An Mr 68,000 host-encoded protein has been identified that is differentially phosphorylated in extracts from viroid-infected and mock-inoculated tissues. This phosphoprotein is immunologically related to a double-stranded (ds) RNA-dependent protein kinase from virus-infected, interferon-treated human cells. Further, nucleotide photoaffinity labeling indicates that the protein has an ATP binding site. This protein is similar to dsRNA-dependent protein kinases implicated in mammalian systems in the regulation of protein synthesis and virus replication.
The formation of disulphide bonds in mammalian secretory and cell-surface proteins occurs in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum and is believed to be catalysed by the enzyme protein disulphide-isomerase (PDI). The evidence for this physiological role for PDI is circumstantial and relates to the cell and tissue distribution of the enzyme, its developmental behaviour and its catalytic properties in vitro. A clear requirement for PDI in the correct folding or assembly of disulphide-bonded proteins during biosynthesis has not been demonstrated. We have prepared dog pancreas microsomes which are deficient in soluble lumenal proteins, including PDI, but which are still able to translocate and process proteins synthesized in vitro. Using the formation of intramolecular disulphide bonds during the in vitro synthesis of gamma-gliadin, a wheat storage protein, as a model, we have demonstrated that these microsomes are defective in co-translational formation of disulphide bonds. Reconstitution of these microsomes with purified PDI reverses this defect.
The formation of cyclobutane-type dimers between adjacent pyrimidine residues in model polynucleotides or DNA may be represented by the general scheme See pdf 379.pdf Whereas the formation of all other known photoproducts follows the irreversible path See pdf 379.pdf Thus dimers are distinguished from other photoproducts by the fact that they can be monomerized, as well as formed, by ultraviolet irradiation. At large incident fluxes of photons the steady-state value of dimers depends on wavelength and pH, as well as on other characteristics of the surrounding medium. The number of dimers in an irradiated polynucleotide may be decreased by purely photochemical means, whereas this is not true for most other photoproducts, for which continued irradiation, irrespective of wavelength, always results in the formation of more photoproduct (37). The wavelength dependence of the steady-state for dimers is also reflected in the biological activity of irradiated transforming DNA. This experiment and the fact that photoreactivating enzyme plus visible light monomerizes dimers (and has not been demonstrated to have any effect on other photoproducts) are the strongest lines of experimental evidence that pyrimidine dimers of the cyclobutane type are biologically important lesions and can account for a large fraction of the effects of ultraviolet light on DNA in solution. Insofar as DNA is one of the more important biological structures, such dimers, when formed, account for a large part of the effects of ultraviolet radiation on biological systems.
Intermediate filaments are ubiquitous in eukaryotic cells, but their functions are poorly understood. The Xenopus oocyte contains both messenger RNA and protein products of cytokeratin and vimentin genes in non-overlapping arrays. The cytokeratin filaments contain dimers of the type I (acidic) subunit XLK3a(19), and the type II (basic) subunit XCK1(8), polymerized to form a cortical network. These are homologues of the human simple epithelial keratins 19 and 8, respectively. After the first few cell cycles following fertilization these filaments become restricted to the superficial cells of the blastula. We have depleted the oocyte's store of the type II cytokeratin mRNA by injecting antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (oligos) and studied the effect on embryonic development. As zygotic transcription does not commence until the late blastula stage, there are at least 9 hours in which to see the effect of loss of function of this mRNA. We report here that the cytokeratin filaments become depleted in the cortical cells of the embryo. As a result, there is a loss of the 'compacted' epithelial surface of the blastula, an inability to close a wounded surface and defective gastrulation.
In response to DNA damage and blocks to replication, eukaryotes activate the checkpoint pathways that prevent genomic instability and cancer by coordinating cell cycle progression with DNA repair. In budding yeast, the checkpoint response requires the Mec1-dependent activation of the Rad53 protein kinase. Active Rad53 slows DNA synthesis when DNA is damaged and prevents firing of late origins of replication. Further, rad53 mutants are unable to recover from a replication block. Mec1 and Rad53 also modulate the phosphorylation state of different DNA replication and repair enzymes. Little is known of the mechanisms by which checkpoint pathways interact with the replication apparatus when DNA is damaged or replication blocked. We used the two-dimensional gel technique to examine replication intermediates in response to hydroxyurea-induced replication blocks. Here we show that hydroxyurea-treated rad53 mutants accumulate unusual DNA structures at replication forks. The persistence of these abnormal molecules during recovery from the hydroxyurea block correlates with the inability to dephosphorylate Rad53. Further, Rad53 is required to properly maintain stable replication forks during the block. We propose that Rad53 prevents collapse of the fork when replication pauses.
RNA amplification with transcript sequencing (RAWTS) is a rapid and sensitive method of direct sequencing that involves complementary DNA synthesis, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with a primer or primers containing a phage promoter, transcription from the phage promoter, and reverse transcriptase-mediated sequencing. By means of RAWTS, it was possible to sequence each of four tissue-specific human messenger RNAs (blue pigment, factor IX, phenylalanine hydroxylase, and tyrosine hydroxylase) in four cell types examined (white blood cells, liver, K562 erythroleukemia cells, and chorionic villus cells). These results indicate that there is a basal rate of transcription, splicing, and polyadenylation of tissue-specific mRNAs in adult and embryonic tissues. In addition to revealing sequence information, it is possible to generate a desired in vitro translation product by incorporating a translation initiation signal into the appropriate PCR primer. RAWTS can be used to obtain novel mRNA sequence information from other species as illustrated with a segment of the catalytic domain of factor IX. In general, the ability to obtain mRNA sequences rapidly across species boundaries should aid both the study of protein evolution and the identification of sequences crucial for protein structure and function.
Determination of dissociation constants by two different methods yield the following mean values in 20 millimolar phosphate, pH 7.0, 25 degrees C: 0.27 micromolar for reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH); 0.29 micromolar for NADH with deuterium in the nicotinamide 4-B position (B-NADD); and 0.46 micromolar for NADH with deuterium in the nicotinamide 4-A position (A-NADD). These results indicate that dehydrogenases are capable of recognizing and distinguishing the appropriate hydrogen in the coenzyme already in the initial binding reaction.
Tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) converts the inactive zymogen, plasminogen, into the powerful protease, plasmin, which then degrades the fibrin meshwork of thrombi. To prevent systemic activation of plasminogen, plasma contains several inhibitors of t-PA, the most important of which is plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), a member of the serpin superfamily. As the ability to produce serpin-resistant variants of t-PA could increase the potential of this enzyme as a thrombolytic agent, we have used the known three-dimensional structure of the complex between trypsin and bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) to model the interactions between the active site of human t-PA and PAI-1. On the basis of this model we then altered by site-directed mutagenesis those amino acids of t-PA predicted to make contact with PAI-1 but not with the substrate plasminogen. We report here that although the resulting mutants have enzymatic properties similar to those of wild-type t-PA, they display significant resistance to inhibition by PAI-1. For example, following incubation with an amount of the serpin that completely inhibits the wild-type enzyme, one variant retains 95% of its initial activity. This mutant is also resistant to inhibition by the complex mixture of serpins present in human plasma.
Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is a subviral human pathogen that requires hepatitis B virus (HBV) for packaging. Concurrent infection by HBV and HDV increases the risk of severe liver disease compared to infection with HBV alone. The HDV genome is a closed circular RNA of about 1,700 bases which is replicated through an RNA intermediate, the antigenome. Both RNAs can be folded into highly base-paired, rod-shaped structures, similar to the plant viroid RNAs. Two forms of the sole HDV protein, hepatitis delta antigen, are derived from a single open reading frame by RNA editing; the enzymes responsible for the editing have not been characterized. Here we report that the purified enzyme dsRAD (for double-stranded-RNA-adenosine deaminase) can edit HDV antigenomic RNA in vitro. Most important, we observe that mutations in critical sequences of the antigenome have identical effects on in vitro and in vivo editing, suggesting that dsRAD, or a closely related enzyme, is responsible for editing HDV RNA in vivo.
The multiprotein replisome complex that replicates DNA has been extensively characterized in vitro, but its composition and architecture in vivo is unknown. Using millisecond single-molecule fluorescence microscopy in living cells expressing fluorescent derivatives of replisome components, we have examined replisome stoichiometry and architecture. Active Escherichia coli replisomes contain three molecules of the replicative polymerase, rather than the historically accepted two. These are associated with three molecules of tau, a clamp loader component that trimerizes polymerase. Only two of the three sliding clamps are always associated with the core replisome. Single-strand binding protein has a broader spatial distribution than the core components, with 5 to 11 tetramers per replisome. This in vivo technique could provide single-molecule insight into other molecular machines.
The past decade has seen an alarming worldwide increase in resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics among many pathogenic bacteria, which is due mainly to plasmid- or chromosomally encoded beta-lactamases that specifically cleave penicillin and cephalosporins, rendering them inactive. There is therefore a need to develop new strategies in the design of effective inhibitors of beta-lactamase. All the small-molecule inhibitors in clinical use are not very effective and are rapidly degraded. Furthermore, newly characterized mutants of the plasmid-mediated beta-lactamase TEM-1 are highly resistant to these small-molecule inhibitors, including clavulanic acid and tazobactam. It has been shown that Streptomyces clavuligerus produces an exocellular beta-lactamase inhibitory protein (BLIP; M(r) 17.5 K). Here we present data defining BLIP as the most effective known inhibitor of a variety of beta-lactamases, with Ki values in the subnanomolar to picomolar range. To identify those features in BLIP that make it such a potent inhibitor, we have determined its molecular structure at 2.1 A resolution. BLIP is a relatively flat molecule with a unique fold, comprising a tandem repeat of a 76-amino-acid domain. Each domain consists of a helix-loop-helix motif that packs against a four-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet (Fig. 1a). To our knowledge, BLIP is the first example of a protein inhibitor having two similarly folded domains that interact with and inhibit a single target enzyme.
The use of isotopically labelled compounds as metabolic tracers in in vivo and in vitro studies is particularly important in folate biochemistry, where the natural coenzyme forms occur in transient and trace amounts. However, during our studies on the whole body metabolism of radioactive folate tracers, we have now observed that some forms of isotopically labelled folate are biologically distinguishable from the unlabelled carrier molecules by an as yet unidentified secondary isotope effect. Folates excreted in the urine of rats dosed previously with mixtures of 14C- and 3H-labelled folate derivatives are apparently 3H enriched, that is contain more 3H than 14C relative to the dosed compound. This apparent 3H enrichment was largely due to the enhanced absorption of 3H-folate from the intestine, confirmed by studies with everted sac preparations of rat jejunum in which it was found that the 3H-labelled folate in the mixture was transported from the mucosal into the serosal compartment at a faster rate than both the 14C-labelled folate and the unlabelled carrier. Secondary isotope effects were also observed on ion-exchange chromatography, 3H-labelled folates with 3H at the C-9 position eluting fractionally earlier than the corresponding unlabelled or [2-14C]folate from DEAE-cellulose, a behaviour similar to that reported earlier for isotopically labelled 2-aminopurine and several amino acids. Such isotope effects may be more widespread and more important than is generally accepted.
Hepatitis B viruses synthesize their open circular DNA genomes by reverse transcription of an RNA intermediate. The details of this process have been examined with the use of mammalian hepatitis B viruses to map the sites for initiation and termination of DNA synthesis and to explore the consequences of mutations introduced at short, separated direct repeats (DR1 and DR2) implicated in the mechanisms of initiation. The first DNA strand to be synthesized is initiated within DR1, apparently by a protein primer, and the completed strand has a short terminal redundancy. In contrast, the second DNA strand begins with the sequence adjacent to DR2, but its 5' end is joined to an oligoribonucleotide that contains DR1; thus the putative RNA primer has been transposed to the position of DR2. It is now possible to propose a detailed strategy for reverse transcription by hepatitis B viruses that can be instructively compared with that used by retroviruses.
Point mutations in the presenilin-1 gene (PS1) are a major cause of familial Alzheimer's disease. They result in a selective increase in the production of the amyloidogenic peptide amyloid-beta(1-42) by proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Here we investigate whether PS1 is also involved in normal APP processing in neuronal cultures derived from PS1-deficient mouse embryos. Cleavage by alpha- and beta-secretase of the extracellular domain of APP was not affected by the absence of PS1, whereas cleavage by gamma-secretase of the transmembrane domain of APP was prevented, causing carboxyl-terminal fragments of APP to accumulate and a fivefold drop in the production of amyloid peptide. Pulse-chase experiments indicated that PS1 deficiency specifically decreased the turnover of the membrane-associated fragments of APP. As in the regulation of cholesterol metabolism by proteolysis of a membrane-bound transcription factor, PS1 appears to facilitate a proteolytic activity that cleaves the integral membrane domain of APP. Our results indicate that mutations in PS1 that manifest clinically cause a gain of function and that inhibition of PS1 activity is a potential target for anti-amyloidogenic therapy in Alzheimer's disease.
Long-term potentiation (LTP) in the hippocampus is an interesting example of synaptic plasticity because of its induction by physiological discharge rates and its long duration. Of the possible biochemical mechanisms that regulate prolonged changes in cell function, protein phosphorylation is a particularly attractive candidate. We have therefore examined the effect of intracellular injection of calcium/diacylglycerol-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase C (PKC] in CA1 pyramidal neurones in hippocampal slices. Injection of the active enzyme elicited long-lasting enhancement of synaptic transmission, similar to LTP, whereas inactivated kinase failed to do so. The observed changes included an increased amplitude of the excitatory post-synaptic potential (e.p.s.p.) and an increased probability of firing and a reduced latency of the associated actin potential.
beta-lactamases are enzymes that protect bacteria from the lethal effects of beta-lactam antibiotics, and are therefore of considerable clinical importance. The crystal structure of beta-lactamase from the Gram-positive bacterium Staphylococcus aureus PC1 has been determined at 2.5 angstrom resolution. It reveals a molecule of novel topology, made up of two closely associated domains. The active site is located at the interface between the domains, with the key catalytic residue Ser70 at the amino terminus of a buried helix. Examination of the disposition of the functionally important residues within the active site depression leads to a model for the binding of a substrate and a functional analogy to the serine proteases. The unusual topology of the secondary structure units is relevant to questions concerning the evolutionary relation to the beta-lactam target enzymes of the bacterial cell wall.
An inducible expression system was developed for the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei. Transgenic trypanosomes expressing the tetracycline repressor of Escherichia coli exhibited inducer (tetracycline)-dependent expression of chromosomally integrated reporter genes under the control of a procyclic acidic repetitive protein (PARP) promoter bearing a tet operator. Reporter expression could be controlled over a range of four orders of magnitude in response to tetracycline concentration, a degree of regulation that exceeds those exhibited by other eukaryotic repression-based systems. The tet repressor-controlled PARP promoter should be a valuable tool for the study of trypanosome biochemistry, pathogenicity, and cell and molecular biology.
New strategies for prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes (T2D) require improved insight into disease etiology. We analyzed 386,731 common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1464 patients with T2D and 1467 matched controls, each characterized for measures of glucose metabolism, lipids, obesity, and blood pressure. With collaborators (FUSION and WTCCC/UKT2D), we identified and confirmed three loci associated with T2D-in a noncoding region near CDKN2A and CDKN2B, in an intron of IGF2BP2, and an intron of CDKAL1-and replicated associations near HHEX and in SLC30A8 found by a recent whole-genome association study. We identified and confirmed association of a SNP in an intron of glucokinase regulatory protein (GCKR) with serum triglycerides. The discovery of associated variants in unsuspected genes and outside coding regions illustrates the ability of genome-wide association studies to provide potentially important clues to the pathogenesis of common diseases.
Heterochromatin comprises tightly compacted repetitive regions of eukaryotic chromosomes. The inheritance of heterochromatin through mitosis requires RNA interference (RNAi), which guides histone modification during the DNA replication phase of the cell cycle. Here we show that the alternating arrangement of origins of replication and non-coding RNA in pericentromeric heterochromatin results in competition between transcription and replication in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Co-transcriptional RNAi releases RNA polymerase II (Pol II), allowing completion of DNA replication by the leading strand DNA polymerase, and associated histone modifying enzymes that spread heterochromatin with the replication fork. In the absence of RNAi, stalled forks are repaired by homologous recombination without histone modification.
In mammals, insulin signalling regulates glucose transport together with the expression and activity of various metabolic enzymes. In the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, a related pathway regulates metabolism, development and longevity. Wild-type animals enter the developmentally arrested dauer stage in response to high levels of a secreted pheromone, accumulating large amounts of fat in their intestines and hypodermis. Mutants in DAF-2 (a homologue of the mammalian insulin receptor) and AGE-1 (a homologue of the catalytic subunit of mammalian phosphatidylinositol 3-OH kinase) arrest development at the dauer stage. Moreover, animals bearing weak or temperature-sensitive mutations in daf-2 and age-1 can develop reproductively, but nevertheless show increased energy storage and longevity. Here we show that null mutations in daf-16 suppress the effects of mutations in daf-2 or age-1; lack of daf-16 bypasses the need for this insulin receptor-like signalling pathway. The principal role of DAF-2/AGE-1 signalling is thus to antagonize DAF-16. daf-16 is widely expressed and encodes three members of the Fork head family of transcription factors. The DAF-2 pathway acts synergistically with the pathway activated by a nematode TGF-beta-type signal, DAF-7, suggesting that DAF-16 cooperates with nematode SMAD proteins in regulating the transcription of key metabolic and developmental control genes. The probable human orthologues of DAF-16, FKHR and AFX, may also act downstream of insulin signalling and cooperate with TGF-beta effectors in mediating metabolic regulation. These genes may be dysregulated in diabetes.
Seven families of RNA ligases, previously isolated from random RNA sequences, fall into three classes on the basis of secondary structure and regiospecificity of ligation. Two of the three classes of ribozymes have been engineered to act as true enzymes, catalyzing the multiple-turnover transformation of substrates into products. The most complex of these ribozymes has a minimal catalytic domain of 93 nucleotides. An optimized version of this ribozyme has a kcat exceeding one per second, a value far greater than that of most natural RNA catalysts and approaching that of comparable protein enzymes. The fact that such a large and complex ligase emerged from a very limited sampling of sequence space implies the existence of a large number of distinct RNA structures of equivalent complexity and activity.
The crystal structure of a large fragment of yeast type II DNA topoisomerase reveals a heart-shaped dimeric protein with a large central hole. It provides a molecular model of the enzyme as an ATP-modulated clamp with two sets of jaws at opposite ends, connected by multiple joints. An enzyme with bound DNA can admit a second DNA duplex through one set of jaws, transport it through the cleaved first duplex, and expel it through the other set of jaws.
Ustilago maydis is a ubiquitous pathogen of maize and a well-established model organism for the study of plant-microbe interactions. This basidiomycete fungus does not use aggressive virulence strategies to kill its host. U. maydis belongs to the group of biotrophic parasites (the smuts) that depend on living tissue for proliferation and development. Here we report the genome sequence for a member of this economically important group of biotrophic fungi. The 20.5-million-base U. maydis genome assembly contains 6,902 predicted protein-encoding genes and lacks pathogenicity signatures found in the genomes of aggressive pathogenic fungi, for example a battery of cell-wall-degrading enzymes. However, we detected unexpected genomic features responsible for the pathogenicity of this organism. Specifically, we found 12 clusters of genes encoding small secreted proteins with unknown function. A significant fraction of these genes exists in small gene families. Expression analysis showed that most of the genes contained in these clusters are regulated together and induced in infected tissue. Deletion of individual clusters altered the virulence of U. maydis in five cases, ranging from a complete lack of symptoms to hypervirulence. Despite years of research into the mechanism of pathogenicity in U. maydis, no 'true' virulence factors had been previously identified. Thus, the discovery of the secreted protein gene clusters and the functional demonstration of their decisive role in the infection process illuminate previously unknown mechanisms of pathogenicity operating in biotrophic fungi. Genomic analysis is, similarly, likely to open up new avenues for the discovery of virulence determinants in other pathogens.
To characterize the mechanism by which receptors propagate conformational changes across membranes, nitroxide spin labels were attached at strategic positions in the bacterial aspartate receptor. By collecting the electron paramagnetic resonance spectra of these labeled receptors in the presence and absence of the ligand aspartate, ligand binding was shown to generate an approximately 1 angstrom intrasubunit piston-type movement of one transmembrane helix downward relative to the other transmembrane helix. The receptor-associated phosphorylation cascade proteins CheA and CheW did not alter the ligand-induced movement. Because the piston movement is very small, the ability of receptors to produce large outcomes in response to stimuli is caused by the ability of the receptor-coupled enzymes to detect small changes in the conformation of the receptor.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae produces a soluble hemolysin active against guinea pig erythrocytes. This hemolysin appears to be a peroxide, since catalase or peroxidase inhibits its activity. The action of catalase and peroxidase is specific, since heating the enzymes abolishes their effect on the hemolysin. In addition, 3-amino- 1,2,4-triazole, a potent inhibitor of catalase, reverses the inhibitory effect of the enzyme. The hemolysin of M. laidlawii is also a peroxide. The hemolysins of M. pneumoniae and M. laidlawii seem unique for microbial organisms since the bacterial hemolysins which have been described have been protein or lipid in nature.
DAF-2, an insulin receptor-like protein, regulates metabolism, development, and aging in Caenorhabditis elegans. In a quantitative proteomic study, we identified 86 proteins that were more or less abundant in long-lived daf-2 mutant worms than in wild-type worms. Genetic studies on a subset of these proteins indicated that they act in one or more processes regulated by DAF-2, including entry into the dauer developmental stage and aging. In particular, we discovered a compensatory mechanism activated in response to reduced DAF-2 signaling, which involves the protein phosphatase calcineurin.
Improved resolution of serum protein mixtures is effected by electrophoresis, first in a 5 percent acrylamide gel following which a strip of the resolved pattern is embedded in 8 percent gel and subjected to a second electrophoresis separation at right angles to the first. Lactic dehydrogenase enzymes appear as small rectangular spots lying on an oblique straight line passing through the point of initial application.
Normal processing of the amyloid beta protein precursor (beta APP) results in secretion of a soluble 4-kilodalton protein essentially identical to the amyloid beta protein (A beta) that forms insoluble fibrillar deposits in Alzheimer's disease. Human neuroblastoma (M17) cells transfected with constructs expressing wild-type beta APP or the beta APP717 mutants linked to familial Alzheimer's disease were compared by (i) isolation of metabolically labeled 4-kilodalton A beta from conditioned medium, digestion with cyanogen bromide, and analysis of the carboxyl-terminal peptides released, or (ii) analysis of the A beta in conditioned medium with sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays that discriminate A beta 1-40 from the longer A beta 1-42. Both methods demonstrated that the 4-kilodalton A beta released from wild-type beta APP is primarily but not exclusively A beta 1-40. The beta APP717 mutations, which are located three residues carboxyl to A beta 43, consistently caused a 1.5- to 1.9-fold increase in the percentage of longer A beta generated. Long A beta (for example, A beta 1-42) forms insoluble amyloid fibrils more rapidly than A beta 1-40. Thus, the beta APP717 mutants may cause Alzheimer's disease because they secrete increased amounts of long A beta, thereby fostering amyloid deposition.
Chlorinated natural products include vancomycin and cryptophycin A. Their biosynthesis involves regioselective chlorination by flavin-dependent halogenases. We report the structural characterization of tryptophan 7-halogenase (PrnA), which regioselectively chlorinates tryptophan. Tryptophan and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) are separated by a 10 angstrom-long tunnel and bound by distinct enzyme modules. The FAD module is conserved in halogenases and is related to flavin-dependent monooxygenases. On the basis of biochemical studies, crystal structures, and by analogy with monooxygenases, we predict that FADH2 reacts with O2 to make peroxyflavin, which is decomposed by Cl-. The resulting HOCl is guided through the tunnel to tryptophan, where it is activated to participate in electrophilic aromatic substitution.
DNA fragments that show retarded electrophoretic mobility through polyacrylamide gels have been found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In the case of kinetoplast DNA, evidence has been presented that the DNA is curved or 'bent'. Bent DNA has previously been found at the lambda and simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA replication origins. Here we show the existence of bent DNA at a yeast autonomously replicating sequence (ARS1), a putative replication origin. The bent DNA has been localized to a 40-55 base pair (bp) segment and contains six (A)3-5 stretches (that is, six poly(A) stretches, three to five nucleotides in length) phased approximately every 10.5 bp. This region contains a DNA binding site for a yeast protein factor. This site lies at the 3' end of the TRP1 gene, in a region devoid of nucleosomes, and is positioned 80 bp away from the ARS consensus sequence; removal of this region impairs ARS function in vivo. The bent DNA may be involved in transcription termination or the prevention of nucleosome assembly in this region.
The human fibroblast interferon gene was inserted in a thermoinducible expression plasmid under control of the phage lambda PL promoter. The primary translation products predicted on the basis of the plasmid constructions were hybrid proteins starting with beta-lactamase or phage MS2 polymerase information followed by the total preinterferon. On induction, antiviral activity, whose physico-chemical, immunological and biological characteristics closely corresponded to those of authentic human fibroblast interferon, was synthesized. Processing to a size compatible with mature but unglycosylated authentic product was observed.
A substantial number of novel guanine nucleotide binding regulatory proteins have been identified over the last few years but the function of many of them is largely unknown. This article will discuss a particular family of these proteins, structurally related to the Ras oncoprotein. Approximately 30 Ras-related small guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins are known, and from yeast to man they appear to be involved in controlling a diverse set of essential cellular functions including growth, differentiation, cytoskeletal organization, and intracellular vesicle transport and secretion.
The three-dimensional structure of the human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) nucleocapsid protein (NC) bound to the SL3 stem-loop recognition element of the genomic Psi RNA packaging signal has been determined by heteronuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Tight binding (dissociation constant, approximately 100 nM) is mediated by specific interactions between the amino- and carboxyl-terminal CCHC-type zinc knuckles of the NC protein and the G7 and G9 nucleotide bases, respectively, of the G6-G7-A8-G9 RNA tetraloop. A8 packs against the amino-terminal knuckle and forms a hydrogen bond with conserved Arg32, and residues Lys3 to Arg10 of NC form a 310 helix that binds to the major groove of the RNA stem and also packs against the amino-terminal zinc knuckle. The structure provides insights into the mechanism of viral genome recognition, explains extensive amino acid conservation within NC, and serves as a basis for the development of inhibitors designed to interfere with genome encapsidation.
A concept is presented for testing the dimensional restrictions of enzyme-active sites by stretching the substrate or cofactor by known magnitude. These restrictions of enzyme-active sites specific for purine cofactors were tested by the synthesis and evaluation of lin-benzoadenosine 5'-triphosphate, 5'-diphosphate, and 3',5'-monophosphate with respect to enzyme binding and activity. These "stretchedout" (by 2.4 angstroms) versions of the adenine ribonucleotides bind strongly, slow the enzymatic rates, and have useful fluorescence properties.
In addition to the RNA polymerases (RNAPs) transcribing the nuclear genes, eukaryotic cells also require RNAPs to transcribe the genes of the mitochondrial genome and, in plants, of the chloroplast genome. The plant Arabidopsis thaliana was found to contain two nuclear genes similar to genes encoding the mitochondrial RNAP from yeast and RNAPs of bacteriophages T7, T3, and SP6. The putative transit peptides of the two polymerases were capable of targeting fusion proteins to mitochondria and chloroplasts, respectively, in vitro. The results indicate that the mitochondrial RNAP in plants is a bacteriophage-type enzyme. A gene duplication event may have generated the second RNAP, which along with the plastid-encoded eubacteria-like RNAP could transcribe the chloroplast genome.
Amyloid B-protein/amyloid A4 is a peptide present in the neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and cerebrovascular deposits in patients with Alzheimer's disease and Down's syndrome (trisomy 21) and may be involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Recent molecular genetic studies have indicated that amyloid protein is encoded as part of a larger protein by a gene on human chromosome 21 (refs 6-9). The amyloid protein precursor (APP) gene is expressed in brain and in several peripheral tissues, but the specific biochemical events leading to deposition of amyloid are not known. We have now screened complementary DNA libraries constructed from peripheral tissues to determine whether the messenger RNA encoding APP in these tissues is identical to that expressed in brain, and we identify a second APP mRNA that encodes an additional internal domain with a sequence characteristic of a Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor. The alternative APP mRNA is present in both brain and peripheral tissues of normal individuals and those with Alzheimer's disease, but its pattern of expression differs from that of the previously reported APP mRNA.
The microsomal fraction of horse and human platelets contains an enzyme which converts prostaglandin cyclic endoperoxides (PGG2 or PGH2) to a substance which is much more potent in contracting strips of rabbit aorta. This substance has the same characteristics as thromboxane A2, and can be distinguished from other products of arachidonic acid metabolism by differential bioassay.
Microbial enzyme systems may be used in the biodegradation of persistent environmental pollutants. The three polypeptide components of one such system, the 4-chlorobenzoate dehalogenase system, have been isolated, and the chemical steps of the 4-hydroxybenzoate-forming reaction that they catalyze have been identified. The genes contained within a 4.5-kilobase Pseudomonas sp. strain CBS3 chromosomal DNA fragment that encode dehalogenase activity were selectively expressed in transformed Escherichia coli. Oligonucleotide sequencing revealed a stretch of homology between the 57-kilodalton (kD) polypeptide and several magnesium adenosine triphosphate (MgATP)-cleaving enzymes that allowed MgATP and coenzyme A (CoA) to be identified as the dehalogenase cosubstrate and cofactor, respectively. The dehalogenase activity arises from two components, a 4-chlorobenzoate:CoA ligase-dehalogenase (an alpha beta dimer of the 57- and 30-kD polypeptides) and a thioesterase (the 16-kD polypeptide).
Water environments with temperatures up to and above boiling are commonly found in association with geothermal activity. At temperatures above 60 degrees C, only bacteria are found. Bacteria with temperature optima over the range 65 degrees to 105 degrees C have been obtained in pure culture and are the object of many research projects. The upper temperature limit for life in liquid water has not yet been defined, but is likely to be somewhere between 110 degrees and 200 degrees C, since amino acids and nucleotides are destroyed at temperatures over 200 degrees C. Because bacteria capable of growth at high temperatures are found in many phylogenetic groups, it is likely that the ability to grow at high temperature had a polyphyletic origin. The macromolecules of these organisms are inherently more stable to heat than those of conventional organisms, but only small changes in sequence can lead to increases in thermostability. Because of their unique properties, thermophilic organisms and their enzymes have many potential biotechnological uses, and extensive research on industrial applications is under way.
An essential feature of the bacterial pathogen Salmonella spp. is its ability to enter cells that are normally non-phagocytic, such as those of the intestinal epithelium. The bacterium achieves entry by delivering effector proteins into the host-cell cytosol by means of a specialized protein-secretion system (termed type III), which causes reorganization of the cell's actin cytoskeleton and ruffling of its membrane. One of the bacterial effectors that stimulates these cellular responses is SopE, which acts as a guanyl-nucleotide-exchange factor on Rho GTPase proteins such as Cdc42 and Rac. As the actin-cytoskeleton reorganization induced by Salmonella is reversible and short-lived, infected cells regain their normal architecture after bacterial internalization. We show here that the S. Typhimurium effector protein SptP, which is delivered to the host-cell cytosol by the type-III secretion system, is directly responsible for the reversal of the actin cytoskeletal changes induced by the bacterium. SptP exerts this function by acting as a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for Rac-1 and Cdc42.
Productive interaction of a T lymphocyte with an antigen-presenting cell results in the clustering of the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) and the recruitment of a large signalling complex to the site of cell-cell contact. Subsequent signal transduction resulting in cytokine gene expression requires the activation of one or more of the multiple isoenzymes of serine/threonine-specific protein kinase C (PKC). Among the several PKC isoenzymes expressed in T cells, PKC-theta is unique in being rapidly recruited to the site of TCR clustering. Here we show that PKC-theta is essential for TCR-mediated T-cell activation, but is dispensable during TCR-dependent thymocyte development. TCR-initiated NF-kappaB activation was absent from PKC-theta(-/-) mature T lymphocytes, but was intact in thymocytes. Activation of NF-kappaB by tumour-necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-1 was unaffected in the mutant mice. Although studies in T-cell lines had suggested that PKC-theta regulates activation of the JNK signalling pathway, induction of JNK was normal in T cells from mutant mice. These results indicate that PKC-theta functions in a unique pathway that links the TCR signalling complex to the activation of NF-kappaB in mature T lymphocytes.
The domestication of all major crop plants occurred during a brief period in human history about 10,000 years ago. During this time, ancient agriculturalists selected seed of preferred forms and culled out seed of undesirable types to produce each subsequent generation. Consequently, favoured alleles at genes controlling traits of interest increased in frequency, ultimately reaching fixation. When selection is strong, domestication has the potential to drastically reduce genetic diversity in a crop. To understand the impact of selection during maize domestication, we examined nucleotide polymorphism in teosinte branched1, a gene involved in maize evolution. Here we show that the effects of selection were limited to the gene's regulatory region and cannot be detected in the protein-coding region. Although selection was apparently strong, high rates of recombination and a prolonged domestication period probably limited its effects. Our results help to explain why maize is such a variable crop. They also suggest that maize domestication required hundreds of years, and confirm previous evidence that maize was domesticated from Balsas teosinte of southwestern Mexico.
Regulatory GTP-binding proteins (G proteins) are membrane-attached heterotrimers (alpha, beta, gamma) that mediate cellular responses to a wide variety of extracellular stimuli. They undergo a cycle of guanine-nucleotide exchange and GTP hydrolysis, during which they dissociate into alpha-subunit and beta gamma complex. The roles of G-protein alpha-subunits in these processes and for the specificity of signal transduction are largely established; the beta- and gamma-subunits are essential for receptor-induced G-protein activation and seem to be less diverse and less specific. Although the complementary DNAs for several beta-subunits have been cloned, isolated subunits have only been studied as beta gamma complexes. Functional differences have been ascribed to the gamma-subunit on the basis of extensive sequence similarity among beta-subunits and apparent heterogeneity in gamma-subunit sequences. Beta gamma complexes can interact directly or indirectly with different effectors. They seem to be interchangeable in their interaction with pertussis toxin-sensitive alpha-subunits, so we tested this by microinjecting antisense oligonucleotides into nuclei of a rat pituitary cell line to suppress the synthesis of individual beta-subunits selectively. Here we show that two out of four subtypes of beta-subunits tested (beta 1 and beta 3) are selectively involved in the signal transduction cascades from muscarinic M4 (ref. 4) and somatostatin receptors, respectively, to voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels.
A hallmark feature of DNA replication is the coordination between the continuous polymerization of nucleotides on the leading strand and the discontinuous synthesis of DNA on the lagging strand. This synchronization requires a precisely timed series of enzymatic steps that control the synthesis of an RNA primer, the recycling of the lagging-strand DNA polymerase, and the production of an Okazaki fragment. Primases synthesize RNA primers at a rate that is orders of magnitude lower than the rate of DNA synthesis by the DNA polymerases at the fork. Furthermore, the recycling of the lagging-strand DNA polymerase from a finished Okazaki fragment to a new primer is inherently slower than the rate of nucleotide polymerization. Different models have been put forward to explain how these slow enzymatic steps can take place at the lagging strand without losing coordination with the continuous and fast leading-strand synthesis. Nonetheless, a clear picture remains elusive. Here we use single-molecule techniques to study the kinetics of a multiprotein replication complex from bacteriophage T7 and to characterize the effect of primase activity on fork progression. We observe the synthesis of primers on the lagging strand to cause transient pausing of the highly processive leading-strand synthesis. In the presence of both leading- and lagging-strand synthesis, we observe the formation and release of a replication loop on the lagging strand. Before loop formation, the primase acts as a molecular brake and transiently halts progression of the replication fork. This observation suggests a mechanism that prevents leading-strand synthesis from outpacing lagging-strand synthesis during the slow enzymatic steps on the lagging strand.
In higher eukaryotes, a multiprotein exon junction complex is deposited on spliced messenger RNAs. The complex is organized around a stable core, which serves as a binding platform for numerous factors that influence messenger RNA function. Here, we present the crystal structure of a tetrameric exon junction core complex containing the DEAD-box adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) eukaryotic initiation factor 4AIII (eIF4AIII) bound to an ATP analog, MAGOH, Y14, a fragment of MLN51, and a polyuracil mRNA mimic. eIF4AIII interacts with the phosphate-ribose backbone of six consecutive nucleotides and prevents part of the bound RNA from being double stranded. The MAGOH and Y14 subunits lock eIF4AIII in a prehydrolysis state, and activation of the ATPase probably requires only modest conformational changes in eIF4AIII motif I.
Considerable evidence indicates that NO biology involves a family of NO-related molecules and that S-nitrosothiols (SNOs) are central to signal transduction and host defence. It is unknown, however, how cells switch off the signals or protect themselves from the SNOs produced for defence purposes. Here we have purified a single activity from Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and mouse macrophages that metabolizes S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), and show that it is the glutathione-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase. Although the enzyme is highly specific for GSNO, it controls intracellular levels of both GSNO and S-nitrosylated proteins. Such 'GSNO reductase' activity is widely distributed in mammals. Deleting the reductase gene in yeast and mice abolishes the GSNO-consuming activity, and increases the cellular quantity of both GSNO and protein SNO. Furthermore, mutant yeast cells show increased susceptibility to a nitrosative challenge, whereas their resistance to oxidative stress is unimpaired. We conclude that GSNO reductase is evolutionarily conserved from bacteria to humans, is critical for SNO homeostasis, and protects against nitrosative stress.
Proteins of the Rho family control signalling pathways that regulate the actin cytoskeleton and gene transcription. In vitro studies have implicated Rho-like GTP-hydrolysing enzymes (GTPases) in cell migration, cell-cycle progression, and Ras-induced focus formation, suggesting a role for these GTPases in the formation and progression of tumours in vivo. To study this, we have generated mice lacking the Rac-specific activator Tiam1, a T-lymphoma invasion and metastasis inducing protein. Here we show that such Tiam1(-/-) mice are resistant to the development of Ras-induced skin tumours initiated with 7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene and promoted with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Moreover, the few tumours produced in Tiam1(-/-) mice grew much slower than did tumours in wild-type mice. Tiam1-deficient primary embryonic fibroblasts were also resistant to Ras(V12)-induced focus formation. Analysis of Tiam1 heterozygotes indicated that both tumour initiation and promotion were dependent on the Tiam1 gene dose. Tiam1 deficiency was associated with increased apoptosis during initiation, and with impeded proliferation during promotion. Although the number of tumours in Tiam1(-/-) mice was small, a greater proportion progressed to malignancy, suggesting that Tiam1 deficiency promotes malignant conversion. Our studies identify the Rac activator Tiam1 as a critical regulator of different aspects of Ras-induced tumour formation.
Study of the mechanisms by which interferon (IFN) treatment of cells induces resistance to virus infections has been complicated by the multiple biochemical changes induced. Over 20 proteins are increased by IFN, including the double-stranded (ds) RNA-activated protein kinase, (2'-5') oligo A synthetase, surface proteins such as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins, and various proteins with unknown functions. The availability of cloned complementary DNAs for several IFN-induced proteins now allows us to probe their roles in IFN action. For instance, the murine Mx protein has been shown to confer resistance, to influenza virus. We studied chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell clones expressing high constitutive levels of (2'-5') A synthetase as a result of transfection with the cDNA encoding the enzyme form which has a relative molecular mass (Mr) of 40K. Elevated enzyme correlates directly with resistance to infection by a picornavirus such as Mengo, but does not make the cells resistant to vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV).
Amino acids in natural proteins have a chiral, asymmetric center at the alpha carbon that is of the L-configuration. The sugar backbone of natural RNAs are also homochiral, but of the D-configuration. Because protein synthesis requires the aminoacylation of RNA, it is this step that could have provided chiral selectivity. Here we show that an RNA minihelix was aminoacylated by an aminoacyl-phosphate-D-oligonucleotide with a clear preference for L- as opposed to D-amino acids. A mirror-image RNA system showed the opposite selectivity. These results suggest the possibility that the selection of L-amino acids for proteins was determined by the stereochemistry of RNA.
Cap structures are added cotranscriptionally to all RNA polymerase II transcripts. They affect several processes including RNA stability, pre-messenger RNA splicing, RNA export from the nucleus and translation initiation. The effect of the cap on translation is mediated by the initiation factor eIF-4F, whereas the effect on pre-mRNA splicing involves a nuclear complex (CBC) composed of two cap binding proteins, CBP80 and CBP20. A role for CBC in the nuclear export of capped RNAs has also been proposed. We report here the characterization of human and Xenopus CBP20s. Antibodies against recombinant CBP20 prevent interaction of CBC with capped RNAs in vitro. Following microinjection into Xenopus oocytes, the antibodies inhibit both pre-mRNA splicing and export of U small nuclear RNAs to the cytoplasm. These results demonstrate that CBC mediates the effect of the cap structure in U snRNA export, and provide direct evidence for the involvement of a cellular RNA-binding factor in the transport of RNA to the cytoplasm.
The organization of chromatin affects all aspects of nuclear DNA metabolism in eukaryotes. H3.3 is an evolutionarily conserved histone variant and a key substrate for replication-independent chromatin assembly. Elimination of chromatin remodeling factor CHD1 in Drosophila embryos abolishes incorporation of H3.3 into the male pronucleus, renders the paternal genome unable to participate in zygotic mitoses, and leads to the development of haploid embryos. Furthermore, CHD1, but not ISWI, interacts with HIRA in cytoplasmic extracts. Our findings establish CHD1 as a major factor in replacement histone metabolism in the nucleus and reveal a critical role for CHD1 in the earliest developmental instances of genome-scale, replication-independent nucleosome assembly. Furthermore, our results point to the general requirement of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-utilizing motor proteins for histone deposition in vivo.
In view of the emerging role of the phosphoinositide system in cellular communication we examined its involvement in quantal-transmitter release, which is a key element in synaptic transmission. Transmitter release is normally activated by an increase in intracellular calcium, achieved either by entry of calcium ions through the presynaptic membrane or by intracellular calcium liberation. One of the targets of the phosphoinositide signalling system is the enzyme protein kinase C (PKC), which can be activated experimentally by tumour promoting phorbol esters, including 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Such activation of PKC may be implicated in transmitter release in two ways. First, phorbol esters were found to increase secretion and enhance calcium currents; it might therefore be expected that they would increase synaptic transmitter release. But phorbol esters also inhibit the calcium current in dorsal root ganglion neurones. We report that the phorbol ester TPA augments synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction by increasing transmitter liberation. Activation of PKC also depends synaptic depression.
Single amino acid changes were introduced into normal (non-oncogenic) and activated forms of the human H-ras protein at a position (residue 116) proposed on structural grounds to represent a contact site with guanine nucleotides. Substitutions at this site could significantly reduce the ability of both forms to bind and hydrolyze guanosine 5'-triphosphate; these substitutions, however, did not necessarily diminish the transforming capacity of activated derivatives. One substitution that severely impairs these functions activated the transforming potential of the otherwise normal polypeptide.
Transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) is a mitogenically active polypeptide hormone produced by acutely proliferating neoplastic and embryonic tissues. Molecular cloning of TGF-alpha cDNA from human and rat has indicated that this factor is synthesized as part of a larger precursor, proTGF-alpha. An intriguing feature of proTGF-alpha is that it contains a sequence of 24 hydrophobic amino acids following the bioactive TGF-alpha sequence. Similar hydrophobic sequences present in transmembrane proteins are cotranslationally anchored into the phospholipid bilayer of the rough endoplasmic reticulum, suggesting the possibility that pro TGF-alpha might be an integral membrane protein. Other secretory proteins including all known prohormones lack membrane anchoring sequences and are completely translocated across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. To address the question of whether proTGF-alpha is as an integral membrane protein we have translated rat proTGF-alpha mRNA transcripts in the presence of rough endoplasmic reticulum membrane vesicles. The results indicate that proTGF-alpha is synthesized as an integral membrane glycoprotein. The 50-amino-acid TGF-alpha sequence in proTGF-alpha is exposed to the fluid extracellular phase where it can be released after cleavage by the appropriate enzyme.
To understand basic principles of bacterial metabolism organization and regulation, but also the impact of genome size, we systematically studied one of the smallest bacteria, Mycoplasma pneumoniae. A manually curated metabolic network of 189 reactions catalyzed by 129 enzymes allowed the design of a defined, minimal medium with 19 essential nutrients. More than 1300 growth curves were recorded in the presence of various nutrient concentrations. Measurements of biomass indicators, metabolites, and 13C-glucose experiments provided information on directionality, fluxes, and energetics; integration with transcription profiling enabled the global analysis of metabolic regulation. Compared with more complex bacteria, the M. pneumoniae metabolic network has a more linear topology and contains a higher fraction of multifunctional enzymes; general features such as metabolite concentrations, cellular energetics, adaptability, and global gene expression responses are similar, however.
The gene for the circumsporozoite (CS) protein of Plasmodium falciparum has been cloned and its nucleotide sequence determined. The gene encodes a protein of 412 amino acids as deduced from the nucleotide sequence. The protein contains 41 tandem repeats of a tetrapeptide, 37 of which are Asn-Ala-Asn-Pro and four of which are Asn-Val-Asp-Pro. Monoclonal antibodies against the CS protein of Plasmodium falciparum were inhibited from binding to the protein by synthetic peptides of the repeat sequence. The CS protein of Plasmodium falciparum and the CS protein of a simian malaria parasite, Plasmodium knowlesi, have two regions of homology, one of which is present on either side of the repeat. One region contains 12 of 13 identical amino acids. Within the nucleotide sequence of this region, 25 of 27 nucleotides are conserved. The conservation of these regions in parasites widely separated in evolution suggests that they may have a function such as binding to liver cells and may represent an invariant target for immunity.
Recent studies have unequivocally associated the fat mass and obesity-associated (FTO) gene with the risk of obesity. In vitro FTO protein is an AlkB-like DNA/RNA demethylase with a strong preference for 3-methylthymidine (3-meT) in single-stranded DNA or 3-methyluracil (3-meU) in single-stranded RNA. Here we report the crystal structure of FTO in complex with the mononucleotide 3-meT. FTO comprises an amino-terminal AlkB-like domain and a carboxy-terminal domain with a novel fold. Biochemical assays show that these two domains interact with each other, which is required for FTO catalytic activity. In contrast with the structures of other AlkB members, FTO possesses an extra loop covering one side of the conserved jelly-roll motif. Structural comparison shows that this loop selectively competes with the unmethylated strand of the DNA duplex for binding to FTO, suggesting that it has an important role in FTO selection against double-stranded nucleic acids. The ability of FTO to distinguish 3-meT or 3-meU from other nucleotides is conferred by its hydrogen-bonding interaction with the two carbonyl oxygen atoms in 3-meT or 3-meU. Taken together, these results provide a structural basis for understanding FTO substrate-specificity, and serve as a foundation for the rational design of FTO inhibitors.
Rapid calcium efflux from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) is a necessary step in excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle and is thought to be mediated by a calcium channel. Calcium efflux has been studied in fragmented SR vesicles by radioisotope efflux and fluorescence measurements. Several laboratories have reported that adenine nucleotides can stimulate calcium efflux from SR. In recent reports, Ca2+ release with a first-order rate constant as high as 100 s-1 has been observed for nucleotide-stimulated Ca2+ release from SR vesicles. Also, radioisotope efflux was blocked by Mg2+ and micromolar concentrations of the polycationic dye, ruthenium red. These high rates of transport are difficult to reconcile with a mechanism other than passive diffusion through a nucleotide-activated 'calcium release channel'. Using the fusion technique for inserting SR proteins into planar lipid bilayers, we report here single-channel recordings of calcium release channels from purified 'heavy' SR membranes. Channels have been identified on the basis of their activation by adenine nucleotides, blockade by ruthenium red, and selectivity for divalent cations. Surprisingly, the channel studied here exhibits an unusually large conductance of 170 pS in 50 mM Ba2+ while still being capable of discriminating against monovalent cations by a permeability ratio, P(Ba)/P(Cs) = 11.4.
Cell-free replication systems for simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA are taken to be a model for the replication of eukaryotic chromosomes, because only one viral protein is required to supplement the replication proteins provided by a human cell extract. To prove that these cellular proteins function in chromosomal DNA replication we have begun to identify homologous proteins in an organism that can be genetically manipulated. Here we report the identification of yeast replication factor-A (yRF-A) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and show that it is functionally and structurally related to a human protein that is required for the initiation and elongation of SV40 DNA replication. Yeast RF-A, a multi-subunit phosphoprotein, is similar to the human protein in its chromatographic behaviour, subunit structure and DNA-binding activity. The yeast protein will fully substitute for the human protein in an early stage of the initiation of SV40 DNA replication. Substitution of yRF-A in the complete SV40 replication system, however, results in reduced DNA replication, presumably due to a requirement for species-specific interactions between yeast RF-A and the DNA polymerase complex.
Since the discovery of Z-DNA by X-ray analysis of the alternated hexanucleotide d(C-G)3 crystals, numerous studies have shown that fragments of natural DNAs can adopt the Z conformation, topological constraints being a major factor stabilizing this conformation. Immunochemical assays using antibodies to Z-DNA provide strong evidence for the presence of Z fragments in chromosomes. The biological role of Z-DNA is not yet known, but it might be involved in gene regulation. Proteins which bind specifically to Z-DNA have been isolated and interactions between Z-DNA and several cellular proteins have been studied. The ability of DNA repair enzymes to maintain the genome's integrity is of major importance to the cell. On alkylation of DNA by chemical carcinogens such as dimethyl sulphate, methyl methanesulphonate, methylnitrosourea or methylnitrosoguanidine, the main target is the N7 of the guanosine residue, yielding 7-methylguanine (mG). In alkaline conditions, the imidazole ring of mG opens up, yielding the ring-opened form 2,6-diamino-4-oxo-5-methylformamidopyrimidine (rom7G); this lesion is a block to DNA replication. It occurs in vivo and is enzymatically removed by the DNA glycosylase. Here we report that the lesion is not excised when present in DNA in the left-handed Z conformation.
The Rho-family GTP-hydrolysing proteins (GTPases), Cdc42, Rac and Rho, act as molecular switches in signalling pathways that regulate cytoskeletal architecture, gene expression and progression of the cell cycle. Cdc42 and Rac transmit many signals through GTP-dependent binding to effector proteins containing a Cdc42/Rac-interactive-binding (CRIB) motif. One such effector, the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP), is postulated to link activation of Cdc42 directly to the rearrangement of actin. Human mutations in WASP cause severe defects in haematopoletic cell function, leading to clinical symptoms of thrombocytopenia, immunodeficiency and eczema. Here we report the solution structure of a complex between activated Cdc42 and a minimal GTPase-binding domain (GBD) from WASP. An extended amino-terminal GBD peptide that includes the CRIB motif contacts the switch I, beta2 and alpha5 regions of Cdc42. A carboxy-terminal beta-hairpin and alpha-helix pack against switch II. The Phe-X-His-X2-His portion of the CRIB motif and the alpha-helix appear to mediate sensitivity to the nucleotide switch through contacts to residues 36-40 of Cdc42. Discrimination between the Rho-family members is likely to be governed by GBD contacts to the switch I and alpha5 regions of the GTPases. Structural and biochemical data suggest that GBD-sequence divergence outside the CRIB motif may reflect additional regulatory interactions with functional domains that are specific to individual effectors.
Chalcone synthases, which biosynthesize chalcones (the starting materials for many flavonoids), have been believed to be specific to plants. However, the rppA gene from the Gram-positive, soil-living filamentous bacterium Streptomyces griseus encodes a 372-amino-acid protein that shows significant similarity to chalcone synthases. Several rppA-like genes are known, but their functions and catalytic properties have not been described. Here we show that a homodimer of RppA catalyses polyketide synthesis: it selects malonyl-coenzyme-A as the starter, carries out four successive extensions and releases the resulting pentaketide to cyclize to 1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaphthalene (THN). Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that, as in other chalcone synthases, a cysteine residue is essential for enzyme activity. Disruption of the chromosomal rppA gene in S. griseus abolished melanin production in hyphae, resulting in 'albino' mycelium. THN was readily oxidized to form 2,5,7-trihydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone (flaviolin), which then randomly polymerized to form various coloured compounds. THN formed by RppA appears to be an intermediate in the biosynthetic pathways for not only melanins but also various secondary metabolites containing a naphthoquinone ring. Therefore, RppA is a chalcone-synthase-related synthase that synthesizes polyketides and is found in the Streptomyces and other bacteria.
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcribes genes that encode proteins and noncoding small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs). The carboxyl-terminal repeat domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of mammalian RNA Pol II, comprising tandem repeats of the heptapeptide consensus Tyr1-Ser2-Pro3-Thr4-Ser5-Pro6-Ser7, is required for expression of both gene types. We show that mutation of serine-7 to alanine causes a specific defect in snRNA gene expression. We also present evidence that phosphorylation of serine-7 facilitates interaction with the snRNA gene-specific Integrator complex. These findings assign a biological function to this amino acid and highlight a gene type-specific requirement for a residue within the CTD heptapeptide, supporting the existence of a CTD code.
Properdin is a plasma glycoprotein which stabilizes the C3bnBb enzyme complex of the alternative pathway of the complement system. Unlike the classical pathway, which is initiated by interaction of C1q with the Fc regions of IgG or IgM antibodies in immune complexes, the alternative pathway can be directly activated via binding of C3b to surfaces of foreign organisms. The stabilized C3bnBbP complex activates components C3 and C5 resulting in opsonization of foreign material (via C3b) and assembly of the membrane attack complex (via C5b) on target cells. Therefore properdin greatly enhances complement-mediated clearance and inactivation mechanisms in both natural and acquired resistance to infection. This paper shows that the primary amino acid sequence of properdin is composed mainly of six repeating motifs, each of approximately 60 amino acids, and that similar sequences are found in thrombospondin, the circumsporozoite protein of malaria parasites and regions of the membrane-attack components of complement. These similarities may provide insight into the mechanisms by which parasites avoid host defences mediated by complement.
Phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns), the most abundant phosphoinositide, is the precursor of phosphatidylinositol 4-monophosphate which is converted to phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, the lipid hydrolysed as an early step in signal transduction by many stimuli. It is generally thought that a single enzyme in the endoplasmic reticulum, PtdIns synthase (CDP-diglyceride:myoinositol 3-phosphatidyltransferase, EC 2.7.8.11), is responsible for PtdIns synthesis and that newly synthesized PtdIns is transported to the plasma membrane by exchange proteins. Several investigators have proposed that there are two functionally distinct pools of PtdIns, one responsive to stimulation and the other not, and that the stimulus-responsive pool may be synthesized at a different site within the cell, perhaps within the plasma membrane. Indeed, it was suggested that there is PtdIns synthase activity in plasma membrane isolated from rat liver. GH3 rat pituitary tumour cells are an excellent model system to study stimulation of phosphoinositide metabolism by thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). Conversion of PtdIns to polyphosphoinositides and TRH (and GTP)-activated phosphoinositide hydrolysis are known to occur in plasma membrane isolated from GH3 cells. Here we report that PtdIns synthase activity in the plasma membrane of GH3 cells is distinct from that present in the endoplasmic reticulum. The plasma membrane PtdIns synthase may be responsible for a portion of PtdIns re-synthesis that occurs during cell stimulation.
Rab/Ypt guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) represent a family of key membrane traffic regulators in eukaryotic cells whose function is governed by the guanosine diphosphate (GDP) dissociation inhibitor (RabGDI). Using a combination of chemical synthesis and protein engineering, we generated and crystallized the monoprenylated Ypt1:RabGDI complex. The structure of the complex was solved to 1.5 angstrom resolution and provides a structural basis for the ability of RabGDI to inhibit the release of nucleotide by Rab proteins. Isoprenoid binding requires a conformational change that opens a cavity in the hydrophobic core of its domain II. Analysis of the structure provides a molecular basis for understanding a RabGDI mutant that causes mental retardation in humans.
The Z variant of alpha1-antitrypsin was isolated by a new technique from the liver of a patient homozygous for the Z allele of the protease inhibitor locus. The material was homogenous and antigenically competent but had no protease inhibiting capacity. An interesting correlation was found between the subcellular localization and the carbohydrate composition of the Z variant from liver. Carbohydate analysis of this glycoprotein showed an absence of galactose and sialic acid, an appreciable decrease in N-acetylglucosamine, and an almost twofold increase in mannose residues. These data indicate a considerable slowdown in the processing of the oligosaccharides of liver Z variant. In spite of the absence of sialyl residues, the liver Z varant was microheterogeneous by analytical isoelectric focusing. The isoproteins of liver Z variant coincided with those of asialo M variant in the focusing field.
Many aspects of eukaryotic development depend on regulated protein degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. This highly conserved pathway promotes covalent attachment of ubiquitin to protein substrates through the sequential action of three enzymes called a ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1), a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2), and a ubiquitin-protein ligase (E3). Most ubiquitinated proteins are then targeted for degradation by the 26S proteasome. Recent studies have also shown that the ubiquitin-related protein RUB/Nedd8 and the proteasome-related COP9 signalosome complex cooperate with the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway to promote protein degradation. Most of these components are conserved in all three eukaryotic kingdoms. However, the known targets of the pathway in plants, and the developmental processes they regulate, are specific to the plant kingdom.
Muscarinic receptors trigger several different responses including an increase in concentration of cyclic GMP, a decrease in cyclic AMP concentration, breakdown of polyphosphoinositides and changes in ion permeability. It is not yet clear whether these reactions occur sequentially or independently and which directly coupled to the muscarinic receptor. Several lines of evidence indicate that muscarinic receptors in many, if not all, cell types are coupled to the inhibitory guanine nucleotide regulatory protein (Ni or Gi) of adenylate cyclase. To provide direct evidence for this coupling, we have reconstituted muscarinic receptors purified from porcine brain with Ni purified from rat brain in a phospholipid vesicle. Here, we report that the GTPase activity of Ni is stimulated by carbachol. This action is blocked by the simultaneous addition of atropine and is not observed when the Ni protein is ADP-ribosylated. We conclude that one function of the muscarinic receptor is the activation of Ni.
Transcription factor IID (TFIID) binds to the TATA box promoter element and regulates the expression of most eukaryotic genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II. Complementary DNA (cDNA) encoding a human TFIID protein has been cloned. The human TFIID polypeptide has 339 amino acids and a molecular size of 37,745 daltons. The carboxyl-terminal 181 amino acids of the human TFIID protein shares 80% identity with the TFIID protein from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The amino terminus contains an unusual repeat of 38 consecutive glutamine residues and an X-Thr-Pro repeat. Expression of DNA in reticulocyte lysates or in Escherichia coli yielded a protein that was competent for both DNA binding and transcription activation.
Mitogen-activated protein kinases, MAP kinases or ERKs (extracellular signal-regulated kinases) are rapidly stimulated by growth-promoting factors acting on a variety of cell-surface receptors. In turn, ERKs phosphorylate and regulate key intracellular enzymes and transcription factors involved in the control of cellular proliferation. The tyrosine-kinase class of growth-factor receptors transmits signals to ERKs in a multistep process that involves Ras and a limited number of defined molecules. In contrast, ERK activation by G-protein-coupled receptors is poorly understood, as is the role of ras in this signalling pathway. We have explored in COS-7 cells the mechanism of ERKs activation by m1 and m2 muscarinic receptors, typical examples of receptors coupled through Gq proteins to induce phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis and to G(i) proteins to inhibit adenylyl cyclase, respectively. Here we present evidence that ERK activation is mediated by beta gamma subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins acting on a ras-dependent pathway.
RNA editing by site-selective deamination of adenosine to inosine alters codons and splicing in nuclear transcripts, and therefore protein function. ADAR2 (refs 7, 8) is a candidate mammalian editing enzyme that is widely expressed in brain and other tissues, but its RNA substrates are unknown. Here we have studied ADAR2-mediated RNA editing by generating mice that are homozygous for a targeted functional null allele. Editing in ADAR2-/- mice was substantially reduced at most of 25 positions in diverse transcripts; the mutant mice became prone to seizures and died young. The impaired phenotype appeared to result entirely from a single underedited position, as it reverted to normal when both alleles for the underedited transcript were substituted with alleles encoding the edited version exonically. The critical position specifies an ion channel determinant, the Q/R site, in AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate) receptor GluR-B pre-messenger RNA. We conclude that this transcript is the physiologically most important substrate of ADAR2.
The reality of axoplasmic transport is widely accepted; various neutrotransmitters, enzymes, labelled proteins and peptides are known to move rapidly along the axons of different nerve fibres. In the terminals of sympathetic nerves, noradrenaline release is controlled by various regulatory mechanisms which imply the occurrence of presynaptic receptors. In this regard, there is considerable indirect physiological evidence for the existence of muscarinic cholinergic receptors in the sympathetic nerve endings; the stimulation by acetylcholine of such presynaptic receptors elicits an inhibitory effect on noradrenaline release. We not provide direct biochemical evidence for the occurrence in dog splenic nerve of muscarinic receptors which seem to move along the axon as suggested by their rapid accumulation on either side of a ligature.
The enzyme alpha1,3-galactosyltransferase (alpha1,3GT or GGTA1) synthesizes alpha1,3-galactose (alpha1,3Gal) epitopes (Galalpha1,3Galbeta1,4GlcNAc-R), which are the major xenoantigens causing hyperacute rejection in pig-to-human xenotransplantation. Complete removal of alpha1,3Gal from pig organs is the critical step toward the success of xenotransplantation. We reported earlier the targeted disruption of one allele of the alpha1,3GT gene in cloned pigs. A selection procedure based on a bacterial toxin was used to select for cells in which the second allele of the gene was knocked out. Sequencing analysis demonstrated that knockout of the second allele of the alpha1,3GT gene was caused by a T-to-G single point mutation at the second base of exon 9, which resulted in inactivation of the alpha1,3GT protein. Four healthy alpha1,3GT double-knockout female piglets were produced by three consecutive rounds of cloning. The piglets carrying a point mutation in the alpha1,3GT gene hold significant value, as they would allow production of alpha1,3Gal-deficient pigs free of antibiotic-resistance genes and thus have the potential to make a safer product for human use.
A new hypothesis for the origin of eukaryotic cells is proposed, based on the comparative biochemistry of energy metabolism. Eukaryotes are suggested to have arisen through symbiotic association of an anaerobic, strictly hydrogen-dependent, strictly autotrophic archaebacterium (the host) with a eubacterium (the symbiont) that was able to respire, but generated molecular hydrogen as a waste product of anaerobic heterotrophic metabolism. The host's dependence upon molecular hydrogen produced by the symbiont is put forward as the selective principle that forged the common ancestor of eukaryotic cells.
Influenza A viruses pose a serious threat to world public health, particularly the currently circulating avian H5N1 viruses. The influenza viral nucleoprotein forms the protein scaffold of the helical genomic ribonucleoprotein complexes, and has a critical role in viral RNA replication. Here we report a 3.2 A crystal structure of this nucleoprotein, the overall shape of which resembles a crescent with a head and a body domain, with a protein fold different compared with that of the rhabdovirus nucleoprotein. Oligomerization of the influenza virus nucleoprotein is mediated by a flexible tail loop that is inserted inside a neighbouring molecule. This flexibility in the tail loop enables the nucleoprotein to form loose polymers as well as rigid helices, both of which are important for nucleoprotein functions. Single residue mutations in the tail loop result in the complete loss of nucleoprotein oligomerization. An RNA-binding groove, which is found between the head and body domains at the exterior of the nucleoprotein oligomer, is lined with highly conserved basic residues widely distributed in the primary sequence. The nucleoprotein structure shows that only one of two proposed nuclear localization signals are accessible, and suggests that the body domain of nucleoprotein contains the binding site for the viral polymerase. Our results identify the tail loop binding pocket as a potential target for antiviral development.
Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is a protein required for B cells to undergo class switch recombination and somatic hypermutation (SHM)--two processes essential for producing high-affinity antibodies. Purified AID catalyses the deamination of C to U on single-stranded (ss)DNA. Here, we show in vitro that AID-catalysed C deaminations occur preferentially on 5' WRC sequences in accord with SHM spectra observed in vivo. Although about 98% of DNA clones suffer no mutations, most of the remaining mutated clones have 10-70 C to T transitions per clone. Therefore, AID carries out multiple C deaminations on individual DNA strands, rather than jumping from one strand to another. The avid binding of AID to ssDNA could result from its large net positive charge (+11) at pH 7.0, owing to a basic amino-terminal domain enriched in arginine and lysine. Furthermore, AID exhibits a 15-fold preference for C deamination on the non-transcribed DNA strand exposed by RNA polymerase than the transcribed strand protected as a RNA-DNA hybrid. These deamination results on ssDNA bear relevance to three characteristic features of SHM: preferential mutation at C sites within WRC hotspot sequences, the broad clonal mutagenic heterogeneity of antibody variable regions targeted for mutation, and the requirement for active transcription to obtain mutagenesis.
The prion protein PrPc is a glycoprotein of unknown function normally found in neurons and glia. It is involved in diseases such as bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), scrapie and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. PrPSc, an altered isoform of PrPC that is associated with disease, shows greater protease resistance and is part of the infectious agent, the prion. Prion diseases are characterized by neuronal degeneration, gliosis and accumulation of PrPSc. Mice devoid of PrPC are resistant to scrapie. A fragment of human PrP consisting of amino acids 106-126 that forms fibrils in vitro is toxic to cultured neurons. Here we show that this toxic effect requires the presence of microglia which respond to PrP106-126 by increasing their oxygen radical production. The combined direct and microglia-mediated effects of PrP106-126 are toxic to normal neurons but are insufficient to destroy neurons from mice not expressing PrPC.
Protein design provides a rigorous test of our knowledge about proteins and allows the creation of novel enzymes for biotechnological applications. Whereas progress has been made in designing proteins that mimic native proteins structurally, it is more difficult to design functional proteins. In comparison to recent successes in designing non-metalloproteins, it is even more challenging to rationally design metalloproteins that reproduce both the structure and function of native metalloenzymes. This is because protein metal-binding sites are much more varied than non-metal-containing sites, in terms of different metal ion oxidation states, preferred geometry and metal ion ligand donor sets. Because of their variability, it has been difficult to predict metal-binding site properties in silico, as many of the parameters, such as force fields, are ill-defined. Therefore, the successful design of a structural and functional metalloprotein would greatly advance the field of protein design and our understanding of enzymes. Here we report a successful, rational design of a structural and functional model of a metalloprotein, nitric oxide reductase (NOR), by introducing three histidines and one glutamate, predicted as ligands in the active site of NOR, into the distal pocket of myoglobin. A crystal structure of the designed protein confirms that the minimized computer model contains a haem/non-haem Fe(B) centre that is remarkably similar to that in the crystal structure. This designed protein also exhibits NO reduction activity, and so models both the structure and function of NOR, offering insight that the active site glutamate is required for both iron binding and activity. These results show that structural and functional metalloproteins can be rationally designed in silico.
Chimaeric plasmids containing double-stranded cDNA copies of mRNA induced in human fibroblasts by poly I . C were screened by an RNA selection method. A series of clones to which human fibroblast interferon mRNA selectively hybridized was identified. From the nucleotide sequence of the gene, the complete amino acid sequence of human fibroblast interferon was deduced. The protein is 166 amino acids long and is preceded by a 21-amino acid signal sequence.
Simple chemical catalysts have been designed to achieve some desirable features of enzymes. These novel catalysts are not proteins, but they may incorporate the typical enzyme catalytic groups and they achieve selectivity in their reactions by use of geometric control, as do enzymes. Catalysts that carry out geometrically controlled chlorinations of aromatic rings and steroids have been constructed. Other catalysts achieve the selective synthesis of amino acids, and still others imitate ribonuclease in detailed mechanism and hydrolyze RNA. Optimization of geometries has led to a rate acceleration of over 10(8) in one instance.
In the supernatant fraction of homogenized rat liver, the activity of aldehyde dehydrogenase that is dependent on nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (E.C. 1.2.1.3) is increased up to tenfold after administration of phenobarbital for 3 days. The effect is genetically controlled and is inherited as an autosomal dominant characteristic. The mechanism is apparently unrelated to other druginduced increases in enzyme activity such as that which occurs in the hepatic microsomal systems for drug metabolism.
Stimulation of rat vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) by platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) transiently increased the intracellular concentration of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). This increase could be blunted by increasing the intracellular concentration of the scavenging enzyme catalase or by the chemical antioxidant N-acetylcysteine. The response of VSMCs to PDGF, which includes tyrosine phosphorylation, mitogen-activated protein kinase stimulation, DNA synthesis, and chemotaxis, was inhibited when the growth factor-stimulated rise in H2O2 concentration was blocked. These results suggest that H2O2 may act as a signal-transducing molecule, and they suggest a potential mechanism for the cardioprotective effects of antioxidants.
The sirtuins are a highly conserved family of NAD(+)-dependent enzymes that regulate lifespan in lower organisms. Recently, the mammalian sirtuins have been connected to an ever widening circle of activities that encompass cellular stress resistance, genomic stability, tumorigenesis and energy metabolism. Here we review the recent progress in sirtuin biology, the role these proteins have in various age-related diseases and the tantalizing notion that the activity of this family of enzymes somehow regulates how long we live.
Adenosine receptors associated with a reduction of adenylate cyclase and labeled by tritium-labeled cyclohexyladenosine can be solubilized from brain membranes with sodium cholate. Regulation of receptor binding by guanine nucleotides is retained in the soluble state. Influences of cations observed in membrane preparations of adenosine receptors are no longer detected with the solubilized receptors. The apparent retention of a complex of receptors and guanosine triphosphate binding but not cation binding protein in the soluble state may permit a molecular analysis of receptor regulation.
Dopamine receptor belong to a large class of neurotransmitter and hormone receptors that are linked to their signal transduction pathways through guanine nucleotide binding regulatory proteins (G proteins). Pharmacological, biochemical and physiological criteria have been used to define two subcategories of dopamine receptors referred to as D1 and D2. D1 receptors activate adenylyl cyclase and are coupled with the Gs regulatory protein. By contrast, activation of D2 receptors results in various responses including inhibition of adenylyl cyclase, inhibition of phosphatidylinositol turnover, increase in K+ channel activity and inhibition of Ca2+ mobilization. The G protein(s) linking the D2 receptors to these responses have not been identified, although D2 receptors have been shown to both copurify and functionally reconstitute with both Gi and Go related proteins. The diversity of responses elicited by D2-receptor activation could reflect the existence of multiple D2 receptor subtypes, the identification of which is facilitated by the recent cloning of a complementary DNA encoding a rat D2 receptor. This receptor exhibits considerable amino-acid homology with other members of the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. Here we report the identification and cloning of a cDNA encoding an RNA splice variant of the rat D2 receptor cDNA. This cDNA codes for a receptor isoform which is predominantly expressed in the brain and contains an additional 29 amino acids in the third cytoplasmic loop, a region believed to be involved in G protein coupling.
The amino acid sequences of three fragments of cyanogen bromide-digested human placental inositol 1,2-cyclic phosphate 2-phosphohydrolase, an enzyme of the phosphatidylinositol signaling pathway, are identical to sequences within lipocortin III, a member of a family of homologous calcium- and phospholipid-binding proteins that do not have defined physiological functions. Lipocortin III has also been previously identified as placental anticoagulant protein III (PAP III) and calcimedin 35 alpha. Antibodies to PAP III detected PAP III and inositol 1,2-cyclic phosphate 2-phosphohydrolase with identical reactivity on immunoblotting. In addition, inositol 1,2-cyclic phosphate 2-phosphohydrolase was stimulated by the same acidic phospholipids that bind lipocortins.
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are synthesized as part of longer primary transcripts that require processing of both their 3' and 5' extremities in every living organism known. The 5' side is processed (matured) by the ubiquitously conserved endonucleolytic ribozyme, RNase P, whereas removal of the 3' tails can be either exonucleolytic or endonucleolytic. The endonucleolytic pathway is catalysed by an enzyme known as RNase Z, or 3' tRNase. RNase Z cleaves precursor tRNAs immediately after the discriminator base (the unpaired nucleotide 3' to the last base pair of the acceptor stem, used as an identity determinant by many aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases) in most cases, yielding a tRNA primed for addition of the CCA motif by nucleotidyl transferase. Here we report the crystal structure of Bacillus subtilis RNase Z at 2.1 A resolution, and propose a mechanism for tRNA recognition and cleavage. The structure explains the allosteric properties of the enzyme, and also sheds light on the mechanisms of inhibition by the CCA motif and long 5' extensions. Finally, it highlights the extraordinary adaptability of the metallo-hydrolase domain of the beta-lactamase family for the hydrolysis of covalent bonds.
Human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) is the aetiological agent of AIDS. The virus establishes lytic, latent and non-cytopathic productive infection in cells in culture. The complexity of virus-host cell interaction is reflected in the complex organization of the viral genome. In addition to the genes that encode the virion capsid and envelope proteins and the enzymes required for proviral synthesis and integration common to all retroviruses, HIV-1 is known to encode at least four additional proteins that regulate virus replication, the tat, art, sor and 3' orf proteins, as well as a protein of unknown function from the open reading frame called R. Close examination of the nucleic acid sequences of the genomes of multiple HIV isolates raised the possibility that the virus encodes a previously undetected additional protein. Here we report that HIV-1 encodes a ninth protein and that antibodies to this protein are detected in the sera of people infected with HIV-1. This protein distinguishes HIV-1 isolates from the other human and simian immunodeficiency viruses (HIV-2 and SIV) that do not have the capacity to encode a similar protein.
Structures of the 31-kilodalton catalytic domain of rat DNA polymerase beta (pol beta) and the whole 39-kilodalton enzyme were determined at 2.3 and 3.6 angstrom resolution, respectively. The 31-kilodalton domain is composed of fingers, palm, and thumb subdomains arranged to form a DNA binding channel reminiscent of the polymerase domains of the Klenow fragment of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I, HIV-1 reverse transcriptase, and bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase. The amino-terminal 8-kilodalton domain is attached to the fingers subdomain by a flexible hinge. The two invariant aspartates found in all polymerase sequences and implicated in catalytic activity have the same geometric arrangement within structurally similar but topologically distinct palms, indicating that the polymerases have maintained, or possibly re-evolved, a common nucleotidyl transfer mechanism. The location of Mn2+ and deoxyadenosine triphosphate in pol beta confirms the role of the invariant aspartates in metal ion and deoxynucleoside triphosphate binding.
Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex that synthesizes telomere repeats in tissue progenitor cells and cancer cells. Active human telomerase consists of at least three principal subunits, including the telomerase reverse transcriptase, the telomerase RNA (TERC), and dyskerin. Here, we identify a holoenzyme subunit, TCAB1 (telomerase Cajal body protein 1), that is notably enriched in Cajal bodies, nuclear sites of RNP processing that are important for telomerase function. TCAB1 associates with active telomerase enzyme, established telomerase components, and small Cajal body RNAs that are involved in modifying splicing RNAs. Depletion of TCAB1 by using RNA interference prevents TERC from associating with Cajal bodies, disrupts telomerase-telomere association, and abrogates telomere synthesis by telomerase. Thus, TCAB1 controls telomerase trafficking and is required for telomere synthesis in human cancer cells.
Mitochondrial cytochrome bc1 complex performs two functions: It is a respiratory multienzyme complex and it recognizes a mitochondrial targeting presequence. Refined crystal structures of the 11-subunit bc1 complex from bovine heart reveal full views of this bifunctional enzyme. The "Rieske" iron-sulfur protein subunit shows significant conformational changes in different crystal forms, suggesting a new electron transport mechanism of the enzyme. The mitochondrial targeting presequence of the "Rieske" protein (subunit 9) is lodged between the two "core" subunits at the matrix side of the complex. These "core" subunits are related to the matrix processing peptidase, and the structure unveils how mitochondrial targeting presequences are recognized.
The coupling of ATP hydrolysis to electron transfer by the enzyme nitrogenase during biological nitrogen fixation is an important example of a nucleotide-dependent transduction mechanism. The crystal structure has been determined for the complex between the Fe-protein and MoFe-protein components of nitrogenase stabilized by ADP x AIF4-, previously used as a nucleoside triphosphate analogue in nucleotide-switch proteins. The structure reveals that the dimeric Fe-protein has undergone substantial conformational changes. The beta-phosphate and AIF4- groups are stabilized through intersubunit contacts that are critical for catalysis and the redox centre is repositioned to facilitate electron transfer. Interactions in the nitrogenase complex have broad implications for signal and energy transduction mechanisms in multiprotein complexes.
Plasma obtained from human subjects after exercise and injected intraperitoneally into rats elevated rat rectal temperature and depressed plasma iron and zinc concentrations. The pyrogenic component was heat-denaturable and had an apparent molecular weight of 14,000 daltons. Human mononuclear leukocytes obtained after exercise and incubated in vitro released a factor into the medium that also elevated body temperature in rats and reduced trace metal concentrations. These results suggest that endogenous pyrogen, a protein mediator of fever and trace metal metabolism during infection, is released during exercise.
oskar messenger RNA localization at the posterior pole of the Drosophila oocyte is essential for germline and abdomen formation in the future embryo. The nuclear shuttling proteins Y14/Tsunagi and Mago nashi are required for oskar mRNA localization, and they co-localize with oskar mRNA at the posterior pole of the oocyte. Their human homologues, Y14/RBM8 and Magoh, are core components of the exon-exon junction complex (EJC). The EJC is deposited on mRNAs in a splicing-dependent manner, 20-24 nucleotides upstream of exon-exon junctions, independently of the RNA sequence. This indicates a possible role of splicing in oskar mRNA localization, challenging the established notion that the oskar 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) is sufficient for this process. Here we show that splicing at the first exon-exon junction of oskar RNA is essential for oskar mRNA localization at the posterior pole. We revisit the issue of sufficiency of the oskar 3'UTR for posterior localization and show that the localization of unrelated transcripts bearing the oskar 3'UTR is mediated by endogenous oskar mRNA. Our results reveal an important new function for splicing: regulation of messenger ribonucleoprotein complex assembly and organization for mRNA cytoplasmic localization.
When mammals fast, glucose homeostasis is achieved by triggering expression of gluconeogenic genes in response to glucagon and glucocorticoids. The pathways act synergistically to induce gluconeogenesis (glucose synthesis), although the underlying mechanism has not been determined. Here we show that mice carrying a targeted disruption of the cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element binding (CREB) protein gene, or overexpressing a dominant-negative CREB inhibitor, exhibit fasting hypoglycaemia [corrected] and reduced expression of gluconeogenic enzymes. CREB was found to induce expression of the gluconeogenic programme through the nuclear receptor coactivator PGC-1, which is shown here to be a direct target for CREB regulation in vivo. Overexpression of PGC-1 in CREB-deficient mice restored glucose homeostasis and rescued expression of gluconeogenic genes. In transient assays, PGC-1 potentiated glucocorticoid induction of the gene for phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), the rate-limiting enzyme in gluconeogenesis. PGC-1 promotes cooperativity between cyclic AMP and glucocorticoid signalling pathways during hepatic gluconeogenesis. Fasting hyperglycaemia is strongly correlated with type II diabetes, so our results suggest that the activation of PGC-1 by CREB in liver contributes importantly to the pathogenesis of this disease.
The alpha 2A-adrenergic receptor (adrenoceptor) was stably expressed in AtT20 mouse pituitary tumor cells; adrenoceptor agonists inhibited adenylyl cyclase, inhibited voltage-dependent calcium currents, and increased inwardly rectifying potassium currents. An aspartic acid residue (Asp79) highly conserved among guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors was mutated to asparagine; in cells transfected with the mutant alpha 2-receptor, agonists inhibited adenylyl cyclase and calcium currents but did not increase potassium currents. Because distinct G proteins appear to couple adrenoceptors to potassium and calcium currents, the present findings suggest that the mutant alpha 2-adrenoceptor cannot achieve the conformation necessary to activate G proteins that mediate potassium channel activation.
Proper chromosome segregation requires the attachment of sister kinetochores to microtubules from opposite spindle poles to form bi-oriented chromosomes on the metaphase spindle. The chromosome passenger complex containing Survivin and the kinase Aurora B regulates this process from the centromeres. We report that a de-ubiquitinating enzyme, hFAM, regulates chromosome alignment and segregation by controlling both the dynamic association of Survivin with centromeres and the proper targeting of Survivin and Aurora B to centromeres. Survivin is ubiquitinated in mitosis through both Lys(48) and Lys(63) ubiquitin linkages. Lys(63) de-ubiquitination mediated by hFAM is required for the dissociation of Survivin from centromeres, whereas Lys(63) ubiquitination mediated by the ubiquitin binding protein Ufd1 is required for the association of Survivin with centromeres. Thus, ubiquitinaton regulates dynamic protein-protein interactions and chromosome segregation independently of protein degradation.
Major pathways of recombinational DNA repair in Escherichia coli require the RecBCD protein--a heterotrimeric, ATP-driven, DNA translocating motor enzyme. RecBCD combines a highly processive and exceptionally fast helicase (DNA-unwinding) activity with a strand-specific nuclease (DNA-cleaving) activity (refs 1, 2 and references therein). Recognition of the DNA sequence 'chi' (5'-GCTGGTGG-3') switches the polarity of DNA cleavage and stimulates recombination at nearby sequences in vivo. Here we attach microscopic polystyrene beads to biotin-tagged RecD protein subunits and use tethered-particle light microscopy to observe translocation of single RecBCD molecules (with a precision of up to approximately 30 nm at 2 Hz) and to examine the mechanism by which chi modifies enzyme activity. Observed translocation is unidirectional, with each molecule moving at a constant velocity corresponding to the population-average DNA unwinding rate. These observations place strong constraints on possible movement mechanisms. Bead release at chi is negligible, showing that the activity modification at chi does not require ejection of the RecD subunit from the enzyme as previously proposed; modification may occur through an unusual, pure conformational switch mechanism.
An organelle approximately 0.5 to 1.5 microns in diameter, limited by a single membrane, occurs abundantly in the chlorophyllous cells of leaves of several dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous plants. Its finely granular matrix frequently contains crystalline, fibrous, or amorphous inclusions. It is frequently appressed to a chloroplast or squeezed between chloroplasts so that its limiting membrane is in extensive contact with the outer membranes of the chloroplast envelopes. The organelle is probably identical with recently isolated leaf particles that contain enzymes involved in the metabolism of glycolate, a chloroplast product; it is interpreted as a form of plant microbody.
Perforin is one of the cytolytic factors present in the cytoplasmic granules of mouse cytotoxic T lymphocytes and natural killer cells. We have determined the sequence of the N-terminal amino acids of perforin purified from a mouse natural killer cell line, and, by using oligonucleotide probes corresponding to the amino acid residues, we have identified a complementary DNA encoding perforin from the cDNA library of a mouse cytotoxic T lymphocyte clone. As predicted from the functional similarities between perforin and the ninth component of the serum cytolytic system, complement (C9) (refs 4-8), the deduced primary structure of perforin has homology with C9 at their respective functionally conserved regions. We find that perforin is only expressed in killer cell lines, and not in helper T lymphocytes or other tumour cells tested. Thus we have provided direct molecular evidence that a killer-cell-specific protein evolutionally linked to C9 is involved in cell-mediated cytolysis.
The Tetrahymena group I ribozyme catalyses a sequence-specific phosphodiester cleavage reaction on an external RNA oligonucleotide substrate in the presence of a divalent metal cation cofactor. This reaction proceeds readily with either Mg2+ or Mn2+, but no detectable reaction has been reported when other divalent cations are used as the sole cofactor. Cations such as Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+ can stabilize the correct folded conformation of the ribozyme, thereby partially alleviating the Mg2+ or Mn2+ requirement. But catalysis by the ribozyme involves coordination of either Mg2+ or Mn2+ at the active site, resulting in an overall requirement for one of these two cations. Here we use an in vitro evolution process to obtain variants of the Tetrahymena ribozyme that are capable of cleaving an RNA substrate in reaction mixtures containing Ca2+ as the divalent cation. These findings extend the range of different chemical environments available to RNA enzymes and illustrate the power of in vitro evolution in generating macromolecular catalysts with desired properties.
The baculovirus protein p35 inhibits programmed cell death in such diverse animals as insects, nematodes and mammals. Here we show that p35 protein is a substrate for and inhibitor of the Caenorhabditis elegans cell-death protease CED-3 (refs 6, 7) and a substrate for four CED-3-like vertebrate cysteine protease activities implicated in apoptosis in mammals. A p35 mutation that greatly reduced p35 activity in vitro as a CED-3 substrate and inhibitor abolished p35 activity in vivo in protecting against cell death in C. elegans. Introduction of the CED-3 cleavage site in p35 into the cowpox virus protein crmA, which inhibits mammalian apoptosis but not programmed cell death in C. elegans, caused crmA to block CED-3-mediated cell death. These observations suggest that p35 may prevent programmed cell death in C. elegans and other species by acting as a competitive inhibitor of cysteine proteases.
The amino-acid sequence of murine band 3, deduced from the nucleotide sequence of a complementary DNA clone, confirms that this integral membrane glycoprotein is composed of two major structural domains which correlate with its dual functions as the anchor for the erythrocyte cytoskeleton and as a plasma membrane anion antiporter. This latter activity resides within a highly hydrophobic domain that crosses the plasma membrane at least 12 times.
The design of new enzymes for reactions not catalysed by naturally occurring biocatalysts is a challenge for protein engineering and is a critical test of our understanding of enzyme catalysis. Here we describe the computational design of eight enzymes that use two different catalytic motifs to catalyse the Kemp elimination-a model reaction for proton transfer from carbon-with measured rate enhancements of up to 10(5) and multiple turnovers. Mutational analysis confirms that catalysis depends on the computationally designed active sites, and a high-resolution crystal structure suggests that the designs have close to atomic accuracy. Application of in vitro evolution to enhance the computational designs produced a >200-fold increase in k(cat)/K(m) (k(cat)/K(m) of 2,600 M(-1)s(-1) and k(cat)/k(uncat) of >10(6)). These results demonstrate the power of combining computational protein design with directed evolution for creating new enzymes, and we anticipate the creation of a wide range of useful new catalysts in the future.
The T antigen specified by SV40 virus is the only viral-encoded protein required for replication of SV40 DNA. T antigen has two activities that appear to be essential for viral DNA replication: specific binding to duplex DNA at the origin of replication and helicase activity that unwinds the two DNA strands. As judged by electron microscopy, DNA unwinding is initiated at the origin of replication and proceeds bidirectionally. Either linear or circular DNA molecules containing the origin of replication are effective substrates; with closed circular DNA, a topoisomerase capable of removing positive superhelical turns is required for an efficient reaction. Presence of an origin sequence on duplex DNA and a single-strand DNA-binding protein appear to be the only requirements for T antigen to catalyze unwinding. This reaction mediated by T antigen defines a likely pathway to precise initiation of DNA replication: (i) the sequence-specific binding activity locates the origin sequence, (ii) the duplex DNA is unwound at this site, and (iii) the DNA polymerase and primase begin DNA replication. A similar pathway has been inferred for the localized initiation of DNA replication by bacteriophage lambda and by Escherichia coli in which a sequence-specific binding protein locates the origin and directs the DnaB helicase to this site. Observations with the SV40 system indicate that localized initiation of duplex DNA replication may be similar for prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
A 579-base pair approximately full-length cDNA which codes for the 145-amino acid long beta-subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) has been cloned in the plasmid vector pBR322 and its complete nucleotide sequence determined. A hydrophobic presequence of 20 amino acids can be identified from the nucleotide sequence. The amino acid sequence of the beta-subunit is known to be related to those of the beta-subunits of the other glycoprotein hormones LH, FSH and TSH, but the beta-subunit of HCG is unique in that it contains a C-terminal extension of about 30 amino acids which has no homologous counterpart in the other three hormones. Analysis of the beta HCG cDNA nucleotide sequence suggests that this extension may have arisen by the loss of the termination codon of an ancestral beta-like gene so that most of what was previously the 3'-untranslated region now codes for protein. The beta-subunit of HCG terminates with the codon UAA located 16 bases before the poly(A) in the sequence AAUAAA. This sequence is believed to be a recognition signal involved in either polyadenylation or processing and therefore has a dual role in this gene, serving both a coding and a regulatory function.
The four-way junction between DNA helices is the central intermediate in recombination, and the manner of its interaction with resolvase enzymes can determine the genetic outcome of the process. A knowledge of its structure is a prerequisite to understanding the interaction with proteins, and there has been recent progress. Here we use fluorescence energy transfer to determine the relative distances between the ends of a small DNA junction, and hence the path of the strands. Our results are consistent with the geometry of an 'X'. The interconnected helices are juxtaposed so that the continuous strands of each helix generate an antiparallel alignment, and the two interchanged strands do not cross at the centre. The acute angle of the X structure is defined by a right-handed rotation of the helical axes about the axis perpendicular to the X plane, as viewed from the centre of the X.
Budding yeast grown under continuous, nutrient-limited conditions exhibit robust, highly periodic cycles in the form of respiratory bursts. Microarray studies reveal that over half of the yeast genome is expressed periodically during these metabolic cycles. Genes encoding proteins having a common function exhibit similar temporal expression patterns, and genes specifying functions associated with energy and metabolism tend to be expressed with exceptionally robust periodicity. Essential cellular and metabolic events occur in synchrony with the metabolic cycle, demonstrating that key processes in a simple eukaryotic cell are compartmentalized in time.
The class Ib ribonucleotide reductase of Escherichia coli can initiate reduction of nucleotides to deoxynucleotides with either a Mn(III)2-tyrosyl radical (Y*) or a Fe(III)2-Y* cofactor in the NrdF subunit. Whereas Fe(III)2-Y* can self-assemble from Fe(II)2-NrdF and O2, activation of Mn(II)2-NrdF requires a reduced flavoprotein, NrdI, proposed to form the oxidant for cofactor assembly by reduction of O2. The crystal structures reported here of E. coli Mn(II)2-NrdF and Fe(II)2-NrdF reveal different coordination environments, suggesting distinct initial binding sites for the oxidants during cofactor activation. In the structures of Mn(II)2-NrdF in complex with reduced and oxidized NrdI, a continuous channel connects the NrdI flavin cofactor to the NrdF Mn(II)2 active site. Crystallographic detection of a putative peroxide in this channel supports the proposed mechanism of Mn(III)2-Y* cofactor assembly.
Import of nuclear-encoded precursor proteins into mitochondria and their subsequent sorting into mitochondrial subcompartments is mediated by translocase enzymes in the mitochondrial outer and inner membranes. Precursor proteins carrying amino-terminal targeting signals are translocated into the matrix by the integral inner membrane proteins Tim23 and Tim17 in cooperation with Tim44 and mitochondrial Hsp70. We describe here the discovery of a new pathway for the transport of members of the mitochondrial carrier family and other inner membrane proteins that contain internal targeting signals. Two related proteins in the intermembrane space, Tim10/Mrs11 and Tim12/Mrs5, interact sequentially with these precursors and facilitate their translocation across the outer membrane, irrespective of the membrane potential. Tim10 and Tim12 are found in a complex with Tim22, which takes over the precursor and mediates its membrane-potential-dependent insertion into the inner membrane. This interaction of Tim10 and Tim12 with the precursors depends on the presence of divalent metal ions. Both proteins contain a zinc-finger-like motif with four cysteines and bind equimolar amounts of zinc ions.
DNA polymerases have been partially purified from human milk. A DNA polymerase detected by phosphocellulose chromatography is similar to the enzymes of RNA tumor viruses in that a hybrid of polyriboadenylate and oligodeoxythymidylate is a better template than is DNA. However, this polymerase differed from that of the RNA tumor viruses in its chromatographic behavior. Three different methods of detecting "reverse transcriptase" activity failed to correlate with the donor's family history of cancer.
N-acetyldopamine has been identified as a dihydroxyphenylalanine metabolite in the blowfly imago during eclosion. The activity of the dihydroxyphenylalanine decarboxylase, the main enzyme responsible for its formation, which is minimal during the pupal stage, increases I day before eclosion. The similarity of dihydroxyphenylalanine metabolism in Calliphora during eclosion and during puparium formation justifies the assumption that N-acetyldopamine can be regarded as the sclerotizing agent of the imaginal cuticle. It is concluded that the formation of this substance is under the control of ecdysone.
Heterotrimeric guanine-nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins (G proteins) transduce signals from a wide variety of cell-surface receptors to generate physiological responses. Protein-tyrosine kinases are another group of critical cellular signal transducers and their malfunction often leads to cancer. Although activation of G-protein-coupled receptors can elicit rapid stimulation of cellular protein-tyrosine phosphorylation, the mechanism used by G proteins to activate protein-tyrosine kinases is unclear. Here we show that the purified alpha-subunit of the G(q) class of G proteins (G[alpha]q) directly stimulates the activity of a purified non-receptor kinase, Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk), whereas purified alpha-subunits from G(il), G(O) or G(z) proteins do not. G(alpha)q can also activate Btk in vivo. Furthermore, in Btk-deficient cells, stimulation of another kinase, a p38 MAP kinase, by Gq-coupled receptors is blocked. Our results demonstrate that certain protein-tyrosine kinases can be direct effectors of G proteins.
Thrombin, a coagulation protease generated at sites of vascular injury, activates platelets, endothelial cells, leukocytes and mesenchymal cells. A G-protein-coupled receptor that is proteolytically activated by thrombin is a target for drug development aimed at blocking thrombosis, inflammation and proliferation. Here we show that although disruption of the thrombin receptor (tr) gene in mice causes about half of the tr-/- embryos to die at embryonic day 9-10, half survive to become grossly normal adult mice with no bleeding diathesis. Strikingly, tr-/- platelets respond strongly to thrombin, whereas tr-/- fibroblasts lose their ability to respond to thrombin. We conclude that the thrombin receptor plays an unexpected role in embryonic development, suggesting a possible new function for the 'coagulation' proteases themselves. Moreover, a second platelet thrombin receptor exists, and different thrombin receptors have tissue-specific roles. This may allow development of therapeutics that will selectively block thrombin's different cellular actions.
A 148-nucleotide subfragment of hepatitis delta virus RNA was shown to undergo cleavage and ligation reversibly. The direction of the reaction is determined by the presence or absence of Mg2+ ions, with the presence of Mg2+ favoring the cleavage reaction. Ligation requires specific conformation of the RNA molecules involved and occurs only between two cleaved RNA fragments that are still held together by hydrogen bonds. The ligation reaction occurs rapidly on removal of Mg2+ by EDTA. This represents a new class of RNA enzymes.
Cerebral deposition of amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) is an early and critical feature of Alzheimer's disease. Abeta generation depends on proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by two unknown proteases: beta-secretase and gamma-secretase. These proteases are prime therapeutic targets. A transmembrane aspartic protease with all the known characteristics of beta-secretase was cloned and characterized. Overexpression of this protease, termed BACE (for beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme) increased the amount of beta-secretase cleavage products, and these were cleaved exactly and only at known beta-secretase positions. Antisense inhibition of endogenous BACE messenger RNA decreased the amount of beta-secretase cleavage products, and purified BACE protein cleaved APP-derived substrates with the same sequence specificity as beta-secretase. Finally, the expression pattern and subcellular localization of BACE were consistent with that expected for beta-secretase. Future development of BACE inhibitors may prove beneficial for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.
The interaction between protein and water is of fundamental importance for processes ranging from protein folding and enzymatic activity to anhydrobiosis. In this letter we bring together results from diverse types of measurements to give a unified picture of the hydration process for lysozyme. The data come principally from experiments with protein films and powders. The principal aim is to examine the relationship between the sites of water interaction, the extent of coverage, and the enzymatic activity, thus providing a better understanding of the relationship between water and enzyme dynamics.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal degenerative motor neuron disorder. Ten percent of cases are inherited; most involve unidentified genes. We report here 13 mutations in the fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS) gene on chromosome 16 that were specific for familial ALS. The FUS/TLS protein binds to RNA, functions in diverse processes, and is normally located predominantly in the nucleus. In contrast, the mutant forms of FUS/TLS accumulated in the cytoplasm of neurons, a pathology that is similar to that of the gene TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP43), whose mutations also cause ALS. Neuronal cytoplasmic protein aggregation and defective RNA metabolism thus appear to be common pathogenic mechanisms involved in ALS and possibly in other neurodegenerative disorders.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are evolutionarily conserved, 18- to 25-nucleotide, non-protein coding transcripts that posttranscriptionally regulate gene expression during development. miRNAs also occur in postmitotic cells, such as neurons in the mammalian central nervous system, but their function is less well characterized. We investigated the role of miRNAs in mammalian midbrain dopaminergic neurons (DNs). We identified a miRNA, miR-133b, that is specifically expressed in midbrain DNs and is deficient in midbrain tissue from patients with Parkinson's disease. miR-133b regulates the maturation and function of midbrain DNs within a negative feedback circuit that includes the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor Pitx3. We propose a role for this feedback circuit in the fine-tuning of dopaminergic behaviors such as locomotion.
The primary decision about male or female sexual development of the human embryo depends on the presence of the Y chromosome, more specifically on a gene on the Y chromosome encoding a testis-determining factor, TDF. The human sex-determining region has been delimited to a 35-kilobase interval near the Y pseudoautosomal boundary. In this region there is a candidate gene for TDF, termed SRY, which is conserved and specific to the Y chromosome in all mammals tested. The corresponding gene from the mouse Y chromosome is deleted in a line of XY female mutant mice, and is expressed at the expected stage during male gonadal development. We have now identified a mutation in SRY in one out of 12 sex-inversed XY females with gonadal dysgenesis who do not lack large segments of the short arm of the Y chromosome. The four-nucleotide deletion occurs in a sequence of SRY encoding a conserved DNA-binding motif and results in a frame shift presumably leading to a non-functional protein. The mutation occurred de novo, because the father of the sporadic XY female that bears it has the normal sequence at the corresponding position. These results provide strong evidence for SRY being TDF.
Differences in gene expression may play a major role in speciation and phenotypic diversity. We examined genome-wide differences in transcription factor (TF) binding in several humans and a single chimpanzee by using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing. The binding sites of RNA polymerase II (PolII) and a key regulator of immune responses, nuclear factor kappaB (p65), were mapped in 10 lymphoblastoid cell lines, and 25 and 7.5% of the respective binding regions were found to differ between individuals. Binding differences were frequently associated with single-nucleotide polymorphisms and genomic structural variants, and these differences were often correlated with differences in gene expression, suggesting functional consequences of binding variation. Furthermore, comparing PolII binding between humans and chimpanzee suggests extensive divergence in TF binding. Our results indicate that many differences in individuals and species occur at the level of TF binding, and they provide insight into the genetic events responsible for these differences.
The importance of the dopaminergic system in brain function has been emphasized by its association with neurological and psychiatric disorders such as Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. On the basis of their biochemical and pharmacological characteristics, dopamine receptors are classified into D1 and D2 subtypes. As the most abundant dopamine receptor in the central nervous system, D1 receptors seem to mediate some behavioural responses, modulate activity of D2 dopamine receptors, and regulate neuron growth and differentiation. The D dopamine receptor has been cloned by low-stringency screening. We report here the cloning of human and rat D1 dopamine receptors by applying an approach based on the polymerase chain reaction. The cloned human D1 dopamine receptor has been characterized on the basis of four criteria: the deduced amino-acid sequence, which reveals that it is a G protein-coupled receptor; the tissue distribution of its messenger RNA, which is compatible with that of the D1 dopamine receptor; its pharmacological profile when transfected into COS-7 cells; and its ability to stimulate the accumulation of cyclic AMP in human 293 cells.
Phthalate dioxygenase reductase (PDR) is a prototypical iron-sulfur flavoprotein (36 kilodaltons) that utilizes flavin mononucleotide (FMN) to mediate electron transfer from the two-electron donor, reduced nicotinamide adenine nucleotide (NADH), to the one-electron acceptor, [2Fe-2S]. The crystal structure of oxidized PDR from Pseudomonas cepacia has been analyzed at 2.0 angstrom resolution resolution; reduced PDR and pyridine nucleotide complexes have been analyzed at 2.7 angstrom resolution. NADH, FMN, and the [2Fe-2S] cluster, bound to distinct domains, are brought together near a central cleft in the molecule, with only 4.9 angstroms separating the flavin 8-methyl and a cysteine sulfur ligated to iron. The domains that bind FMN and [2Fe-2S] are packed so that the flavin ring and the plane of the [2Fe-2S] core are approximately perpendicular. The [2Fe-2S] group is bound by four cysteines in a site resembling that in plant ferredoxins, but its redox potential (-174 millivolts at pH 7.0) is much higher than the potentials of plant ferredoxins. Structural and sequence similarities assign PDR to a distinct family of flavoprotein reductases, all related to ferredoxin NADP(+)-reductase.
Two small RNAs regulate the timing of Caenorhabditis elegans development. Transition from the first to the second larval stage fates requires the 22-nucleotide lin-4 RNA, and transition from late larval to adult cell fates requires the 21-nucleotide let-7 RNA. The lin-4 and let-7 RNA genes are not homologous to each other, but are each complementary to sequences in the 3' untranslated regions of a set of protein-coding target genes that are normally negatively regulated by the RNAs. Here we have detected let-7 RNAs of approximately 21 nucleotides in samples from a wide range of animal species, including vertebrate, ascidian, hemichordate, mollusc, annelid and arthropod, but not in RNAs from several cnidarian and poriferan species, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Escherichia coli or Arabidopsis. We did not detect lin-4 RNA in these species. We found that let-7 temporal regulation is also conserved: let-7 RNA expression is first detected at late larval stages in C. elegans and Drosophila, at 48 hours after fertilization in zebrafish, and in adult stages of annelids and molluscs. The let-7 regulatory RNA may control late temporal transitions during development across animal phylogeny.
The heterotrimeric AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) has a key role in regulating cellular energy metabolism; in response to a fall in intracellular ATP levels it activates energy-producing pathways and inhibits energy-consuming processes. AMPK has been implicated in a number of diseases related to energy metabolism including type 2 diabetes, obesity and, most recently, cancer. AMPK is converted from an inactive form to a catalytically competent form by phosphorylation of the activation loop within the kinase domain: AMP binding to the g-regulatory domain promotes phosphorylation by the upstream kinase, protects the enzyme against dephosphorylation, as well as causing allosteric activation. Here we show that ADP binding to just one of the two exchangeable AXP (AMP/ADP/ATP) binding sites on the regulatory domain protects the enzyme from dephosphorylation, although it does not lead to allosteric activation. Our studies show that active mammalian AMPK displays significantly tighter binding to ADP than to Mg-ATP, explaining how the enzyme is regulated under physiological conditions where the concentration of Mg-ATP is higher than that of ADP and much higher than that of AMP. We have determined the crystal structure of an active AMPK complex. The structure shows how the activation loop of the kinase domain is stabilized by the regulatory domain and how the kinase linker region interacts with the regulatory nucleotide-binding site that mediates protection against dephosphorylation. From our biochemical and structural data we develop a model for how the energy status of a cell regulates AMPK activity.
The effect of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) in protecting against atherosclerosis is usually attributed to its role in 'reverse cholesterol transport'. In this process, HDL particles mediate the efflux and the transport of cholesterol from peripheral cells to the liver for further metabolism and bile excretion. Thus, cell-surface receptors for HDL on hepatocytes are chief partners in the regulation of cholesterol homeostasis. A high-affinity HDL receptor for apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) was previously identified on the surface of hepatocytes. Here we show that this receptor is identical to the beta-chain of ATP synthase, a principal protein complex of the mitochondrial inner membrane. Different experimental approaches confirm this ectopic localization of components of the ATP synthase complex and the presence of ATP hydrolase activity at the hepatocyte cell surface. Receptor stimulation by apoA-I triggers the endocytosis of holo-HDL particles (protein plus lipid) by a mechanism that depends strictly on the generation of ADP. We confirm this effect on endocytosis in perfused rat liver ex vivo by using a specific inhibitor of ATP synthase. Thus, membrane-bound ATP synthase has a previously unsuspected role in modulating the concentrations of extracellular ADP and is regulated by a principal plasma apolipoprotein.
Synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) do not produce altered coding sequences, and therefore they are not expected to change the function of the protein in which they occur. We report that a synonymous SNP in the Multidrug Resistance 1 (MDR1) gene, part of a haplotype previously linked to altered function of the MDR1 gene product P-glycoprotein (P-gp), nonetheless results in P-gp with altered drug and inhibitor interactions. Similar mRNA and protein levels, but altered conformations, were found for wild-type and polymorphic P-gp. We hypothesize that the presence of a rare codon, marked by the synonymous polymorphism, affects the timing of cotranslational folding and insertion of P-gp into the membrane, thereby altering the structure of substrate and inhibitor interaction sites.
Rad23 is an evolutionarily conserved protein that is important for nucleotide excision repair. A regulatory role has been proposed for Rad23 because rad23 mutants are sensitive to ultraviolet light but are still capable of incising damaged DNA. Here we show that Rad23 interacts with the 26S proteasome through an amino-terminal ubiquitin-like domain (UbL[R23]). The carboxy terminus of Rad23 binds to the Rad4 DNA repair protein and creates a link between the DNA repair and proteasome pathways. The ultraviolet sensitivity caused by deletion of the UbL(R23) domain may therefore arise from its inability to interact with the proteasome. The fusion proteins glutathione S-transferase (GST)-Rad23 and Rad4-haemagglutinin (HA), and the proteasome subunits Cim3 and Cim5, cofractionate through consecutive chromatography steps. The ubiquitin-like domain of human Rad23 (UbL[HRB]) also interacts with the human proteasome. These results demonstrate that ubiquitin-like domains (UbLs) represent a new class of proteasome-interacting motifs.
Poly(adenosine 5'-diphosphoribose) synthetase (PARS) is a nuclear enzyme which, when activated by DNA strand breaks, adds up to 100 adenosine 5'-diphosphoribose (ADP-ribose) units to nuclear proteins such as histones and PARS itself. This activation can lead to cell death through depletion of beta-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (the source of ADP-ribose) and adenosine triphosphate. Nitric oxide (NO) stimulated ADP-ribosylation of PARS in rat brain. Benzamide and other derivatives, which inhibit PARS, blocked N-methyl-D-aspartate- and NO-mediated neurotoxicity with relative potencies paralleling their ability to inhibit PARS. Thus, NO appeared to elicit neurotoxicity by activating PARS.
The 26S proteasome is responsible for most intracellular proteolysis in eukaryotes. Efficient substrate recognition relies on conjugation of substrates with multiple ubiquitin molecules and recognition of the polyubiquitin moiety by the 19S regulatory complex--a multisubunit assembly that is bound to either end of the cylindrical 20S proteasome core. Only unfolded proteins can pass through narrow axial channels into the central proteolytic chamber of the 20S core, so the attached polyubiquitin chain must be released to allow full translocation of the substrate polypeptide. Whereas unfolding is rate-limiting for the degradation of some substrates and appears to involve chaperone-like activities associated with the proteasome, the importance and mechanism of degradation-associated deubiquitination has remained unclear. Here we report that the POH1 (also known as Rpn11 in yeast) subunit of the 19S complex is responsible for substrate deubiquitination during proteasomal degradation. The inability to remove ubiquitin can be rate-limiting for degradation in vitro and is lethal to yeast. Unlike all other known deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) that are cysteine proteases, POH1 appears to be a Zn(2+)-dependent protease.
Genetic polymorphism has been demonstrated in man for many characteristics including blood groups, serum proteins, tissue enzymes, and hemoglobins. A class of chromosomal polymorphism involving constitutive heterochromatin has now been found. Through the use of a special technique that permits visualization of heterochromatin, seven heterochromatin variants have been found among four individuals. These results suggest a very high frequency of variability of heterochromatin in the population.
Bile acids are essential for the solubilization and transport of dietary lipids and are the major products of cholesterol catabolism. Results presented here show that bile acids are physiological ligands for the farnesoid X receptor (FXR), an orphan nuclear receptor. When bound to bile acids, FXR repressed transcription of the gene encoding cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase, which is the rate-limiting enzyme in bile acid synthesis, and activated the gene encoding intestinal bile acid-binding protein, which is a candidate bile acid transporter. These results demonstrate a mechanism by which bile acids transcriptionally regulate their biosynthesis and enterohepatic transport.
The principal driving forces of protein folding are the burial of hydrophobic residues in the interior of proteins and the exposure of charged residues at the surface. Charged residues are only occasionally found in the interior, where they form hydrogen bonds to oppositely charged residues or main-chain atoms. Ribonucleotide reductase, a key enzyme in DNA synthesis, catalyses the de novo production of deoxyribonucleotide precursors. It is composed of two different dimeric proteins R1 and R2 (refs 3-5). R2 subunits contain buried iron-centres with each centre formed by two ferric ions coordinated by four carboxylates and two histidine ligands. Iron-free R2, apoR2, is a precursor of active R2 and folds into a stable protein which is transformed into active R2 by ferrous ions and molecular oxygen. Here we show that the iron-free protein does not undergo any major structural changes compared with the iron-containing R2. The effect of this is a clustering of four carboxyl side chains in the interior of the subunit, in contrast to the normal distribution of charged residues in proteins.
Superoxide dismutase concentrations in lysates of erythrocytes from black alcoholics were higher than those of white alcoholics and of nonalcoholics of both races. Higher concentrations of enzyme protein, as determined by competition radioimmunoassay, correspond to proportionately higher enzyme activity. Elevated superoxide dismutase levels were not related to any other clinical, historical, or demographic variables. Increased superoxide dismutase levels may delay or prevent some of the pathological sequelae of alcoholism and may be a useful biological marker for alcohol abuse.
Immunoglobulin-binding factors are known to regulate the synthesis of B-cell-derived immunoglobulin heavy-chain isotypes. Cloning and nucleotide sequence determination of complementary DNA encoding rodent IgE-binding factors (IgE-BF) revealed that messenger RNA encodes a glycoprotein of 557 amino acids which is expressed as a precursor of relative molecular mass (Mr) 60,000 (60K) in COS7 monkey cells. We report here that the 3' two-thirds of the IgE-BF coding sequence shows a surprising homology (72%) at the DNA level with coding sequences of the gag and pol (DNA endonuclease) genes of the Syrian hamster intracisternal A particle (IAP H18), an endogenous retrovirus. This marked homology demonstrates that the rodent gene encoding IgE-BF is a hybrid gene which evolved very recently by integrating genes of viral origin, and that the encoded polypeptide comprises three separate domains: an IgE-BF domain and retrovirus-derived gag and DNA endonuclease-like domains. This may represent the first report of a cellular gene containing a virus-derived coding sequence.
A theoretical framework is proposed for the analysis of adhesion between cells or of cells to surfaces when the adhesion is mediated by reversible bonds between specific molecules such as antigen and antibody, lectin and carbohydrate, or enzyme and substrate. From a knowledge of the reaction rates for reactants in solution and of their diffusion constants both in solution and on membranes, it is possible to estimate reaction rates for membrane-bound reactants. Two models are developed for predicting the rate of bond formation between cells and are compared with experiments. The force required to separate two cells is shown to be greater than the expected electrical forces between cells, and of the same order of magnitude as the forces required to pull gangliosides and perhaps some integral membrane proteins out of the cell membrane.
Progress through the cell cycle is governed by the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), the activation of which requires phosphorylation by the CDK-activating kinase (CAK). In vertebrates, CAK is a trimeric enzyme containing CDK7, cyclin H, and MAT1. CAK from the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae was identified as an unusual 44-kilodalton protein kinase, Cak1, that is only distantly related to CDKs. Cak1 accounted for most CAK activity in yeast cell lysates, and its activity was constant throughout the cell cycle. The CAK1 gene was essential for cell viability. Thus, the major CAK in S. cerevisiae is distinct from the vertebrate enzyme, suggesting that budding yeast and vertebrates may have evolved different mechanisms of CDK activation.
Several recent discoveries have pointed to nucleic acid secondary structure as an additional dimension in gene expression. Further evidence for the formation of hairpins in RNA is the fact that cruciforms exist in negatively supercoiled DNAs. As potential binding sites for proteins, these structures have been proposed to play a part in the regulation of various crucial reactions, such as replication, transcription, or RNA processing. As any random nucleotide sequence can self-anneal with an approximately 50% chance of forming some Watson-Crick-type base pairs, it is difficult to assess which, if any, of all possible hairpin-like secondary structures may be biologically relevant. We have computed the expected distribution of perfectly base-paired structures as a function of loop size and stem length and compared it with the distribution observed in the complete genome of eight DNA viruses from animals, plants and bacteria. We report here that hairpins having six or more consecutive base pairs in the stem are not distributed randomly long the genome, occur much more often than chance would predict, and are particularly over-represented in regions that appear to have regulatory significance. The average loop size was found to decrease with an increase in stem length. These results support our previous hypothesis that these structures are biologically relevant.
The N-end rule states that the half-life of a protein is determined by the nature of its amino-terminal residue. Eukaryotes and prokaryotes use N-terminal destabilizing residues as a signal to target proteins for degradation by the N-end rule pathway. In eukaryotes an E3 ligase, N-recognin, recognizes N-end rule substrates and mediates their ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. In Escherichia coli, N-end rule substrates are degraded by the AAA + chaperone ClpA in complex with the ClpP peptidase (ClpAP). Little is known of the molecular mechanism by which N-end rule substrates are initially selected for proteolysis. Here we report that the ClpAP-specific adaptor, ClpS, is essential for degradation of N-end rule substrates by ClpAP in bacteria. ClpS binds directly to N-terminal destabilizing residues through its substrate-binding site distal to the ClpS-ClpA interface, and targets these substrates to ClpAP for degradation. Degradation by the N-end rule pathway is more complex than anticipated and several other features are involved, including a net positive charge near the N terminus and an unstructured region between the N-terminal signal and the folded protein substrate. Through interaction with this signal, ClpS converts the ClpAP machine into a protease with exquisitely defined specificity, ideally suited to regulatory proteolysis.
The germ line is an immortal cell lineage that is passed indefinitely from one generation to the next. To identify the genes that are required for germline immortality, we isolated Caenorhabditis elegans mutants with mortal germ lines--worms that can reproduce for several healthy generations but eventually become sterile. One of these mortal germline (mrt) mutants, mrt-2, exhibits progressive telomere shortening and accumulates end-to-end chromosome fusions in later generations, indicating that the MRT-2 protein is required for telomere replication. In addition, the germ line of mrt-2 is hypersensitive to X-rays and to transposon activity. Therefore, mrt-2 has defects in responding both to damaged DNA and to normal double-strand breaks present at telomeres. mrt-2 encodes a homologue of a checkpoint gene that is required to sense DNA damage in yeast. These results indicate that telomeres may be identified as a type of DNA damage and then repaired by the telomere-replication enzyme telomerase.
In spite of the considerable progress made in recent years toward the understanding of the chemistry and biological function of the cobalt-containing B(12) group of compounds, much of the information still is more descriptive than definitive in nature. In general terms, it is known that the free vitamin forms can function as methyl group carriers and that the 5'-deoxyadenosyl or coenzyme forms serve as hydrogen carriers; but the mechanism of these processes is not understood in detail. More systematic studies of the pure chemistry of these complex molecules containing a carbon-cobalt covalent bond are needed before the biochemist can interpret many of his observations on the enzyme-catalyzed reactions. Even in relatively simple solutions it is difficult to ascertain the state of oxidation of several of the vitamin forms, and these problems are compounded when the reactive thiol compounds and complex proteins of the biological systems also are present. For example, both vitamin B(12r) (the Co(2+) form) and corresponding analogs are known to disproportionate in solution to B(12s) (Co(1+)) and B(12a) (Co(3+)) under a variety of mild conditions (12, 57). This means that in the biological systems it is exceedingly difficult to ascertain the chemical nature of many B(12) intermediates and reaction products. The role of the protein moiety of the various B(12)-linked enzymes in the catalytic processes is little known as is, also, the mode of binding of the B(12) derivative to the protein. These types of questions perhaps can be answered eventually by the crystallographers, whose art is becoming increasingly sophisticated. Note added after preparation of manuscript. In contrast to the values given in Table 4 for the molecular weights of the two dissimilar protein moieties of glycerol dehydrase, a recent report (57a), gives a value of 188,000 for the molecular weight of a stable, catalytically inactive complex of 1 mole of hydroxocobalamin and 1 mole of the apoenzyme complex of glycerol dehydrase. The latter is presumed to contain one equivalent of each of the two dissimilar protein subunits. The original estimate of 240,000 as the molecular weight of the unstable sulfhydryl protein moiety (39) was undoubtedly made on partially aggregated material.
An abundant chloroplast protein is implicated in the assembly of the oligomeric enzyme ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase, which catalyses photosynthetic CO2-fixation in higher plants. The product of the Escherichia coli groEL gene is essential for cell viability and is required for the assembly of bacteriophage capsids. Sequencing of the groEL gene and the complementary cDNA encoding the chloroplast protein has revealed that these proteins are evolutionary homologues which we term 'chaperonins'. Chaperonins comprise a class of molecular chaperones that are found in chloroplasts, mitochondria and prokaryotes. Assisted post-translational assembly of oligomeric protein structures is emerging as a general cellular phenomenon.
The arylhydrocarbon-receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a member of the basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS family of heterodimeric transcription factors which includes the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR), hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and the Drosophila single-minded protein (Sim). ARNT forms heterodimeric complexes with the arylhydrocarbon receptor, HIF-1alpha, Sim and the PAS protein Per. In response to environmental pollutants, AHR-ARNT heterodimers regulate genes involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics, whereas ARNT-HIF-1alpha heterodimers probably regulate those involved in the response to oxygen deprivation. By generating a targeted disruption of the Arnt locus in the mouse, we show here that Arnt-/- embryonic stem cells fail to activate genes that normally respond to low oxygen tension. Arnt-/- ES cells also failed to respond to a decrease in glucose concentration, indicating that ARNT is crucial in the response to hypoxia and to hypoglycaemia. Arnt-/- embryos were not viable past embryonic day 10.5 and showed defective angiogenesis of the yolk sac and branchial arches, stunted development and embryo wasting. The defect in blood vessel formation in Arnt-/- yolk sacs is similar to the angiogenic abnormalities reported for mice deficient in vascular endothelial growth factor or tissue factor. On the basis of these findings, we propose a model in which increasing tissue mass during organogenesis leads to the formation of hypoxic/nutrient-deprived cells, the subsequent activation of ARNT, and a concomitant increase in the expression of genes (including that encoding vascular endothelial growth factor) that promote vascularization of the developing yolk sac and solid tissues.
Repressive chromatin structures need to be unravelled to allow DNA-binding proteins access to their target sequences. This de-repression constitutes an important point at which transcription and presumably other nuclear processes can be regulated. Energy-consuming enzyme complexes that facilitate the interaction of transcription factors with chromatin by modifying nucleosome structure are involved in this regulation. One such factor, nucleosome-remodelling factor (NURF), has been isolated from Drosophila embryo extracts. We have now identified a chromatin-accessibility complex (CHRAC) which uses energy to increase the general accessibility of DNA in chromatin. However, unlike other known chromatin remodelling factors, CHRAC can also function during chromatin assembly: it uses ATP to convert irregular chromatin into a regular array of nucleosomes with even spacing. CHRAC combines enzymes that modulate nucleosome structure and DNA topology. Using mass spectrometry, we identified two of the five CHRAC subunits as the ATPase ISWI, which is also part of NURF, and topoisomerase II. The presence of ISWI in different contexts suggests that chromatin remodelling machines have a modular nature and that ISWI has a central role in different chromatin remodelling reactions.
The crystal structure of RNA polymerase II in the act of transcription was determined at 3.3 A resolution. Duplex DNA is seen entering the main cleft of the enzyme and unwinding before the active site. Nine base pairs of DNA-RNA hybrid extend from the active center at nearly right angles to the entering DNA, with the 3' end of the RNA in the nucleotide addition site. The 3' end is positioned above a pore, through which nucleotides may enter and through which RNA may be extruded during back-tracking. The 5'-most residue of the RNA is close to the point of entry to an exit groove. Changes in protein structure between the transcribing complex and free enzyme include closure of a clamp over the DNA and RNA and ordering of a series of "switches" at the base of the clamp to create a binding site complementary to the DNA-RNA hybrid. Protein-nucleic acid contacts help explain DNA and RNA strand separation, the specificity of RNA synthesis, "abortive cycling" during transcription initiation, and RNA and DNA translocation during transcription elongation.
Circumstantial evidence suggests that intracellular membrane trafficking pathways diversified independently in the plant kingdom, but documented examples are rare. ARF-GEFs (guanine-nucleotide exchange factors for ADP-ribosylation factor GTPases) are essential for vesicular trafficking in all eukaryotic kingdoms, but of the eight ARF-GEF families, only the ancestral BIG and GBF types are found in plants. Whereas fungal and animal GBF proteins perform conserved functions at the Golgi, the Arabidopsis thaliana GBF protein GNOM is thought to act in only the process of recycling from endosomes. We now show that the related Arabidopsis GBF protein GNOM-LIKE1 (GNL1) has an ancestral function at the Golgi but is also required for selective internalization from the plasma membrane in the presence of brefeldin A (BFA). We identified gnl1 mutants that accumulated biosynthetic and recycling endoplasmic reticulum markers in enlarged internal compartments. Notably, in the absence of functional GNL1, Golgi stacks were rendered sensitive to the selective ARF-GEF inhibitor BFA, which caused them to fuse with the endoplasmic reticulum. Furthermore, in BFA-treated gnl1 roots, the internalization of a polar plasma-membrane marker, the auxin efflux carrier PIN2, was selectively inhibited. Thus, GNL1 is a BFA-resistant GBF protein that functions with a BFA-sensitive ARF-GEF both at the Golgi and in selective endocytosis, but not in recycling from endosomes. We propose that the evolution of endocytic trafficking in plants was accompanied by neofunctionalization within the GBF family, whereas in other kingdoms it occurred independently by elaboration of additional ARF-GEF families.
Pancreatic lipase (triacylglycerol acyl hydrolase) fulfills a key function in dietary fat absorption by hydrolysing triglycerides into diglycerides and subsequently into monoglycerides and free fatty acids. We have determined the three-dimensional structure of the human enzyme, a single-chain glycoprotein of 449 amino acids, by X-ray crystallography and established its primary structure by sequencing complementary DNA clones. Enzymatic activity is lost after chemical modification of Ser 152 in the porcine enzyme, indicating that this residue is essential in catalysis, but other data are more consistent with a function in interfacial recognition. Our structural results are evidence that Ser 152 is the nucleophilic residue essential for catalysis. It is located in the larger N-terminal domain at the C-terminal edge of a doubly wound parallel beta-sheet and is part of an Asp-His-Ser triad, which is chemically analogous to, but structurally different from, that in the serine proteases. This putative hydrolytic site is covered by a surface loop and is therefore inaccessible to solvent. Interfacial activation, a characteristic property of lipolytic enzymes acting on water-insoluble substrates at water-lipid interfaces, probably involves a reorientation of this flap, not only in pancreatic lipases but also in the homologous hepatic and lipoprotein lipases.
An enzyme present in extracts from calf thymus degrades specifically the RNA moiety of DNA-RNA hybrids. Other nucleic acids, such as single- or double-stranded DNA and single- or double-stranded RNA, are not affected to a comparable degree. If prepared free of the hybrid-degrading enzyme, RNA polymerase from calf thymus shows a fivefold increase in activity on denatured DNA as compared to native DNA.
Only a small proportion of the vertebrate genome codes for proteins. It would therefore be useful if genes, and in particular the sites at which transcription begins, could be identified in libraries of cloned DNA. Since many known vertebrate genes have distinctive sequences (HTF-islands) surrounding their transcription start sites, we wished to be able to select these sequences easily and to find out how diagnostic they are for genes. HTF-islands contain a high density of non-methylated CpG (ref. 2) and can be detected in chromosomal DNA as clustered sites for certain rare-cutting (C-G) restriction enzymes. Identification of islands in chromosomal DNA is aided by methylation which blocks C-G enzyme sites in non-island DNA. This advantage is lost in cloned DNA, where CpG methylation is absent. We have calculated, however, that even in cloned DNA most sites for certain C-G enzymes should occur in HTF-islands. We tested this prediction using the enzyme SacII and found that four out of four sites in separate cosmids from the human X chromosome were located in HTF-islands. Hybridization to Northern blots provided preliminary evidence that three of the islands were associated with genes.
Light-modulated cytoplasmic cGMP simultaneously controls plasma membrane Na+ conductance in visual excitation and Ca2+ entry into rods by direct interaction with the cation channel. Cytoplasmic Ca2+ in turn may set operating points and contribute to the dynamics of several enzymes that regulate cGMP levels in the dark, recovery from excitation and receptor adaptation or down regulation. Similar channels may couple electrical activity to internal nucleotide metabolism in other tissues. We here report the identification, partial purification and behaviour after reconstitution of a protein of relative molecular mass 39,000 (Mr 39K) present in both disk and plasma membranes from bovine rod outer segments that mediates these cGMP-dependent cation fluxes. Its cGMP agonist specificity, kinetic cooperativity, ionic selectivity, membrane density and other features closely match the properties of the visual cGMP-dependent conductance inferred from electrophysiological measurements.
The mechanism of the sense of smell has long been a subject for theory and speculation. More recently, the notion of odorant recognition by stereospecific protein receptors has gained wide acceptance, but the receptor molecules remained elusive. The recognition molecules are believed to be quite diverse, which would partly explain the unusual difficulties encountered in their isolation by conventional ligand-binding techniques. An alternative approach would be to probe the receptors through transductory components that may be common to all receptor types. Here we report the identification of one such transductory molecular component. This is an odorant-sensitive adenylate cyclase, present in very large concentrations in isolated dendritic membranes of olfactory sensory neurones. Odorant activation of the enzyme is ligand and tissue specific, and occurs only in the presence of GTP, suggesting the involvement of receptor(s) coupled to a guanine nucleotide binding protein (G-protein). The olfactory G-protein is independently identified by labelling with bacterial toxins, and found to be similar to stimulatory G-proteins in other systems. Our results suggest a role for cyclic nucleotides in olfactory transduction, and point to a molecular analogy between olfaction and visual, hormone and neurotransmitter reception. Most importantly, the present findings reveal new ways to identify and isolate olfactory receptor proteins.
Eukaryotic cells contain genes termed proto-oncogenes (c-onc) which have the potential to transform cells in culture and induce tumours in vivo. Most of these genes have been identified by their occasional incorporation into retroviral genomes which can act as natural transducing vectors for these and perhaps other cellular genes. Cell-derived oncogenes of retroviruses (v-onc) are associated mostly with the induction of mesenchymal tumours whereas carcinoma induction is rare. One of these rare carcinoma-inducing viruses is the acutely transforming avian retrovirus MH2 (refs 3-5). Recently we and others have shown that this virus carries a novel putative oncogene, v- mil , in addition to the known oncogene v-myc. While the transforming ability of v- mil has not been directly established, we have recently discovered by hybridization analysis that v- mil is homologous to v-raf (ref. 9), the transforming gene of the murine retrovirus 3611 MSV (ref. 10). Both viruses express the mil /raf oncogene product as a gag-fusion polyprotein, while the myc oncogene of MH2 is expressed via a subgenomic mRNA. Here we report the complete nucleotide sequence of v- mil and compare it with that of v-raf. The 80% homology between the nucleotide sequences and the 94% homology between the predicted amino acid sequences of the two viral genes clearly indicate that these are the avian and murine forms of the same gene. Comparison of the two sequences with that of the human cellular homologue (T. I. Bonner et al., manuscript in preparation) indicates that v-raf has more 3' untranslated sequences while v- mil has additional sequences from two 5' exons of the cellular homologue. Although the mil /raf amino acid sequences reveal partial homology to that of the v-src product, no tyrosine-specific protein kinase activity is detected for the gag- mil and the gag-raf hybrid proteins.
During their intraerythrocytic development, malaria parasites export hundreds of proteins to remodel their host cell. Nutrient acquisition, cytoadherence and antigenic variation are among the key virulence functions effected by this erythrocyte takeover. Proteins destined for export are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and cleaved at a conserved (PEXEL) motif, which allows translocation into the host cell via an ATP-driven translocon called the PTEX complex. We report that plasmepsin V, an ER aspartic protease with distant homology to the mammalian processing enzyme BACE, recognizes the PEXEL motif and cleaves it at the correct site. This enzyme is essential for parasite viability and ER residence is essential for its function. We propose that plasmepsin V is the PEXEL protease and is an attractive enzyme for antimalarial drug development.
Haems are metalloporphyrins that serve as prosthetic groups for various biological processes including respiration, gas sensing, xenobiotic detoxification, cell differentiation, circadian clock control, metabolic reprogramming and microRNA processing. With a few exceptions, haem is synthesized by a multistep biosynthetic pathway comprising defined intermediates that are highly conserved throughout evolution. Despite our extensive knowledge of haem biosynthesis and degradation, the cellular pathways and molecules that mediate intracellular haem trafficking are unknown. The experimental setback in identifying haem trafficking pathways has been the inability to dissociate the highly regulated cellular synthesis and degradation of haem from intracellular trafficking events. Caenorhabditis elegans and related helminths are natural haem auxotrophs that acquire environmental haem for incorporation into haemoproteins, which have vertebrate orthologues. Here we show, by exploiting this auxotrophy to identify HRG-1 proteins in C. elegans, that these proteins are essential for haem homeostasis and normal development in worms and vertebrates. Depletion of hrg-1, or its paralogue hrg-4, in worms results in the disruption of organismal haem sensing and an abnormal response to haem analogues. HRG-1 and HRG-4 are previously unknown transmembrane proteins, which reside in distinct intracellular compartments. Transient knockdown of hrg-1 in zebrafish leads to hydrocephalus, yolk tube malformations and, most strikingly, profound defects in erythropoiesis-phenotypes that are fully rescued by worm HRG-1. Human and worm proteins localize together, and bind and transport haem, thus establishing an evolutionarily conserved function for HRG-1. These findings reveal conserved pathways for cellular haem trafficking in animals that define the model for eukaryotic haem transport. Thus, uncovering the mechanisms of haem transport in C. elegans may provide insights into human disorders of haem metabolism and reveal new drug targets for developing anthelminthics to combat worm infestations.
Many organisms can enter a dormant state or diapause to survive harsh environmental conditions for extended durations. When Caenorhabditis elegans larvae enter dauer they arrest feeding but remain active and motile, yet become stress-resistant, extremely long-lived and non-ageing. Entry into dauer is associated with a reduction in insulin-like signalling, the accumulation of nutritive resources and a concomitant global change in metabolism, yet the precise molecular and physiological processes that enable long-term survival in the absence of caloric intake remain largely unknown. We show here that C. elegans larvae that lack LKB1/AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) signalling enter dauer normally, but then rapidly consume their stored energy and prematurely expire following vital organ failure. We found that this signalling pathway acts in adipose-like tissues to downregulate triglyceride hydrolysis so that these lipid reserves are rationed to last the entire duration of the arrest. Indeed, the downregulation of adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL-1) activity suppresses both the rapid depletion of stored lipids and reduced life span of AMPK mutant dauers, while AMPK directly phosphorylates ATGL-1. Finally, we show that the slow release of energy during dauer is critical for appropriate long-term osmoregulation, which fails as triglyceride resources become depleted. These mechanisms may be essential for survival through diapause, hibernation, or long-term fasting in diverse organisms and may also underlie AMPK-dependent life span extension.
Calcium ions have a pivotal role in many neuronal activities, but little is known about their involvement in the cortical processing of visual information. Using immunohistochemical methods, we have now detected a calcium-binding protein, calbindin-D-28K, which may confer on certain compartments of cortical area 17 the ability to modulate Ca2+ metabolism. Thus, calbindin occurs in the primate striate cortex in a pattern almost complementary to that displaying strong cytochrome c-oxidase activity. From this and other observations, we deduce that the distribution of calbindin-immunoreactive sites corresponds mainly to extra-geniculocortical connections of the primary visual cortex. This implies that the geniculocortical and extra-geniculocortical compartments of area 17 differ in an intracellular system for Ca2+ homeostasis.
Leptin is a hormone secreted by adipocytes that plays a pivotal role in regulating food intake, energy expenditure and neuroendocrine function. Leptin stimulates the oxidation of fatty acids and the uptake of glucose, and prevents the accumulation of lipids in nonadipose tissues, which can lead to functional impairments known as "lipotoxicity". The signalling pathways that mediate the metabolic effects of leptin remain undefined. The 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) potently stimulates fatty-acid oxidation in muscle by inhibiting the activity of acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase (ACC). AMPK is a heterotrimeric enzyme that is conserved from yeast to humans and functions as a 'fuel gauge' to monitor the status of cellular energy. Here we show that leptin selectively stimulates phosphorylation and activation of the alpha2 catalytic subunit of AMPK (alpha2 AMPK) in skeletal muscle, thus establishing a previously unknown signalling pathway for leptin. Early activation of AMPK occurs by leptin acting directly on muscle, whereas later activation depends on leptin functioning through the hypothalamic-sympathetic nervous system axis. In parallel with its activation of AMPK, leptin suppresses the activity of ACC, thereby stimulating the oxidation of fatty acids in muscle. Blocking AMPK activation inhibits the phosphorylation of ACC stimulated by leptin. Our data identify AMPK as a principal mediator of the effects of leptin on fatty-acid metabolism in muscle.
A protein that binds spermine specifically was separated from normal rabbit serum by affinity chromatography. Immunoelectrophoresis, the Ouchterlony immunodiffusion test, and gradient gel electrophoresis indicated that this protein has immunoglobulin characteristics and consists of several populations of antibodies to spermine. These were sequentially released from Sepharose-spermine gel by step-wise elution with solutions ranging in pH from 4 to 1. The binding constants varied from 5.0 x 10(8) to 11.1 x 10(8) liters per mole. These globulins did not react with monoacetylputrescine, L-ornithine, L-lysine, and histamine. Negligible cross-reactivity was detected with spermidine, putrescine, N8-monoacetylspermidine, cadaverine, and diaminopropane. Since perturbations in polyamine metabolism have been identified in several diseases, the study of extracellular polyamine homeostasis may reveal an important regulatory function for this protein.
The dimensions of the small intestinal diffusion barrier interposed between luminal nutrients and their membrane receptors were determined from kinetic analysis of substrate hydrolysis by integral surface membrane enzymes. The calculated equivalent thickness of the unstirred water layer was too large to be compatible with the known dimensions of rat intestine. The discrepancy could be reconciled by consideration of the mucous coat overlying the intestinal surface membrane. Integral surface membrane proteins could not be labeled by an iodine-125 probe unless the surface coat was first removed. The mucoprotein surface coat appears to constitute an important diffusion barrier for nutrients seeking their digestive and transport sites on the outer intestinal membrane.
Xeroderma pigmentosum variant (XP-V) is an inherited disorder which is associated with increased incidence of sunlight-induced skin cancers. Unlike other xeroderma pigmentosum cells (belonging to groups XP-A to XP-G), XP-V cells carry out normal nucleotide-excision repair processes but are defective in their replication of ultraviolet-damaged DNA. It has been suspected for some time that the XPV gene encodes a protein that is involved in trans-lesion DNA synthesis, but the gene product has never been isolated. Using an improved cell-free assay for trans-lesion DNA synthesis, we have recently isolated a DNA polymerase from HeLa cells that continues replication on damaged DNA by bypassing ultraviolet-induced thymine dimers in XP-V cell extracts. Here we show that this polymerase is a human homologue of the yeast Rad30 protein, recently identified as DNA polymerase eta. This polymerase and yeast Rad30 are members of a family of damage-bypass replication proteins which comprises the Escherichia coli proteins UmuC and DinB and the yeast Rev1 protein. We found that all XP-V cells examined carry mutations in their DNA polymerase eta gene. Recombinant human DNA polymerase eta corrects the inability of XP-V cell extracts to carry out DNA replication by bypassing thymine dimers on damaged DNA. Together, these results indicate that DNA polymerase eta could be the XPV gene product.
Turnover of the rat liver tyrosine transaminase in vivo was measured by a label and chase procedure under conditions where the amount of enzyme undergoes no change. Half-life of the (14)C-labeled enzyme in this basal condition was found to be 1.5 +/- 0.3 hours. Inhibitors of protein synthesis (cycloheximide or puromycin) do not appreciably influence the basal enzyme level over a 5-hour period, although these drugs will block hormonal induction of this enzyme. In pulse-labeling experiments, cycloheximide blocked transaminase synthesis almost completely. The conclusion that enzyme degradation, as well as synthesis, must be blocked when protein synthesis is stopped was confirmed in experiments showing that labeled enzyme is stable in the liver of rats treated with cycloheximide The participation of a continuously synthesized polypeptide in the degradative phase of transaminase turnover is suggested.
Plasticity is a property of the nervous system that allows it to modify its response to an altered input. This capacity for change suggests that there are molecular mechanisms in neurons that can couple stimuli to long-term alterations in phenotype. Neuronal excitation elicits rapid transcriptional activation of several immediate-early genes, for example c-fos, c-jun and zif268. Many immediate-early genes encode transcription factors that control expression of downstream genes whose products are believed to bring about long-term plastic changes. Here we use a highly sensitive differential complementary DNA cloning procedure to identify genes that may participate in long-term plasticity. We cloned 52 cDNAs of genes induced by the glutamate analogue kainate in the hippocampus dentate gyrus. The number of these candidate plasticity-related genes (CPGs) is estimated to be 500-1,000. One of the cloned CPGs (16C8), encoding a protease inhibitor, is induced by a stimulus producing long-term potentiation and during dentate gyrus development; a second, cpg1, is dependent on activation of the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor for induction and encodes a new small, dentate-gyrus-specific protein. Seventeen of the cloned CPGs encode known proteins, including six suggesting that strong neuronal activation leads to de novo synthesis of vesicular and other synaptic components.
The high content of sialic acid in the glomerulus is associated with the cell membrane of epithelial cells lining the basement membrane. Whereas enzyme studies indicate that sialic acid is a determinant of the nephritogenic antigen, the physicochemical properties of this nephritogenic glycoprotein suggest that sialic acid may have an important role in the filtration mechanism.
The primary visual cortex (area 17) of the Old World monkey is divided into alternating right- and left-eye dominance columns that are highly modifiable by visual experience during a critical period in development but display little morphological or physiological plasticity during adult life. However, changes in immunocytochemical staining for a calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase occur in visual cortical neurones of adult monkeys after brief monocular deprivation and concentrations of putative neurotransmitters or their related enzymes can be altered with changes in neuronal activity in other systems. We therefore examined the effects of monocular deprivation on the immunocytochemical staining for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and its synthetic enzyme, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), in adult monkey area 17. The staining for GABA and GAD in neuronal somata and terminals was markedly reduced within ocular dominance columns associated with a removed or a visually deprived eye, suggesting that the GABA concentration in cortical neurones may depend on their levels of activity. Thus area 17 of adult monkeys may retain a greater degree of plasticity than previously recognized and sensory experience can profoundly affect transmitter levels, in the cortex, apparently by regulating levels of a synthetic enzyme.
APOBEC-2 (APO2) belongs to the family of apolipoprotein B messenger RNA-editing enzyme catalytic (APOBEC) polypeptides, which deaminates mRNA and single-stranded DNA. Different APOBEC members use the same deamination activity to achieve diverse human biological functions. Deamination by an APOBEC protein called activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is critical for generating high-affinity antibodies, and deamination by APOBEC-3 proteins can inhibit retrotransposons and the replication of retroviruses such as human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus. Here we report the crystal structure of APO2. APO2 forms a rod-shaped tetramer that differs markedly from the square-shaped tetramer of the free nucleotide cytidine deaminase, with which APOBEC proteins share considerable sequence homology. In APO2, two long alpha-helices of a monomer structure prevent the formation of a square-shaped tetramer and facilitate formation of the rod-shaped tetramer via head-to-head interactions of two APO2 dimers. Extensive sequence homology among APOBEC family members allows us to test APO2 structure-based predictions using AID. We show that AID deamination activity is impaired by mutations predicted to interfere with oligomerization and substrate access. The structure suggests how mutations in patients with hyper-IgM-2 syndrome inactivate AID, resulting in defective antibody maturation.
Guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins have been implicated in the transport of newly synthesized proteins along the secretory pathway of yeast and mammalian cells. Early vesicle fusion events that follow receptor-mediated endocytosis as measured by three in vitro assays were blocked by guanosine 5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) and aluminum fluoride. The effect was specific for guanosine nucleotides and depended on the presence of cytosolic factors. Thus, GTP-binding proteins may also have a role in the transport of molecules along the endocytic pathway.
Necrotic cell death underlies the pathology of numerous human neurodegenerative conditions. In the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, gain-of-function mutations in specific ion channel genes such as the degenerin genes deg-1 and mec-4, the acetylcholine receptor channel subunit gene deg-3 and the G(s) protein alpha-subunit gene gsa-1 evoke an analogous pattern of degenerative (necrotic-like) cell death in neurons that express the mutant proteins. An increase in concentrations of cytoplasmic calcium in dying cells, elicited either by extracellular calcium influx or by release of endoplasmic reticulum stores, is thought to comprise a major death-signalling event. But the biochemical mechanisms by which calcium triggers cellular demise remain largely unknown. Here we report that neuronal degeneration inflicted by various genetic lesions in C. elegans requires the activity of the calcium-regulated CLP-1 and TRA-3 calpain proteases and aspartyl proteases ASP-3 and ASP-4. Our findings show that two distinct classes of proteases are involved in necrotic cell death and suggest that perturbation of intracellular concentrations of calcium may initiate neuronal degeneration by deregulating proteolysis. Similar proteases may mediate necrotic cell death in humans.
Phototropins are light-activated kinases important for plant responses to blue light. Light initiates signaling in these proteins by generating a covalent protein-flavin mononucleotide (FMN) adduct within sensory Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains. We characterized the light-dependent changes of a phototropin PAS domain by solution nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and found that an alpha helix located outside the canonical domain plays a key role in this activation process. Although this helix associates with the PAS core in the dark, photoinduced changes in the domain structure disrupt this interaction. We propose that this mechanism couples light-dependent bond formation to kinase activation and identifies a signaling pathway conserved among PAS domains.
The cell-to-cell permeability of the junctions of various cultured mammalian cell types depends on the concentration of intracellular cyclic AMP [( cAMP]i). The permeability rises when the cells are supplied with exogenous cyclic AMP or when their cyclic AMP synthesis is stimulated with choleragen or hormones; it falls when [cAMP]i is lowered by application of serum or due to increase in cell density. The rise and fall in permeability take several hours to develop (the rise is protein synthesis-dependent) and they occur concurrently with the rise and fall in the number of intramembrane particles of the gap junctions, which probably embody the cell-to-cell channels. Is this permeability regulation mediated by phosphorylating protein kinase? In many eukaryotes, the cyclic AMP receptor is a protein kinase consisting of a pair of regulatory subunits and a pair of catalytic subunits. The latter dissociate from the holoenzyme as the cyclic AMP binds to the regulatory subunits and, in this dissociated form, catalyse the phosphorylation of the target. The regulatory subunit occurs in two isoenzyme forms, I and II. The catalytic subunit seems invariant; subunits from different isoenzymes can substitute for each other. We show here that a mutant cell lacking the isoenzyme I is deficient in permeable junctions, and that this junctional defect is corrected when the mutant is supplied with exogenous catalytic subunit.
The extreme obesity of the obese (ob/ob) mouse is attributable to mutations in the gene encoding leptin, an adipocyte-specific secreted protein which has profound effects on appetite and energy expenditure. We know of no equivalent evidence regarding leptin's role in the control of fat mass in humans. We have examined two severely obese children who are members of the same highly consanguineous pedigree. Their serum leptin levels were very low despite their markedly elevated fat mass and, in both, a homozygous frame-shift mutation involving the deletion of a single guanine nucleotide in codon 133 of the gene for leptin was found. The severe obesity found in these congenitally leptin-deficient subjects provides the first genetic evidence that leptin is an important regulator of energy balance in humans.
Sub-zero temperatures can be used to trap intermediates in enzyme-catalysed reactions using suitable cryosolvents. The feasibility of obtaining such intermediates in the crystalline state for X-ray diffraction studies has been demonstrated with several proteases, using specific substrates and optimal pH.
Protein-protein interactions between transcription activator proteins and RNA polymerase or basal transcription factors have been suggested to be important for transcription activation. Interactions between catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) and RNA polymerase have been proposed based on face-of-helix-dependent transcription activation by CAP and based on face-of-helix-dependent cooperative binding of CAP and RNA polymerase to promoter DNA. Mutants of CAP specifically defective in transcription activation have been isolated (mutants defective in transcription activation, but not defective in DNA binding and DNA bending). All such mutants contain amino-acid substitutions within a surface loop consisting of amino acids 152 to 166 of CAP. Here we use the thermodynamically rigorous technique of fluorescence polarization to show that CAP interacts with RNA polymerase in solution in the absence of promoter DNA (KD,app = 2.8 x 10(-7) M), whereas [Ala158]CAP, a mutant of CAP specifically defective in transcription activation, does not.
Odorant signal transduction occurs in the specialized cilia of the olfactory sensory neurons. Considerable biochemical evidence now indicates that this process could be mediated by a G protein-coupled cascade using cyclic AMP as an intracellular second messenger. A stimulatory G protein alpha subunit is expressed at high levels in olfactory neurons and is specifically enriched in the cilia, as is a novel form of adenylyl cyclase. This implies that the olfactory transduction cascade might involve unique molecular components. Electrophysiological studies have identified a cyclic nucleotide-activated ion channel in olfactory cilia. These observations provide evidence for a model in which odorants increase intracellular cAMP concentration, which in turn activates this channel and depolarizes the sensory neuron. An analogous cascade regulating a cGMP-gated channel mediates visual transduction in photoreceptor cells. The formal similarities between olfactory and visual transduction suggest that the two systems might use homologous channels. Here we report the molecular cloning, functional expression and characterization of a channel that is likely to mediate olfactory transduction.
Structural factors that influence functional properties are examined in the case of four heme enzymes: cytochrome P-450, chloroperoxidase, horseradish peroxidase, and secondary amine mono-oxygenase. The identity of the axial ligand, the nature of the heme environment, and the steric accessibility of the heme iron and heme edge combine to play major roles in determining the reactivity of each enzyme. The importance of synthetic porphyrin models in understanding the properties of the protein-free metal center is emphasized. The conclusions described herein have been derived from studies at the interface between biological and inorganic chemistry.
The human and mouse genomes share a number of long, perfectly conserved nucleotide sequences, termed ultraconserved elements. Whereas these regions can act as transcriptional enhancers when upstream of genes, those within genes are less well understood. In particular, the function of ultraconserved elements that overlap alternatively spliced exons of genes encoding RNA-binding proteins is unknown. Here we report that in every member of the human SR family of splicing regulators, highly or ultraconserved elements are alternatively spliced, either as alternative 'poison cassette exons' containing early in-frame stop codons, or as alternative introns in the 3' untranslated region. These alternative splicing events target the resulting messenger RNAs for degradation by means of an RNA surveillance pathway called nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Mouse orthologues of the human SR proteins exhibit the same unproductive splicing patterns. Three SR proteins have been previously shown to direct splicing of their own transcripts, and one of these is known to autoregulate its expression by coupling alternative splicing with decay; our results suggest that unproductive splicing is important for regulation of the entire SR family. We find that unproductive splicing associated with conserved regions has arisen independently in different SR genes, suggesting that splicing factors may readily acquire this form of regulation.
The Son of sevenless (Sos) gene functions in signaling pathways initiated by the sevenless and epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases. The Sos gene has now been isolated and sequenced. Its product is a 1595-amino acid protein similar to the CDC25 protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor that activates Ras. These results imply a role for the ras pathway in Drosophila neuronal development.
A complementary DNA encoding the D100 polypeptide of rat brain dynamin--a force-producing, microtubule-activated nucleotide triphosphatase--has been cloned and sequenced. The predicted amino acid sequence includes a guanine nucleotide-binding domain that is homologous with those of a family of antiviral factors, inducible by interferon and known as Mx proteins, and with the product of the essential yeast vacuolar protein sorting gene VPS1. These relationships imply the existence of a new family of GTPases with physiological roles that may include microtubule-based motility and protein sorting.
Proteins with expanded polyglutamine repeats cause Huntington's disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. Transcriptional dysregulation and loss of function of transcriptional co-activator proteins have been implicated in the pathogenesis of these diseases. Huntington's disease is caused by expansion of a repeated sequence of the amino acid glutamine in the abnormal protein huntingtin (Htt). Here we show that the polyglutamine-containing domain of Htt, Htt exon 1 protein (Httex1p), directly binds the acetyltransferase domains of two distinct proteins: CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF). In cell-free assays, Httex1p also inhibits the acetyltransferase activity of at least three enzymes: p300, P/CAF and CBP. Expression of Httex1p in cultured cells reduces the level of the acetylated histones H3 and H4, and this reduction can be reversed by administering inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC). In vivo, HDAC inhibitors arrest ongoing progressive neuronal degeneration induced by polyglutamine repeat expansion, and they reduce lethality in two Drosophila models of polyglutamine disease. These findings raise the possibility that therapy with HDAC inhibitors may slow or prevent the progressive neurodegeneration seen in Huntington's disease and other polyglutamine-repeat diseases, even after the onset of symptoms.
Foreign protein antigens must be broken down within endosomes or lysosomes to generate suitable peptides that will form complexes with class II major histocompatibility complex molecules for presentation to T cells. However, it is not known which proteases are required for antigen processing. To investigate this, we exposed a domain of the microbial tetanus toxin antigen (TTCF) to disrupted lysosomes that had been purified from a human B-cell line. Here we show that the dominant processing activity is not one of the known lysosomal cathepsins, which are generally believed to be the principal enzymes involved in antigen processing, but is instead an asparagine-specific cysteine endopeptidase. This enzyme seems similar or identical to a mammalian homologue of the legumain/haemoglobinase asparaginyl endopeptidases found originally in plants and parasites. We designed competitive peptide inhibitors of B-cell asparaginyl endopeptidase (AEP) that specifically block its proteolytic activity and inhibit processing of TTCF in vitro. In vivo, these inhibitors slow TTCF presentation to T cells, whereas preprocessing of TTCF with AEP accelerates its presentation, indicating that this enzyme performs a key step in TTCF processing. We also show that N-glycosylation of asparagine residues blocks AEP action in vitro. This indicates that N-glycosylation could eliminate sites of processing by AEP in mammalian proteins, allowing preferential processing of microbial antigens.
Ceramide engagement in apoptotic pathways has been a topic of controversy. To address this controversy, we tested loss-of-function (lf) mutants of conserved genes of sphingolipid metabolism in Caenorhabditis elegans. Although somatic (developmental) apoptosis was unaffected, ionizing radiation-induced apoptosis of germ cells was obliterated upon inactivation of ceramide synthase and restored upon microinjection of long-chain natural ceramide. Radiation-induced increase in the concentration of ceramide localized to mitochondria and was required for BH3-domain protein EGL-1-mediated displacement of CED-4 (an APAF-1-like protein) from the CED-9 (a Bcl-2 family member)/CED-4 complex, an obligate step in activation of the CED-3 caspase. These studies define CEP-1 (the worm homolog of the tumor suppressor p53)-mediated accumulation of EGL-1 and ceramide synthase-mediated generation of ceramide through parallel pathways that integrate at mitochondrial membranes to regulate stress-induced apoptosis.
Bacterial infection remains a serious threat to human lives because of emerging resistance to existing antibiotics. Although the scientific community has avidly pursued the discovery of new antibiotics that interact with new targets, these efforts have met with limited success since the early 1960s. Here we report the discovery of platensimycin, a previously unknown class of antibiotics produced by Streptomyces platensis. Platensimycin demonstrates strong, broad-spectrum Gram-positive antibacterial activity by selectively inhibiting cellular lipid biosynthesis. We show that this anti-bacterial effect is exerted through the selective targeting of beta-ketoacyl-(acyl-carrier-protein (ACP)) synthase I/II (FabF/B) in the synthetic pathway of fatty acids. Direct binding assays show that platensimycin interacts specifically with the acyl-enzyme intermediate of the target protein, and X-ray crystallographic studies reveal that a specific conformational change that occurs on acylation must take place before the inhibitor can bind. Treatment with platensimycin eradicates Staphylococcus aureus infection in mice. Because of its unique mode of action, platensimycin shows no cross-resistance to other key antibiotic-resistant strains tested, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus, vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus and vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Platensimycin is the most potent inhibitor reported for the FabF/B condensing enzymes, and is the only inhibitor of these targets that shows broad-spectrum activity, in vivo efficacy and no observed toxicity.
The fungal metabolite brefeldin A is a powerful tool for investigating membrane traffic in eukaryotic cells. The effects of brefeldin A on traffic are partly explained by its ability to prevent binding of cytosolic coat proteins onto membranes. The non-clathrin coatomer complex binds reversibly to Golgi membranes in a GTP-controlled cycle. The low-molecular-mass GTP-binding protein ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF), which also associates reversibly with Golgi membranes, is required for coatomer binding and probably accounts for the control by guanine nucleotide of the coatomer-membrane interaction. Brefeldin A prevents the assembly of coatomer onto the membrane by inhibiting the GTP-dependent interaction of ARF with the Golgi membrane, but the nature of this interaction has not been established. Here we demonstrate that Golgi membranes can specifically catalyse the exchange of GTP onto ARF and that brefeldin A prevents this function.
Methylation on the base or the ribose is prevalent in eukaryotic ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and is thought to be crucial for ribosome biogenesis and function. Artificially introduced 2'-O-methyl groups in small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) can stabilize siRNAs in serum without affecting their activities in RNA interference in mammalian cells. Here, we show that plant microRNAs (miRNAs) have a naturally occurring methyl group on the ribose of the last nucleotide. Whereas methylation of rRNAs depends on guide RNAs, the methyltransferase protein HEN1 is sufficient to methylate miRNA/miRNA* duplexes. Our studies uncover a new and crucial step in plant miRNA biogenesis and have profound implications in the function of miRNAs.
Ribonuclease (RNase) P is the universal ribozyme responsible for 5'-end tRNA processing. We report the crystal structure of the Thermotoga maritima RNase P holoenzyme in complex with tRNA(Phe). The 154 kDa complex consists of a large catalytic RNA (P RNA), a small protein cofactor and a mature tRNA. The structure shows that RNA-RNA recognition occurs through shape complementarity, specific intermolecular contacts and base-pairing interactions. Soaks with a pre-tRNA 5' leader sequence with and without metal help to identify the 5' substrate path and potential catalytic metal ions. The protein binds on top of a universally conserved structural module in P RNA and interacts with the leader, but not with the mature tRNA. The active site is composed of phosphate backbone moieties, a universally conserved uridine nucleobase, and at least two catalytically important metal ions. The active site structure and conserved RNase P-tRNA contacts suggest a universal mechanism of catalysis by RNase P.
Each neuron in the mammalian brain carries many postsynaptic membrane specializations containing high densities of receptors that mediate signal transduction upon neurotransmitter release from the apposed nerve terminal. Little is known about the mechanisms by which receptors are transported to and anchored at postsynaptic sites, but extracellular as well as intracellular components may be involved. Ultrastructural studies have shown that the peripheral membrane protein gephyrin, which co-purifies with the postsynaptic inhibitory glycine receptor (GlyR) upon affinity chromatography, is situated on the cytoplasmic face of glycinergic postsynaptic membranes. Moreover, gephyrin binds with high affinity to polymerized tubulin and has been postulated to link the GlyR to the subsynaptic cytoskeleton. Here we report that treatment of rat spinal neurons in culture with gephyrin antisense oligonucleotides prevents the formation of GlyR clusters in the dendritic plasma membrane. Thus, gephyrin is essential for localizing the GlyR to presumptive postsynaptic plasma membrane specializations.
Cytochrome P450 proteins (CYP450s) are membrane-associated haem proteins that metabolize physiologically important compounds in many species of microorganisms, plants and animals. Mammalian CYP450s recognize and metabolize diverse xenobiotics such as drug molecules, environmental compounds and pollutants. Human CYP450 proteins CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 are the major drug-metabolizing isoforms, and contribute to the oxidative metabolism of more than 90% of the drugs in current clinical use. Polymorphic variants have also been reported for some CYP450 isoforms, which has implications for the efficacy of drugs in individuals, and for the co-administration of drugs. The molecular basis of drug recognition by human CYP450s, however, has remained elusive. Here we describe the crystal structure of a human CYP450, CYP2C9, both unliganded and in complex with the anti-coagulant drug warfarin. The structure defines unanticipated interactions between CYP2C9 and warfarin, and reveals a new binding pocket. The binding mode of warfarin suggests that CYP2C9 may undergo an allosteric mechanism during its function. The newly discovered binding pocket also suggests that CYP2C9 may simultaneously accommodate multiple ligands during its biological function, and provides a possible molecular basis for understanding complex drug-drug interactions.
The immunosuppressive agents cyclosporin A and FK506 inhibit the transcription of early T cell activation genes. The binding proteins for cyclosporin A and FK506, cyclophilin and FKBP, respectively, are peptidyl-prolyl-cis-trans isomerases, or rotamases. One proposed mechanism for rotamase catalysis by cyclophilin involves a tetrahedral adduct of an amide carbonyl and an enzyme-bound nucleophile. The potent FKBP rotamase inhibitor FK506 has a highly electrophilic carbonyl that is adjacent to an acyl-pipicolinyl (homoprolyl) amide bond. Such a functional group would be expected to form a stabilized, enzyme-bound tetrahedral adduct. Spectroscopic and chemical evidence reveals that the drug interacts noncovalently with its receptor, suggesting that the alpha-keto amid of FK506 serves as a surrogate for the twisted amide of a bound peptide substrate.
The controversial question of how thiamine diphosphate, the biologically active form of vitamin B1, is activated in different enzymes has been addressed. Activation of the coenzyme was studied by measuring thermodynamics and kinetics of deprotonation at the carbon in the 2-position (C2) of thiamine diphosphate in the enzymes pyruvate decarboxylase and transketolase by use of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, proton/deuterium exchange, coenzyme analogs, and site-specific mutant enzymes. Interaction of a glutamate with the nitrogen in the 1'-position in the pyrimidine ring activated the 4'-amino group to act as an efficient proton acceptor for the C2 proton. The protein component accelerated the deprotonation of the C2 atom by several orders of magnitude, beyond the rate of the overall enzyme reaction. Therefore, the earlier proposed concerted mechanism or stabilization of a C2 carbanion can be excluded.
At least three different enzymes involved in the regulation of protein synthesis are induced in a variety of cells by interferon (IFN). Sensitive assays for these enzymes have been developed and used to establish the specificity, dose dependence and time course of their induction by IFN. One of these enzymes, the oligo-isoadenylate synthetase E, whose product (2'-5')pppApApA activates the latent ribonuclease F, is increased over 50-fold after IFN treatment. We describe here the assay for an mRNA from IFN-treated mouse L cells, that produces oligo-isoadenylate synthetase activity when injected into Xenopus oocytes. This mRNA is found in the cells only after exposure to IFN. The mRNA increases in mouse L cells with the same time course as the enzyme activity itself. In particular, there is a 3-h lag period between IFN addition and the onset of enzyme and mRNA accumulation. Using anti-IFN antibodies, we show that during this lag period the continued interaction of IFN with the cells is necessary for the full induction of the oligo-isoadenylate synthetase.
Bacteria make extensive use of riboswitches to sense metabolites and control gene expression, and typically do so by modulating premature transcription termination or translation initiation. The most widespread riboswitch class known in bacteria responds to the coenzyme thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), which is a derivative of vitamin B1. Representatives of this class have also been identified in fungi and plants, where they are predicted to control messenger RNA splicing or processing. We examined three TPP riboswitches in the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa, and found that one activates and two repress gene expression by controlling mRNA splicing. A detailed mechanism involving riboswitch-mediated base-pairing changes and alternative splicing control was elucidated for precursor NMT1 mRNAs, which code for a protein involved in TPP metabolism. These results demonstrate that eukaryotic cells employ metabolite-binding RNAs to regulate RNA splicing events that are important for the control of key biochemical processes.
Interactions between bacterial hosts and their viruses (phages) lead to reciprocal genome evolution through a dynamic co-evolutionary process. Phage-mediated transfer of host genes--often located in genome islands--has had a major impact on microbial evolution. Furthermore, phage genomes have clearly been shaped by the acquisition of genes from their hosts. Here we investigate whole-genome expression of a host and phage, the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus MED4 and the T7-like cyanophage P-SSP7, during lytic infection, to gain insight into these co-evolutionary processes. Although most of the phage genome was linearly transcribed over the course of infection, four phage-encoded bacterial metabolism genes formed part of the same expression cluster, even though they are physically separated on the genome. These genes--encoding photosystem II D1 (psbA), high-light inducible protein (hli), transaldolase (talC) and ribonucleotide reductase (nrd)--are transcribed together with phage DNA replication genes and seem to make up a functional unit involved in energy and deoxynucleotide production for phage replication in resource-poor oceans. Also unique to this system was the upregulation of numerous genes in the host during infection. These may be host stress response genes and/or genes induced by the phage. Many of these host genes are located in genome islands and have homologues in cyanophage genomes. We hypothesize that phage have evolved to use upregulated host genes, leading to their stable incorporation into phage genomes and their subsequent transfer back to hosts in genome islands. Thus activation of host genes during infection may be directing the co-evolution of gene content in both host and phage genomes.
Topoisomerases relieve the torsional strain in DNA that is built up during replication and transcription. They are vital for cell proliferation and are a target for poisoning by anti-cancer drugs. Type IB topoisomerase (TopIB) forms a protein clamp around the DNA duplex and creates a transient nick that permits removal of supercoils. Using real-time single-molecule observation, we show that TopIB releases supercoils by a swivel mechanism that involves friction between the rotating DNA and the enzyme cavity: that is, the DNA does not freely rotate. Unlike a nicking enzyme, TopIB does not release all the supercoils at once, but it typically does so in multiple steps. The number of supercoils removed per step follows an exponential distribution. The enzyme is found to be torque-sensitive, as the mean number of supercoils per step increases with the torque stored in the DNA. We propose a model for topoisomerization in which the torque drives the DNA rotation over a rugged periodic energy landscape in which the topoisomerase has a small but quantifiable probability to religate the DNA once per turn.
Heparan sulphate proteoglycans reside on the plasma membrane of all animal cells studied so far and are a major component of extracellular matrices. Studies of model organisms and human diseases have demonstrated their importance in development and normal physiology. A recurrent theme is the electrostatic interaction of the heparan sulphate chains with protein ligands, which affects metabolism, transport, information transfer, support and regulation in all organ systems. The importance of these interactions is exemplified by phenotypic studies of mice and humans bearing mutations in the core proteins or the biosynthetic enzymes responsible for assembling the heparan sulphate chains.
During the evolution of proteins the pressure to optimize biological activity is moderated by a need for efficient folding. For most proteins, this is accomplished through spontaneous folding to a thermodynamically stable and active native state. However, in the extracellular bacterial alpha-lytic protease (alphaLP) these two processes have become decoupled. The native state of alphaLP is thermodynamically unstable, and when denatured, requires millennia (t1/2 approximately 1,800 years) to refold. Folding is made possible by an attached folding catalyst, the pro-region, which is degraded on completion of folding, leaving alphaLP trapped in its native state by a large kinetic unfolding barrier (t1/2 approximately 1.2 years). alphaLP faces two very different folding landscapes: one in the presence of the pro-region controlling folding, and one in its absence restricting unfolding. Here we demonstrate that this separation of folding and unfolding pathways has removed constraints placed on the folding of thermodynamically stable proteins, and allowed the evolution of a native state having markedly reduced dynamic fluctuations. This, in turn, has led to a significant extension of the functional lifetime of alphaLP by the optimal suppression of proteolytic sensitivity.
Picorna-like viruses are a loosely defined group of positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses that are major pathogens of animals, plants and insects. They include viruses that are of enormous economic and public-health concern and are responsible for animal diseases (such as poliomyelitis), plant diseases (such as sharka) and insect diseases (such as sacbrood). Viruses from the six divergent families (the Picornaviridae, Caliciviridae, Comoviridae, Sequiviridae, Dicistroviridae and Potyviridae) that comprise the picorna-like virus superfamily have the following features in common: a genome with a protein attached to the 5' end and no overlapping open reading frames, all the RNAs are translated into a polyprotein before processing, and a conserved RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) protein. Analyses of RdRp sequences from these viruses produce phylogenies that are congruent with established picorna-like virus family assignments; hence, this gene is an excellent molecular marker for examining the diversity of picorna-like viruses in nature. Here we report, on the basis of analysis of RdRp sequences amplified from marine virus communities, that a diverse array of picorna-like viruses exists in the ocean. All of the sequences amplified were divergent from known picorna-like viruses, and fell within four monophyletic groups that probably belong to at least two new families. Moreover, we show that an isolate belonging to one of these groups is a lytic pathogen of Heterosigma akashiwo, a toxic-bloom-forming alga responsible for severe economic losses to the finfish aquaculture industry, suggesting that picorna-like viruses are important pathogens of marine phytoplankton.
When the dynamic properties of many different proteins are plotted as a function of temperature, biphasic behaviour is observed, with a broad transition centred around 220 K. Atomic mean-square displacements from X-ray crystallography and Mossbauer scattering show this behaviour, as do electron transfer rates and dynamic information from inelastic neutron scattering. Molecular dynamics simulations over a range of temperatures also exhibit a transition at about 220 K: high-temperature atomic fluctuations are dominated by anharmonic collective motions of bonded and nonbonded groups of atoms, but below 220 K the predominant dynamic behaviour is harmonic vibration of individual atoms. Here we show by high-resolution X-ray diffraction that crystalline ribonuclease A does not bind substrate or inhibitor at 212 K but will bind either rapidly at 228 K. Once bound at the higher temperature, inhibitor cannot be washed off after the enzyme is cooled to below the transition temperature. These results suggest that enzyme flexibility is required for catalytic function.
The nucleotide sequence of a complete genomic clone for the histidine-rich protein of Plasmodium lophurae has been determined. The deduced amino acid sequence of the mature protein shows numerous tandemly repeated units preceded by a signal and a pro peptide. The gene is interrupted by an intron with a separate exon coding for the signal peptide. The signal peptide-encoding exon detects multiple cross-hybridizing sequences in the parasite genome.
Cohesion between sister chromatids is established during DNA replication and depends on a protein complex called cohesin. At the metaphase-anaphase transition in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the ESP1-encoded protease separin cleaves SCC1, a subunit of cohesin with a relative molecular mass of 63,000 (Mr 63K). The resulting 33K carboxy-terminal fragment of SCC1 bears an amino-terminal arginine-a destabilizing residue in the N-end rule. Here we show that the SCC1 fragment is short-lived (t1/2 approximately 2 min), being degraded by the ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent N-end rule pathway. Overexpression of a long-lived derivative of the SCC1 fragment is lethal. In ubr1Delta cells, which lack the N-end rule pathway, we found a highly increased frequency of chromosome loss. The bulk of increased chromosome loss in ubr1Delta cells is caused by metabolic stabilization of the ESP1-produced SCC1 fragment. This fragment is the first physiological substrate of the N-end rule pathway that is targeted through its N-terminal residue. A number of yeast proteins bear putative cleavage sites for the ESP1 separin, suggesting other physiological substrates and functions of the N-end rule pathway.
Ubiquitination controls a broad range of cellular functions. The last step of the ubiquitination pathway is regulated by enzyme type 3 (E3) ubiquitin ligases. E3 enzymes are responsible for substrate specificity and catalyze the formation of an isopeptide bond between a lysine residue of the substrate (or the N terminus of the substrate) and ubiquitin. MIR1 and MIR2 are two E3 ubiquitin ligases encoded by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus that mediate the ubiquitination of major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) molecules and subsequent internalization. Here, we found that MIR1, but not MIR2, promoted down-regulation of MHC I molecules lacking lysine residues in their intracytoplasmic domain. In the presence of MIR1, these MHC I molecules were ubiquitinated, and their association with ubiquitin was sensitive to beta2-mercaptoethanol, unlike lysine-ubiquitin bonds. This form of ubiquitination required a cysteine residue in the intracytoplasmic tail of MHC I molecules. An MHC I molecule containing a single cysteine residue in an artificial glycine and alanine intracytoplasmic domain was endocytosed and degraded in the presence of MIR1. Thus, ubiquitination can occur on proteins lacking accessible lysines or an accessible N terminus.
In virtually all eukaryotes, mitosis starts after the completion of DNA synthesis. This orderly process is ensured by the checkpoint mechanism that blocks the onset of mitosis while DNA is being synthesized or is damaged. In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, this mechanism involves some rad+ and hus+ genes. However, it is not known how the checkpoint system monitors these events. Recently a multicopy suppressor of a temperature-sensitive DNA polymerase-alpha mutant was isolated. This gene, named cds1+ (checking DNA synthesis), encodes a typical protein kinase. Here we report that this protein kinase is a key component of the DNA replication-monitoring S/G2 checkpoint system. Our data suggest that its primary role is to monitor DNA synthesis by interacting with DNA polymerase alpha and send a signal to block the onset of mitosis while DNA synthesis is in progress.
The cryptochrome/photolyase (CRY/PL) family of photoreceptors mediates adaptive responses to ultraviolet and blue light exposure in all kingdoms of life. Whereas PLs function predominantly in DNA repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and 6-4 photolesions caused by ultraviolet radiation, CRYs transduce signals important for growth, development, magnetosensitivity and circadian clocks. Despite these diverse functions, PLs/CRYs preserve a common structural fold, a dependence on flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and an internal photoactivation mechanism. However, members of the CRY/PL family differ in the substrates recognized (protein or DNA), photochemical reactions catalysed and involvement of an antenna cofactor. It is largely unknown how the animal CRYs that regulate circadian rhythms act on their substrates. CRYs contain a variable carboxy-terminal tail that appends the conserved PL homology domain (PHD) and is important for function. Here, we report a 2.3-A resolution crystal structure of Drosophila CRY with an intact C terminus. The C-terminal helix docks in the analogous groove that binds DNA substrates in PLs. Conserved Trp 536 juts into the CRY catalytic centre to mimic PL recognition of DNA photolesions. The FAD anionic semiquinone found in the crystals assumes a conformation to facilitate restructuring of the tail helix. These results help reconcile the diverse functions of the CRY/PL family by demonstrating how conserved protein architecture and photochemistry can be elaborated into a range of light-driven functions.
7SL RNA is an abundant cytoplasmic RNA which functions in protein secretion as a component of the signal recognition particle. Alu sequences are the most abundant family of human and rodent middle repetitive DNA sequences (reviewed in ref. 2). The primary structure of human 7SL RNA consists of an Alu sequence interrupted by a 155-base pair (bp) sequence that is unique to 7SL RNA. In order to obtain information about the evolution of the Alu domain of 7SL RNA, we have determined the nucleotide sequence of a cDNA copy of Xenopus laevis 7SL RNA and of the 7SL RNA gene of Drosophila melanogaster. We find that the Xenopus sequence is 87% homologous with its human counterpart and the Drosophila 7SL RNA is 64% homologous to both the human and amphibian molecules. Despite the evolutionary distance between the species, significant blocks of homology to both the Alu and 7SL-specific portions of mammalian 7SL RNA can be found in the insect sequence. These results clearly demonstrate that the Alu sequence in 7SL RNA appeared in evolution before the mammalian radiation. We suggest that mammalian Alu sequences were derived from 7SL RNA (or DNA) by a deletion of the central 7SL-specific sequence, and are therefore processed 7SL RNA genes.
Cryptosporidium species cause acute gastroenteritis and diarrhoea worldwide. They are members of the Apicomplexa--protozoan pathogens that invade host cells by using a specialized apical complex and are usually transmitted by an invertebrate vector or intermediate host. In contrast to other Apicomplexans, Cryptosporidium is transmitted by ingestion of oocysts and completes its life cycle in a single host. No therapy is available, and control focuses on eliminating oocysts in water supplies. Two species, C. hominis and C. parvum, which differ in host range, genotype and pathogenicity, are most relevant to humans. C. hominis is restricted to humans, whereas C. parvum also infects other mammals. Here we describe the eight-chromosome approximately 9.2-million-base genome of C. hominis. The complement of C. hominis protein-coding genes shows a striking concordance with the requirements imposed by the environmental niches the parasite inhabits. Energy metabolism is largely from glycolysis. Both aerobic and anaerobic metabolisms are available, the former requiring an alternative electron transport system in a simplified mitochondrion. Biosynthesis capabilities are limited, explaining an extensive array of transporters. Evidence of an apicoplast is absent, but genes associated with apical complex organelles are present. C. hominis and C. parvum exhibit very similar gene complements, and phenotypic differences between these parasites must be due to subtle sequence divergence.
Antibiotic-producing polyketide synthases (PKSs) are enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis in Streptomyces and related filamentous bacteria of a remarkably broad range of bioactive metabolites, including antitumour aromatic compounds such as mithramycin and macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin. The molecular basis for the selection of the starter unit on aromatic PKSs is unknown. Here we show that a component of aromatic PKS, previously named 'chain-length factor', is a factor required for polyketide chain initiation and that this factor has decarboxylase activity towards malonyl-ACP (acyl carrier protein). We have re-examined the mechanism of initiation on modular PKSs and have identified as a specific initiation factor a domain of previously unknown function named KSQ, which operates like chain-length factor. Both KSQ and chain-length factor are similar to the ketosynthase domains that catalyse polyketide chain extension in modular multifunctional PKSs and in aromatic PKSs, respectively, except that the ketosynthase domain active-site cysteine residue is replaced by a highly conserved glutamine in KSQ and in chain-length factor. The glutamine residue is important both for decarboxylase activity and for polyketide synthesis.
The p21 products of ras proto-oncogenes are thought to be important components in pathways regulating normal cell proliferation and differentiation. These proteins acquire transforming properties as a result of activating lesions that convert ras genes to oncogenes in a wide array of malignancies. In Xenopus laevis oocytes, microinjection of transforming ras p21 is a potent inducer of maturation, whereas microinjection of a monoclonal antibody to ras p21 inhibits normal maturation induced by hormones. The phosphoinositide pathway is a ubiquitous system that appears to play a key role in diverse cellular functions. By use of the Xenopus oocyte system, it was possible to quantitate the effects of ras p21 microinjection on individual components of the phosphoinositide pathway. Within 20 minutes of microinjection, levels of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, inositol 1-phosphate, and inositol bisphosphate increased 1.5- to 2-fold. The most striking effects were on diacylglycerol, which increased 5-fold under the same conditions. In contrast, the normal ras p21 protein induced no detectable alteration in any of the metabolites analyzed. The earliest effects of the transforming p21 on phosphoinositol turnover were observable within 2 minutes, implying a very rapid effect of ras p21 on the enzymes involved in phospholipid metabolism.
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) with protein covalently attached to 5' strand termini are formed by Spo11 to initiate meiotic recombination. The Spo11 protein must be removed for the DSB to be repaired, but the mechanism for removal is unclear. Here we show that meiotic DSBs in budding yeast are processed by endonucleolytic cleavage that releases Spo11 attached to an oligonucleotide with a free 3'-OH. Two discrete Spo11-oligonucleotide complexes were found in equal amounts, differing with respect to the length of the bound DNA. We propose that these forms arise from different spacings of strand cleavages flanking the DSB, with every DSB processed asymmetrically. Thus, the ends of a single DSB may be biochemically distinct at or before the initial processing step-much earlier than previously thought. SPO11-oligonucleotide complexes were identified in extracts of mouse testis, indicating that this mechanism is evolutionarily conserved. Oligonucleotide-topoisomerase II complexes were also present in extracts of vegetative yeast, although not subject to the same genetic control as for generating Spo11-oligonucleotide complexes. Our findings suggest a general mechanism for repair of protein-linked DSBs.
Recently, it has been demonstrated that a single point mutation is responsible for the acquisition of transforming properties by the EJ and T24 human bladder carcinoma gene. The point mutation consists of the conversion of guanine into thymine, which results in the replacement of a glycine by a valine at position 12 of the p21 protein encoded by the EJ and T24 genes. Sequence data of retroviral analogues of the p21 protein also indicate the importance for a glycine residue at position 12 in normal p21. Comparison of the sequence of the 37 N-terminal residues of the normal human p21 protein with the sequence of the dinucleotide-binding beta alpha beta unit in a group of structurally related enzymes, suggests that these residues of p21 fold into a very similar unit which is also involved in binding a nucleotide. We present here a three-dimensional model of the p21 beta alpha beta unit which explains directly why glycine at position 12 cannot be replaced by another residue without altering the nucleotide-binding properties of p21.
The self-cleaving ribozyme of the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is the only catalytic RNA known to be required for the viability of a human pathogen. We obtained crystals of a 72-nucleotide, self-cleaved form of the genomic HDV ribozyme that diffract X-rays to 2.3 A resolution by engineering the RNA to bind a small, basic protein without affecting ribozyme activity. The co-crystal structure shows that the compact catalytic core comprises five helical segments connected as an intricate nested double pseudoknot. The 5'-hydroxyl leaving group resulting from the self-scission reaction is buried deep within an active-site cleft produced by juxtaposition of the helices and five strand-crossovers, and is surrounded by biochemically important backbone and base functional groups in a manner reminiscent of protein enzymes.
Gene activation by a DNA-binding regulatory protein in yeast requires the protein to have two components: one to recognize a specific DNA sequence and a second, the 'activating region', to interact with a general transcription factor or perhaps with RNA polymerase. The activating regions that have been characterized are acidic, and mutational analysis of one indicates that this acidity is important for activity. Here we report the design of an artificial protein bearing a novel 15-amino acid peptide linked to a DNA binding fragment of the yeast regulatory protein GAL4). The synthetic peptide is acidic and should it form an alpha-helix, that helix would be amphipathic, having one hydrophilic face bearing the acidic residues, and one hydrophobic face. When expressed in yeast, the artificial protein bearing this peptide efficiently activates the GAL1 gene which is ordinarily activated by GAL4. An otherwise identical protein with the novel 15 amino acids in a scrambled order, and which is thus unable to form an amphipathic structure, does not activate GAL1 transcription.
DNA polymerases copy DNA templates with remarkably high fidelity, checking for correct base-pair formation both at nucleotide insertion and at subsequent DNA extension steps. Despite extensive biochemical, genetic and structural studies, the mechanism by which nucleotides are correctly incorporated is not known. Here we present high-resolution crystal structures of a thermostable bacterial (Bacillus stearothermophilus) DNA polymerase I large fragments with DNA primer templates bound productively at the polymerase active site. The active site retains catalytic activity, allowing direct observation of the products of several rounds of nucleotide incorporation. The polymerase also retains its ability to discriminate between correct and incorrectly paired nucleotides in the crystal. Comparison of the structures of successively translocated complexes allows the structural features for the sequence-independent molecular recognition of correctly formed base pairs to be deduced unambiguously. These include extensive interactions with the first four to five base pairs in the minor groove, location of the terminal base pair in a pocket of excellent steric complementarity favouring correct base-pair formation, and a conformational switch from B-form to underwound A-form DNA at the polymerase active site.
Previous genetic studies of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans identified three important components of the cell death machinery. CED-3 and CED-4 function to kill cells, whereas CED-9 protects cells from death. Here CED-9 and its mammalian homolog Bcl-xL (a member of the Bcl-2 family of cell death regulators) were both found to interact with and inhibit the function of CED-4. In addition, analysis revealed that CED-4 can simultaneously interact with CED-3 and its mammalian counterparts interleukin-1beta-converting enzyme (ICE) and FLICE. Thus, CED-4 plays a central role in the cell death pathway, biochemically linking CED-9 and the Bcl-2 family to CED-3 and the ICE family of pro-apoptotic cysteine proteases.
The process by which extracellular signals are relayed from the plasma membrane to specific intracellular sites is an essential facet of cellular regulation. Many signaling pathways do so by altering the phosphorylation state of tyrosine, serine, or threonine residues of target proteins. Recently, it has become apparent that regulatory mechanisms exist to influence where and when protein kinases and phosphatases are activated in the cell. The role of scaffold, anchoring, and adaptor proteins that contribute to the specificity of signal transduction events by recruiting active enzymes into signaling networks or by placing enzymes close to their substrates is discussed.
A nucleosomal core particle is composed of two each of histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 located inside the particle with approximately 47 base pairs (bp) of DNA wrapped around the octamer in about 1.8 turns of a left-handed superhelix. The path of the superhelix is not smooth; the DNA is sharply bent, or kinked, at positions symmetrically disposed at a distance of about one and four double-helical turns in both directions from the nucleosomal dyad axis (designated as sites +/- 1 and +/- 4 respectively). This non-uniform bending is considered archetypal to other DNA-protein complexes, but its mechanism is not clear (reviewed in ref. 4). DNA-histone chemical cross-linking within the core particle has revealed strong binding of each of the two histone H4 molecules to DNA at a distance of 1.5 helical turns either side of the nucleosomal dyad axis (sites +/- 1.5). In each of these sites, a single flexible domain of H4 was previously shown to contact three points, at about nucleotides 55 and 65 on one strand and nucleotide 88 on the complementary strand, numbering from the 5' terminus of each 147-base strand; these three locations are closely juxtaposed across the highly compressed minor and major grooves (Fig. 1). Here we report that the amino-acid residue of histone H4 cross-linked at the 1.5 site is histidine-18, embedded in a highly basic cluster Lys-Arg-His-Arg-Lys-Val-Leu-Arg which is probably involved in the sharp bending of the DNA double helix at the +/- 1 sites.
Muscarinic receptors of cardiac pacemaker and atrial cells are linked to a potassium channel (IK.ACh) by a pertussis toxin-sensitive GTP-binding protein. The dissociation of G-proteins leads to the generation of two potential transducing elements, alpha-GTP and beta gamma. IK.ACh is activated by G-protein alpha- and beta gamma-subunits applied to the intracellular surface of inside-out patches of membrane. beta gamma has been shown to activate the membrane-bound enzyme phospholipase A2 in retinal rods. Arachidonic acid, which is produced from the action of phospholipase A2 on phospholipids, is metabolized to compounds which may act as second messengers regulating ion channels in Aplysia. Muscarinic receptor activation leads to the generation of arachidonic acid in some cell lines. We therefore tested the hypothesis that beta gamma activates IK.ACh by stimulation of phospholipase A2. When patches were first incubated with antibody that blocks phospholipase A2 activity, or with the lipoxygenase inhibitor, nordihydroguaiaretic acid, beta gamma failed to activate IK.ACh. Arachidonic acid and several of its metabolites derived from the 5-lipoxygenase pathway, activated the channel. Blockade of the cyclooxygenase pathway did not inhibit arachidonic acid-induced channel activation. We conclude that the beta gamma-subunit of G-proteins activates IK.ACh by stimulating the production of lipoxygenase-derived second messengers.
The beta2-adrenergic receptor (beta2AR) is a well-studied prototype for heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that respond to diffusible hormones and neurotransmitters. To overcome the structural flexibility of the beta2AR and to facilitate its crystallization, we engineered a beta2AR fusion protein in which T4 lysozyme (T4L) replaces most of the third intracellular loop of the GPCR ("beta2AR-T4L") and showed that this protein retains near-native pharmacologic properties. Analysis of adrenergic receptor ligand-binding mutants within the context of the reported high-resolution structure of beta2AR-T4L provides insights into inverse-agonist binding and the structural changes required to accommodate catecholamine agonists. Amino acids known to regulate receptor function are linked through packing interactions and a network of hydrogen bonds, suggesting a conformational pathway from the ligand-binding pocket to regions that interact with G proteins.
Polyadenylation of messenger RNA precursors requires a complex protein machinery that is closely integrated with the even more complex transcriptional apparatus. Here a polyadenylation factor, CstF-50 (cleavage stimulation factor), is shown to interact in vitro and in intact cells with a nuclear protein of previously unknown function, BRCA1-associated RING domain protein (BARD1). The BARD1-CstF-50 interaction inhibits polyadenylation in vitro. BARD1, like CstF-50, also interacts with RNA polymerase II. These results indicate that BARD1-mediated inhibition of polyadenylation may prevent inappropriate RNA processing during transcription, perhaps at sites of DNA repair, and they reveal an unanticipated integration of diverse nuclear events.
Susceptibility to Crohn's disease, a complex inflammatory disease involving the small intestine, is controlled by over 30 loci. One Crohn's disease risk allele is in ATG16L1, a gene homologous to the essential yeast autophagy gene ATG16 (ref. 2). It is not known how ATG16L1 or autophagy contributes to intestinal biology or Crohn's disease pathogenesis. To address these questions, we generated and characterized mice that are hypomorphic for ATG16L1 protein expression, and validated conclusions on the basis of studies in these mice by analysing intestinal tissues that we collected from Crohn's disease patients carrying the Crohn's disease risk allele of ATG16L1. Here we show that ATG16L1 is a bona fide autophagy protein. Within the ileal epithelium, both ATG16L1 and a second essential autophagy protein ATG5 are selectively important for the biology of the Paneth cell, a specialized epithelial cell that functions in part by secretion of granule contents containing antimicrobial peptides and other proteins that alter the intestinal environment. ATG16L1- and ATG5-deficient Paneth cells exhibited notable abnormalities in the granule exocytosis pathway. In addition, transcriptional analysis revealed an unexpected gain of function specific to ATG16L1-deficient Paneth cells including increased expression of genes involved in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signalling and lipid metabolism, of acute phase reactants and of two adipocytokines, leptin and adiponectin, known to directly influence intestinal injury responses. Importantly, Crohn's disease patients homozygous for the ATG16L1 Crohn's disease risk allele displayed Paneth cell granule abnormalities similar to those observed in autophagy-protein-deficient mice and expressed increased levels of leptin protein. Thus, ATG16L1, and probably the process of autophagy, have a role within the intestinal epithelium of mice and Crohn's disease patients by selective effects on the cell biology and specialized regulatory properties of Paneth cells.
Many of the functional domains of the myosin molecule have been defined by the use of proteolytic enzymes. Major fragments that retain enzymatic or assembly properties have been prepared by cleavage in the rod to form heavy meromyosin (HMM) and light meromyosin (LMM) or at the head-rod junction to form S-1 and rod. Limited tryptic digestion of vertebrate skeletal myosin S-1 indicates that the head contains three major regions: an amino-terminal nucleotide binding domain of molecular weight (MW) 25,000, a central domain of MW 50,000 and a carboxyl domain MW 20,000; the latter two are both able to bind to actin. Tryptic digestion of scallop S-1 has also been used to isolate a head fragment MW 14,000 associated with both types of scallop light chains. Here we report that myosin from vertebrate (chicken and rabbit skeletal) and molluscan (scallop adductor) striated muscles is cleaved in an unusual way with an enzyme from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. This bacterial protease (designated Ps-1) does not cleave myosin at the head-rod junction or in the rod; instead, Ps-1 splits the myosin heavy chain within the head, yielding a complete rod joined to the 20,000-MW head domains. The scallop regulatory and essential light chains remain associated with this fragment. We examined this new fragment by electron microscopy; the rods bear two 'nubs' about 100 A long, which appear to correspond morphologically to the neck region of the myosin molecule.
The threshold at which antigen triggers lymphocyte activation is set by the enzymes that regulate tyrosine phosphorylation. Upon T cell activation, the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 was found to bind to the protein tyrosine kinase ZAP-70. This interaction resulted in an increase in SHP-1 phosphatase activity and a decrease in ZAP-70 kinase activity. Expression of a dominant negative mutant of SHP-1 in T cells increased the sensitivity of the antigen receptor. Thus, SHP-1 functions as a negative regulator of the T cell antigen receptor and in setting the threshold of activation.
The retroviruses human T-cell lymphotrophic virus-I (HTLV-I) and HTLV-III/LAV (lymphadenopathy-associated virus) are clearly linked to human diseases. Patients with HTLV-I-positive neoplasms may respond transiently to traditional chemotherapy, but are not cured. For patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) there is no curative therapy. In retroviruses of different species, viral propagation crucially depends on reverse transcriptase, an enzyme not present in normal mammalian cells and different from mammalian DNA polymerases, making it a target for specific inhibition. Reverse transcriptase has been well conserved through evolution: an LAV isolate contained a 250-amino-acid-long domain, presumably the reverse transcriptase core sequence, which has 21% homology to Moloney murine leukaemia virus (MoMLV). Because HTLV-III infects only humans and chimpanzees, we substituted murine retroviruses for in vivo evaluation of candidate anti-AIDS drugs after ascertaining similar inhibition in vitro of HTLV-III and MLVs, which were chosen for their short incubation time. The triphosphate of 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) is incorporated into complementary DNA by retroviral reverse transcriptase, causing premature chain termination. Here we show that chronic AZT treatment of mice infected with Rauscher murine leukaemia virus complex (RLV) prevents infection of splenocytes and development of splenomegaly, and suppresses viraemia if started soon after inoculation. Starting AZT late in the course of disease still leads to significant prolongation of life; anaemia, however is a significant side-effect. By analogy, AZT may have a role in preventing retroviral disease in humans if started early after infection, and it may lead to significant survival gains even if started later in the course of disease.
Helical filaments driven by linear molecular motors are anticipated to rotate around their axis, but rotation consistent with the helical pitch has not been observed. 14S dynein and non-claret disjunctional protein (ncd) rotated a microtubule more efficiently than expected for its helical pitch, and myosin rotated an actin filament only poorly. For DNA-based motors such as RNA polymerase, transcription-induced supercoiling of DNA supports the general picture of tracking along the DNA helix. Here we report direct and real-time optical microscopy measurements of rotation rate that are consistent with high-fidelity tracking. Single RNA polymerase molecules attached to a glass surface rotated DNA for >100 revolutions around the right-handed screw axis of the double helix with a rotary torque of >5 pN nm. This real-time observation of rotation opens the possibility of resolving individual transcription steps.
Anti-inflammatory steroids reduce prostaglandin (PG) synthesis in intact cells and isolated organs by interfering indirectly with the phospholipase(s) which release the poly-unsaturated fatty acid precursors for both cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways. This action requires nucleic acid transcription and synthesis of new protein, and a soluble factor capable of inhibiting PG generation has been identified. However, it is not known whether these steroids affect either the actions or content of the enzymes of the PG system after administration in vivo, nor is it known if they affect PG-metabolizing enzymes. We show here that treatment of rats with anti-inflammatory steroids causes rapid changes in tissue activities of enzymes which synthesize and inactivate PGs, with apparent levels reduced and increased respectively.
When the recognition sequence of a ribozyme is extended beyond a certain length, turnover is slowed and specificity is decreased. Here, it is shown that a protein can help a ribozyme overcome these general limitations on ribozyme activity. Cleavage of an RNA oligonucleotide by a hammerhead ribozyme is enhanced 10- to 20-fold upon addition of a protein derived from the p7 nucleocapsid (NC) protein of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1. The NC protein also enhances the ability of the ribozyme to discriminate between cleavage of RNA oligonucleotides with differing sequences. These catalytic improvements can be attributed to the strand exchange activity of this RNA binding protein. It is conceivable that endogenous or added proteins may provide analogous increases in ribozyme activity and specificity in vivo.
A 19-nucleotide RNA fragment can cause rapid, highly specific cleavage of a 24-nucleotide RNA fragment under physiological conditions. Because each 19-mer can participate in many cleavage reactions, this molecule has all the properties associated with an RNA enzyme.
The coagulant and inflammatory exacerbation in sepsis is counterbalanced by the protective protein C (PC) pathway. Activated PC (APC) was shown to use the endothelial cell PC receptor (EPCR) as a coreceptor for cleavage of protease activated receptor 1 (PAR1) on endothelial cells. Gene profiling demonstrated that PAR1 signaling could account for all APC-induced protective genes, including the immunomodulatory monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), which was selectively induced by activation of PAR1, but not PAR2. Thus, the prototypical thrombin receptor is the target for EPCR-dependent APC signaling, suggesting a role for this receptor cascade in protection from sepsis.
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases catalyze aminoacylation of transfer RNAs (tRNAs). It is shown that human tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase can be split into two fragments with distinct cytokine activities. The endothelial monocyte-activating polypeptide II-like carboxy-terminal domain has potent leukocyte and monocyte chemotaxis activity and stimulates production of myeloperoxidase, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and tissue factor. The catalytic amino-terminal domain binds to the interleukin-8 type A receptor and functions as an interleukin-8-like cytokine. Under apoptotic conditions in cell culture, the full-length enzyme is secreted, and the two cytokine activities can be generated by leukocyte elastase, an extracellular protease. Secretion of this tRNA synthetase may contribute to apoptosis both by arresting translation and producing needed cytokines.
Haemoglobin has previously been recorded in plants only in the nitrogen-fixing nodules formed by symbiotic association between Rhizobium or Frankia and legume or non-legume hosts. Structural similarities amongst these and animal haemoglobins at the protein and gene level suggested a common evolutionary origin. This suggests that haemoglobin genes, inherited from an ancestor common to plants and animals, might be present in all plants. We report here the isolation of a haemoglobin gene from Trema tomentosa, a non-nodulating relative of Parasponia (Ulmaceae). The gene has three introns located at positions identical to those in the haemoglobin genes of nodulating plant species, strengthening the case for a common origin of all plant haemoglobin genes. The data argue strongly against horizontal haemoglobin gene transfer from animals to plants. The Trema gene has a tissue-specific pattern of transcription and translation, producing monomeric haemoglobin in Trema roots. We have also found that the Parasponia haemoglobin gene is transcribed in roots of non-nodulated plants. These results suggest that haemoglobin has a role in the respiratory metabolism of root cells of all plant species. We propose that its special role in nitrogen-fixing nodules has required adaptation of the haemoglobin-gene regulation pathway, to give high expression in the specialized environment of the nodule.
It is now possible, by site-directed mutagenesis of the gene, to change any amino acid residue in a protein to any other. In enzymology, application of this technique is leading to exciting new insights both into the mechanism of catalysis by particular enzymes, and into the basis of catalysis itself. The precise and often delicate changes that are being made in and near the active sites of enzymes are illuminating the interdependent roles of catalytic groups, and are allowing the first steps to be taken toward the rational alteration of enzyme specificity and reactivity.
Deletions of muscle mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) have recently been found in patients with mitochondrial myopathy. However, as most of the described cases were sporadic, and individual deletions involved different portions of mtDNA, the mechanism(s) producing the molecular lesions, as well as their mode of transmission, remain unclear. By studying families with mtDNA heteroplasmy, valuable information can be obtained about the role of inheritable factors in the pathogenesis of these disorders. We have studied four members of a family with autosomal dominant mitochondrial myopathy. Multiple deletions, involving the same portion of muscle mtDNA, were identified in all patients. Sequence analysis of the mutant mtDNAs, performed after DNA amplification by the polymerase-chain reaction showed that all the deletions start within a 12-nucleotide stretch at the 5' end of the D-loop region, a site of active communication between the nucleus and the mtDNA. The data indicate that a mutation of a nuclear-coded protein can destroy the integrity of the mitochondrial genome in a specific, heritable way.
It has been debated whether the potassium channel of the atrium is activated by the alpha subunit or by the beta gamma subunits of guanine nucleotide binding (G) proteins, which dissociate on activation with guanosine triphosphate (GTP). Therefore, the channel-activating effectiveness of these subunits on isolated guinea pig atrial cells was tested. The activated alpha K subunit from human erythrocytes activated the channel in subpicomolar concentrations. The beta gamma dimer from bovine brain activated the channel in nanomolar concentrations. These results support the view that, physiologically, the alpha subunit activates the channel.
Almost all DNA polymerases show a strong preference for incorporating the nucleotide that forms the correct Watson-Crick base pair with the template base. In addition, the catalytic efficiencies with which any given polymerase forms the four possible correct base pairs are roughly the same. Human DNA polymerase-iota (hPoliota), a member of the Y family of DNA polymerases, is an exception to these rules. hPoliota incorporates the correct nucleotide opposite a template adenine with a several hundred to several thousand fold greater efficiency than it incorporates the correct nucleotide opposite a template thymine, whereas its efficiency for correct nucleotide incorporation opposite a template guanine or cytosine is intermediate between these two extremes. Here we present the crystal structure of hPoliota bound to a template primer and an incoming nucleotide. The structure reveals a polymerase that is 'specialized' for Hoogsteen base-pairing, whereby the templating base is driven to the syn conformation. Hoogsteen base-pairing offers a basis for the varied efficiencies and fidelities of hPoliota opposite different template bases, and it provides an elegant mechanism for promoting replication through minor-groove purine adducts that interfere with replication.
Two regions of the gene for the human T-cell leukemia virus subgroup I (HTLV-I) envelope were expressed in Escherichia coli by use of the vector pJLA16. One corresponds to the carboxyl terminal region of the major envelope protein p46, and the other corresponds to the transmembrane protein p21E. Reactivity of the expressed protein with human serum was tested by the Western blot procedure. Each of 11 sera tested that had been shown to contain antibodies to HTLV-I or HTLV-II by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay recognized the bacterially synthesized envelope proteins. There was no reaction detected when 17 control sera were tested. This system will be useful for large-scale seroepidemiological surveys for HTLV-I and related human retroviruses.
SAGA is a transcriptional coactivator complex that is conserved across eukaryotes and performs multiple functions during transcriptional activation and elongation. One role is deubiquitination of histone H2B, and this activity resides in a distinct subcomplex called the deubiquitinating module (DUBm), which contains the ubiquitin-specific protease Ubp8, bound to Sgf11, Sus1, and Sgf73. The deubiquitinating activity depends on the presence of all four DUBm proteins. We report here the 1.90 angstrom resolution crystal structure of the DUBm bound to ubiquitin aldehyde, as well as the 2.45 angstrom resolution structure of the uncomplexed DUBm. The structure reveals an arrangement of protein domains that gives rise to a highly interconnected complex, which is stabilized by eight structural zinc atoms that are critical for enzymatic activity. The structure suggests a model for how interactions with the other DUBm proteins activate Ubp8 and allows us to speculate about how the DUBm binds to monoubiquitinated histone H2B in nucleosomes.
The cationic, antibacterial proteins of polymorphonuclear leukocytes are associated with a unique subcellular particle that is separable through zonal density gradient centrifugation from acid phosphatase-containing particles as well as from particles that contain alkaline phosphatase and lysozyme. Normal macrophages, macrophages stimulated by bacillus Calmette-Guerin, and liver cells lack this particle and the associated group of cationic proteins. Particles physically and biochemically similar to slower sedimenting enzyme-rich particles of polymorphonuclear leukocytes are shared by all the tlhree cell types.
Immune response genes of the murine major histocompatibility complex encode cell-surface glycoproteins that are expressed predominantly on B cells and macrophages and regulate immune responsiveness by restricting antigen recognition by T cells. The two classes of immune response molecule, termed I-A and I-E, are each comprised of two polymorphic chains (alpha and beta), and nucleotide sequence analysis of genomic or cDNA clones has revealed that most of the amino acid differences between allelic I-A alpha or beta chains occur in the first extracellular domain. The mutant mouse strain B6.C-H-2bm12 (bm12), which differs from its parental strain C57BL/6 (B6) at the I-A beta locus, exhibits an immune response profile markedly different from that of B6. Here we present the nucleotide sequence of the mutant bm12 I-A beta gene. Sequence comparison within the coding regions reveals three productive nucleotide differences between the I-A beta genes of B6 and bm12 mice, all three differences occurring within a stretch of 14 nucleotides in the exon encoding the first extracellular domain. The clustered nature of the bm12 mutation, as well as the specific amino acid changes it engenders, suggest a possible mechanism for the generation of polymorphism in class II antigens.
Aggrecan is the major proteoglycan in cartilage, endowing this tissue with the unique capacity to bear load and resist compression. In arthritic cartilage, aggrecan is degraded by one or more 'aggrecanases' from the ADAMTS (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs) family of proteinases. ADAMTS1, 8 and 9 have weak aggrecan-degrading activity. However, they are not thought to be the primary aggrecanases because ADAMTS1 null mice are not protected from experimental arthritis, and cleavage by ADAMTS8 and 9 is highly inefficient. Although ADAMTS4 and 5 are expressed in joint tissues, and are known to be efficient aggrecanases in vitro, the exact contribution of these two enzymes to cartilage pathology is unknown. Here we show that ADAMTS5 is the major aggrecanase in mouse cartilage, both in vitro and in a mouse model of inflammatory arthritis. Our data suggest that ADAMTS5 may be a suitable target for the development of new drugs designed to inhibit cartilage destruction in arthritis, although further work will be required to determine whether ADAMTS5 is also the major aggrecanase in human arthritis.
Ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), a key enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis, is the most rapidly turned over mammalian enzyme. We have shown that its degradation is accelerated by ODC antizyme, an inhibitory protein induced by polyamines. This is a new type of enzyme regulation and may be a model for selective protein degradation. Here we report the identification of the protease responsible for ODC degradation. Using a cell-free degradation system, we demonstrate that immunodepletion of proteasomes from cell extracts causes almost complete loss of ATP- and antizyme-dependent degradation of ODC. In addition, purified 26S proteasome complex, but not the 20S proteasome, catalyses ODC degradation in the absence of ubiquitin. These results strongly suggest that the 26S proteasome, widely viewed as specific for ubiquitin-conjugated proteins, is the main enzyme responsible for ODC degradation. The 26S proteasome may therefore have a second role in ubiquitin-independent proteolysis.
Structural similarity of nitrogenase, the enzyme responsible for biological nitrogen fixation, from various diazotrophic bacteria has been shown by intergeneric biochemical complementation of component proteins in vitro, DNA and protein sequence analysis, and DNA hybridization between nif (nitrogen fixation) structural genes from Klebsiella pneumoniae and genomic sequences from other nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Despite nitrogenase homologies, little is known about similarities among nif regulatory mechanisms although repression of nitrogenase synthesis by NH4+ and O2 occurs in most diazotrophs. In K. pneumoniae, the ntr (gln) genes concerned with regulation of nitrogen metabolism control expression of the nifLA operon whose products act as repressor (nifL) and activator (nifA) of the seven other nif transcriptional units. Here we report that the nifA gene product of K. pneumoniae can activate expression of nif genes in both Azotobacter vinelandii and Azotobacter chroococcum, organisms whose aerobic physiology contrasts with that of the facultative K. pneumoniae.
The polyhedral surface lattice of coated vesicles consists of three-legged hexameric protein complexes called triskelions which constitute the basic assembly unit. The triskelion is a molecular complex of molecular weight 630,000 (Mr 630K) composed of three clathrin heavy chains (subunit 180K) and three light chains (subunits 33K and 36K) (refs 2,3). The presence of additional coated vesicle-specific proteins in the 100-130K and 50-55K range have been reported. We previously described the presence of a cyclic nucleotide- and Ca2+-independent protein kinase activity in coated vesicles which was confirmed by others. This protein kinase specifically phosphorylates the 50K protein (pp50). In this report, we show that the coated vesicle kinase and its 50K protein substrate are part of a stable multimolecular system. In addition we show that the clathrin-light chain complex stimulates the pp50 phosphorylation and only light chains are implicated in this stimulation and that the pp50 phosphorylation does not seem to be affected by the vesicle.
Eukaryotic cells respond to many hormones and neurotransmitters with increased activity of the enzyme phospholipase C and a subsequent rise in the concentration of intracellular free calcium ([Ca2+]i). The increase in [Ca2+]i occurs as a result of the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores and an influx of Ca2+ through the plasma membrane; this influx of Ca2+ may or may not be store-dependent. Drosophila transient receptor potential (TRP) proteins and some mammalian homologues (TRPC proteins) are thought to mediate capacitative Ca2+ entry. Here we describe the molecular mechanism of store-depletion-independent activation of a subfamily of mammalian TRPC channels. We find that hTRPC6 is a non-selective cation channel that is activated by diacylglycerol in a membrane-delimited fashion, independently of protein kinases C activated by diacylglycerol. Although hTRPC3, the closest structural relative of hTRPC6, is activated in the same way, TRPCs 1, 4 and 5 and the vanilloid receptor subtype 1 are unresponsive to the lipid mediator. Thus, hTRPC3 and hTRPC6 represent the first members of a new functional family of second-messenger-operated cation channels, which are activated by diacylglycerol.
Acetylation of histone H4 on lysine 16 (H4-K16Ac) is a prevalent and reversible posttranslational chromatin modification in eukaryotes. To characterize the structural and functional role of this mark, we used a native chemical ligation strategy to generate histone H4 that was homogeneously acetylated at K16. The incorporation of this modified histone into nucleosomal arrays inhibits the formation of compact 30-nanometer-like fibers and impedes the ability of chromatin to form cross-fiber interactions. H4-K16Ac also inhibits the ability of the adenosine triphosphate-utilizing chromatin assembly and remodeling enzyme ACF to mobilize a mononucleosome, indicating that this single histone modification modulates both higher order chromatin structure and functional interactions between a nonhistone protein and the chromatin fiber.
Tay-Sachs disease is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder resulting from mutation of the HEXA gene encoding the alpha-subunit of the lysosomal enzyme, beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase A (ref. 1). A relatively high frequency of carriers (1/27) of a lethal, infantile form of the disease is found in the Ashkenazi Jewish population, but it is not yet evident whether this has resulted from a founder effect and random genetic drift or from a selective advantage of heterozygotes. We have identified a single-base mutation in a cloned fragment of the HEXA gene from an Ashkenazi Jewish patient. This change, the substitution of a C for G in the first nucleotide of intron 12 is expected to result in defective splicing of the messenger RNA. A test for the mutant allele based on amplification of DNA by the 'polymerase chain rection and cleavage of a DdeI restriction site generated by the mutation revealed that this case and two other cases of the Ashkenazi, infantile form of Tay-Sachs disease are heterozygous for two different mutations. The occurrence of multiple mutant alleles warrants further examination of the selective advantage hypothesis.
Simian acquired immune deficiency syndrome (SAIDS) in the macaque genus of monkeys at the California Primate Research Center is apparently caused by infection by a type D retrovirus. The complete nucleotide sequence (8173 base pairs) of a molecular clone of the prototype SAIDS virus isolate, SRV-1, reveals a typical retrovirus structure with long terminal repeats (346 base pairs) and open reading frames for the gag (663 codons), pol (867 codons), and env (605 codons) genes. SRV-1 also has a separate open reading frame of 314 codons between the gag and pol genes that defines the viral protease gene (prt) and a short open reading frame of unknown significance downstream from the env gene. The SRV-1 protease region shows a high degree of homology to its counterpart in the hamster intracisternal A-type particle genome; both these protease genes are about twice as long as the analogous region of other retroviruses. SRV-1 has no notable similarity in either genetic organization or sequence to the human AIDS retroviruses.
Nitric oxide is a messenger molecule, mediating the effect of endothelium-derived relaxing factor in blood vessels and the cytotoxic actions of macrophages, and playing a part in neuronal communication in the brain. Cloning of a complementary DNA for brain nitric oxide synthase reveals recognition sites for NADPH, FAD, flavin mononucleotide and calmodulin as well as phosphorylation sites, indicating that the synthase is regulated by many different factors. The only known mammalian enzyme with close homology is cytochrome P-450 reductase.
Drosophila embryogenesis is characterized by rapid transitions in gene activity, whereby crudely distributed gradients of regulatory proteins give way to precise on/off patterns of gene expression. To explore the underlying mechanisms, a partially automated, quantitative in situ hybridization method was used to visualize expression profiles of 14 developmental control genes in hundreds of embryos. These studies revealed two distinct patterns of gene activation: synchronous and stochastic. Synchronous genes display essentially uniform expression of nascent transcripts in all cells of an embryonic tissue, whereas stochastic genes display erratic patterns of de novo activation. RNA polymerase II is "pre-loaded" (stalled) in the promoter regions of synchronous genes, but not stochastic genes. Transcriptional synchrony might ensure the orderly deployment of the complex gene regulatory networks that control embryogenesis.
The nucleotide sequence of a 1,091-base pair cloned cDNA insert encoding bovine corticotropin-beta-lipotropin precursor mRNA is reported. The corresponding amino acid sequence indicates that the precursor protein consists of repetitive units and includes a third melanotropin sequence in its cryptic portion. Pairs of lysine and arginine residues separate the component peptides of the precursor.
DNA, RNA, and regulatory molecules control gene expression through interactions with RNA polymerase (RNAP). We show that a short alpha helix at the tip of the flaplike domain that covers the RNA exit channel of RNAP contacts a nascent RNA stem-loop structure (hairpin) that inhibits transcription, and that this flap-tip helix is required for activity of the regulatory protein NusA. Protein-RNA cross-linking, molecular modeling, and effects of alterations in RNAP and RNA all suggest that a tripartite interaction of RNAP, NusA, and the hairpin inhibits nucleotide addition in the active site, which is located 65 angstroms away. These findings favor an allosteric model for regulation of transcript elongation.
The chaperonin GroEL has an essential role in mediating protein folding in the cytosol of Escherichia coli. Here we show that GroEL interacts strongly with a well-defined set of approximately 300 newly translated polypeptides, including essential components of the transcription/translation machinery and metabolic enzymes. About one third of these proteins are structurally unstable and repeatedly return to GroEL for conformational maintenance. GroEL substrates consist preferentially of two or more domains with alphabeta-folds, which contain alpha-helices and buried beta-sheets with extensive hydrophobic surfaces. These proteins are expected to fold slowly and be prone to aggregation. The hydrophobic binding regions of GroEL may be well adapted to interact with the non-native states of alphabeta-domain proteins.
The structure of the carboxyl-terminal domain of the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase alpha subunit (alpha CTD), which is regarded as the contact site for transcription activator proteins and for the promoter UP element, was determined by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Its compact structure of four helices and two long arms enclosing its hydrophobic core shows a folding topology distinct from those of other DNA-binding proteins. The UP element binding site was found on the surface comprising helix 1, the amino-terminal end of helix 4, and the preceding loop. Mutation experiments indicated that the contact sites for transcription activator proteins are also on the same surface.
Genomic DNA is replicated by two DNA polymerase molecules, one of which works in close association with the helicase to copy the leading-strand template in a continuous manner while the second copies the already unwound lagging-strand template in a discontinuous manner through the synthesis of Okazaki fragments. Considering that the lagging-strand polymerase has to recycle after the completion of every Okazaki fragment through the slow steps of primer synthesis and hand-off to the polymerase, it is not understood how the two strands are synthesized with the same net rate. Here we show, using the T7 replication proteins, that RNA primers are made 'on the fly' during ongoing DNA synthesis and that the leading-strand T7 replisome does not pause during primer synthesis, contrary to previous reports. Instead, the leading-strand polymerase remains limited by the speed of the helicase; it therefore synthesizes DNA more slowly than the lagging-strand polymerase. We show that the primase-helicase T7 gp4 maintains contact with the priming sequence during ongoing DNA synthesis; the nascent lagging-strand template therefore organizes into a priming loop that keeps the primer in physical proximity to the replication complex. Our findings provide three synergistic mechanisms of coordination: first, primers are made concomitantly with DNA synthesis; second, the priming loop ensures efficient primer use and hand-off to the polymerase; and third, the lagging-strand polymerase copies DNA faster, which allows it to keep up with leading-strand DNA synthesis overall.
Transient soil flooding limits cellular oxygen to roots and reduces crop yield. Plant response to oxygen deprivation involves increased expression of the alcohol dehydrogenase gene (ADH) and ethanolic fermentation. Disruption of the Arabidopsis gene that encodes Rop (RHO-like small G protein of plants) guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activating protein 4 (ROPGAP4), a Rop deactivator, elevates ADH expression in response to oxygen deprivation but decreases tolerance to stress. Rop-dependent production of hydrogen peroxide via a diphenylene iodonium chloride-sensitive calcium-dependent reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase is necessary for induction of both ADH and RopGAP4 expression. Tolerance to oxygen deprivation requires Rop activation and RopGAP4-dependent negative feedback regulation. This Rop signal transduction rheostat balances the ability to increase ethanolic fermentation with survival.
Internal protein dynamics are intimately connected to enzymatic catalysis. However, enzyme motions linked to substrate turnover remain largely unknown. We have studied dynamics of an enzyme during catalysis at atomic resolution using nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation methods. During catalytic action of the enzyme cyclophilin A, we detect conformational fluctuations of the active site that occur on a time scale of hundreds of microseconds. The rates of conformational dynamics of the enzyme strongly correlate with the microscopic rates of substrate turnover. The present results, together with available structural data, allow a prediction of the reaction trajectory.
High mutation frequency during reverse transcription has a principal role in the genetic variation of primate lentiviral populations. It is the main driving force for the generation of drug resistance and the escape from immune surveillance. G to A hypermutation is one of the characteristics of primate lentiviruses, as well as other retroviruses, during replication in vivo and in cell culture. The molecular mechanisms of this process, however, remain to be clarified. Here, we demonstrate that CEM15 (also known as apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G; APOBEC3G), an endogenous inhibitor of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) replication, is a cytidine deaminase and is able to induce G to A hypermutation in newly synthesized viral DNA. This effect can be counteracted by the HIV-1 virion infectivity factor (Vif). It seems that this viral DNA mutator is a viral defence mechanism in host cells that may induce either lethal hypermutation or instability of the incoming nascent viral reverse transcripts, which could account for the Vif-defective phenotype. Importantly, the accumulation of CEM15-mediated non-lethal hypermutation in the replicating viral genome could potently contribute to the genetic variation of primate lentiviral populations.
Transfection of cultured monkey kidney cells with recombinant DNA constructed with a cloned Escherichia coli gene that codes for xanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase and several different SV40 DNA-based vectors, results in the synthesis of readily measurable quantities of the bacterial enzyme. Moreover, the physiological defect in purine nucleotide synthesis characteristic of human Lesch-Nyhan cells can be overcome by the introduction of the bacterial gene into these cells.
The origin and function of introns in eukaryotic genes has provoked considerable debate since their discovery in 1977. Central to this issue are studies on the highly conserved enzyme, triosephosphate isomerase (TPI, EC 5.3.1.1). The 'introns early' argument suggests that introns are as old as the genes themselves and that the apparent correlation of many of the intron sites in plant, animal and fungal TPI genes with the boundaries of modules is evidence of the assembly of ancient proteins by exon shuffling. In contrast, the 'introns late' view holds that ancient genomes contained few if any introns; introns were inserted into pre-existing genes during the last billion years. We have found that the TPI gene from the mosquito, Culex tarsalis, contains an intron in a unique position that was predicted by W. Gilbert and the exon shuffling hypothesis.
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia (FCHL) is a common inherited disorder of lipid metabolism with a prevalence of 0.5-2.0% (refs 1, 2). It is estimated to cause 10% of premature coronary heart disease. The underlying metabolic and genetic defects in FCHL have not been identified, but a population study has suggested an association between FCHL and an XmnI restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) within the apolipoprotein AI-CIII-AIV gene cluster. Here we confirm this association and show that it results from linkage disequilibrium between FCHL and the 6.6-kilobase (kb) allele of the XmnI RFLP. Subsequent analysis in seven FCHL families, ascertained through a proband carrying the 6.6 kb XmnI allele, demonstrated linkage to the AI-CIII-AIV cluster on 11q23-q24, zeta = 6.86 with no recombinants. This assignment will facilitate the identification of the mutation that causes hyperlipidaemia in these families.
A covalent adduct of an aminoacyl tRNA synthetase and uracil nucleoside has been isolated. The enzyme adduct is catalytically inactive; one nucleoside is bound per catalytic site. The release of uridine restores enzyme activity. The nucleoside attaches to a protein segment required for tRNA interaction. The findings add support to concepts of a covalent component for some protein-nucleic acid complexes.
Ras-GAP (GTPase activating protein) is a regulatory protein that stimulates the intrinsic guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity of the proto-oncogene product p21ras. A domain of the neurofibromatosis gene product (NF1) that has sequence similarity to the catalytic domain of Ras-GAP and to yeast IRA gene products also has a specific stimulatory activity toward p21ras GTPase. Arachidonic acid and phosphatidic acid inactivate GAP, but no agents have been identified that stimulate GAP and thereby switch p21ras off. With the use of recombinant Ha-c-Ras and Ras-GAP, NF1, and GAP catalytic domains, it was found that prostaglandins PGF2 alpha and PGA2 stimulated Ras-GAP and that prostacyclin PGI2 inhibited Ras-GAP. The stimulatory effect of PGF2 alpha was saturable and structure-specific and competed with the inhibitory effect of arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid also inhibited the catalytic activity of NF1, but prostaglandins were not stimulatory. These results suggest a mechanism for the allosteric control of Ras function through the modulation of arachidonate metabolism.
Previously, Guillemin and Rosenberg and Saffran and Schally demonstrated the presence of hypothalamic factors that stimulated the secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the pituitary gland. Recently, Vale et al. have isolated and sequenced an ovine hypothalamic peptide of 41 amino acids, which is believed to represent the major physiological corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) (reviewed in refs 5, 6). Available data suggest that hypothalamic CRF enhances both the synthesis and secretion of ACTH and related peptides such as beta-endorphin and beta-lipotropin (beta-LPH) (reviewed in ref. 6), which are all derived from the common precursor, termed ACTH-beta-LPH precursor or preproopiomelanocortin (reviewed in ref. 7). Because CRF mediates the neural control of the pituitary-adrenocortical system, the characterization of its biosynthetic precursor and the gene encoding it is essential for understanding the molecular mechanism underlying the endocrine response to stress. We have now cloned DNA sequences complementary to the ovine hypothalamic mRNA encoding the CRF precursor (referred to hereafter as prepro-CRF). The nucleotide sequence of the cloned cDNA, reported here, has revealed the primary structure of prepro-CRF. The carboxyl end represents the CRF sequence preceded by the tetrapeptide, Arg-Lys-Arg-Arg, and followed by the dipeptide, Gly-Lys. Comparison of the amino acid sequence of prepro-CRF with those of the ACTH-beta-LPH precursor and the arginine vasopressin-neurophysin II precursor suggests that these precursor proteins may be evolutionarily related.
The seminal hypotheses proposed over the years for enzymatic catalysis are scrutinized. The historical record is explored from both biochemical and theoretical perspectives. Particular attention is given to the impact of molecular motions within the protein on the enzyme's catalytic properties. A case study for the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase provides evidence for coupled networks of predominantly conserved residues that influence the protein structure and motion. Such coupled networks have important implications for the origin and evolution of enzymes, as well as for protein engineering.
Many of the G-protein-coupled receptors for hormones that bind to the cell surface can signal to the interior of the cell through several different classes of G protein. For example, although most of the actions of the prototype beta2-adrenergic receptor are mediated through Gs proteins and the cyclic-AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) system, beta-adrenergic receptors can also couple to Gi proteins. Here we investigate the mechanism that controls the specificity of this coupling. We show that in HEK293 cells, stimulation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase by the beta2-adrenergic receptor is mediated by the betagamma subunits of pertussis-toxin-sensitive G proteins through a pathway involving the non-receptor tyrosine kinase c-Src and the G protein Ras. Activation of this pathway by the beta2-adrenergic receptor requires that the receptor be phosphorylated by PKA because it is blocked by H-89, an inhibitor of PKA. Additionally, a mutant of the receptor, which lacks the sites normally phosphorylated by PKA, can activate adenylyl cyclase, the enzyme that generates cAMP, but not MAP kinase. Our results demonstrate that a mechanism previously shown to mediate uncoupling of the beta2-adrenergic receptor from Gs and thus heterologous desensitization (PKA-mediated receptor phosphorylation), also serves to 'switch' coupling of this receptor from Gs to Gi and initiate a new set of signalling events.
Various lectins were found to induce tyrosine aminotransferase in H-35 rat hepatoma cells grown in monolayer culture. Wheat germ agglutinin gave a maximal induction of tyrosine aminotransferase 6 hours after its addition. The induction time course was similar to that elicited by insulin. Fourteen micrograms of wheat germ agglutinin per milliliter gave half-maximal enzyme induction and 50 micrograms per milliliter gave the maximal response. The induction of tyrosine aminotransferase by wheat germ agglutinin was additive with the induction by either dexamethasone or dibutyryl adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate, but was not additive with the tyrosine amino transferase induction by insulin. Wheat germ agglutinin also mimicked insulin in the inhibition of cellular protein degradation in the absence of serum. The insulin-like effects of lectins should be considered in lectin-mediated manipulations such as agglutination.
Many signalling cascades use seven-helical transmembrane receptors coupled to heterotrimeric G proteins (G alpha beta gamma) to convert extracellular signals into intracellular responses. Upon nucleotide exchange catalysed by activated receptors, heterotrimers dissociate into GTP-bound G alpha subunits and G beta gamma dimers, either of which can modulate many downstream effectors. Here we use multiwavelength anomalous diffraction data to solve the crystal structure of the beta gamma dimer of the G protein transducin. The beta-subunit is primarily a seven-bladed beta-propeller that is partially encircled by an extended gamma-subunit. The beta-propeller, which contains seven structurally similar WD repeats, defines the stereochemistry of the WD repeat and the probable architecture of all WD-repeat-containing domains. The structure details interactions between G protein beta- and gamma-subunits and highlights regions implicated in effector modulation for the conserved family of G protein beta gamma dimers.
The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), which forms adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP)-regulated chloride channels, is defective in patients with cystic fibrosis. This protein contains two putative nucleotide binding domains (NBD1 and NBD2) and an R domain. CFTR in which the R domain was deleted (CFTR delta R) conducted chloride independently of the presence of cAMP. However, sites within CFTR other than those deleted also respond to cAMP, because the chloride current of CFTR delta R increased further in response to cAMP stimulation. In addition, deletion of the R domain suppressed the inactivating effect of a mutation in NBD2 (but not NBD1), a result which suggests that NBD2 interacts with the channel through the R domain.
The mouse Brachyury (T) gene is the prototype of a growing family of so-called T-box genes which encode transcriptional regulators and have been identified in a variety of invertebrates and vertebrates, including humans. Mutations in Brachyury and other T-box genes result in drastic embryonic phenotypes, indicating that T-box gene products are essential in tissue specification, morphogenesis and organogenesis. The T-box encodes a DNA-binding domain of about 180 amino-acid residues, the T domain. Here we report the X-ray structure of the T domain from Xenopus laevis in complex with a 24-nucleotide palindromic DNA duplex. We show that the protein is bound as a dimer, interacting with the major and the minor grooves of the DNA. A new type of specific DNA contact is seen, in which a carboxy-terminal helix is deeply embedded into an enlarged minor groove without bending the DNA. Hydrophobic interactions and an unusual main-chain carbonyl contact to a guanine account for sequence-specific recognition in the minor groove by this helix. Thus the structure of this T domain complex with DNA reveals a new way in which a protein can recognize DNA.
C57BL/6J mice with a mutation in the obese (ob) gene are obese, diabetic, and exhibit reduced activity, metabolism, and body temperature. Daily intraperitoneal injection of these mice with recombinant OB protein lowered their body weight, percent body fat, food intake, and serum concentrations of glucose and insulin. In addition, metabolic rate, body temperature, and activity levels were increased by this treatment. None of these parameters was altered beyond the level observed in lean controls, suggesting that the OB protein normalized the metabolic status of the ob/ob mice. Lean animals injected with OB protein maintained a smaller weight loss throughout the 28-day study and showed no changes in any of the metabolic parameters. These data suggest that the OB protein regulates body weight and fat deposition through effects on metabolism and appetite.
Members of the Ras subfamily of small guanine-nucleotide-binding proteins are essential for controlling normal and malignant cell proliferation as well as cell differentiation. The neuronal-specific guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor, Ras-GRF/CDC25Mm, induces Ras signalling in response to Ca2+ influx and activation of G-protein-coupled receptors in vitro, suggesting that it plays a role in neurotransmission and plasticity in vivo. Here we report that mice lacking Ras-GRF are impaired in the process of memory consolidation, as revealed by emotional conditioning tasks that require the function of the amygdala; learning and short-term memory are intact. Electrophysiological measurements in the basolateral amygdala reveal that long-term plasticity is abnormal in mutant mice. In contrast, Ras-GRF mutants do not reveal major deficits in spatial learning tasks such as the Morris water maze, a test that requires hippocampal function. Consistent with apparently normal hippocampal functions, Ras-GRF mutants show normal NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor-dependent long-term potentiation in this structure. These results implicate Ras-GRF signalling via the Ras/MAP kinase pathway in synaptic events leading to formation of long-term memories.
A cytoplasmically inherited element, [URE3], allows yeast to use ureidosuccinate in the presence of ammonium ion. Chromosomal mutations in the URE2 gene produce the same phenotype. [URE3] depends for its propagation on the URE2 product (Ure2p), a negative regulator of enzymes of nitrogen metabolism. Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains cured of [URE3] with guanidium chloride were shown to return to the [URE3]-carrying state without its introduction from other cells. Overproduction of Ure2p increased the frequency with which a strain became [URE3] by 100-fold. In analogy to mammalian prions, [URE3] may be an altered form of Ure2p that is inactive for its normal function but can convert normal Ure2p to the altered form. The genetic evidence presented here suggests that protein-based inheritance, involving a protein unrelated to the mammalian prion protein, can occur in a microorganism.
Adenosine and its analogues are potent inhibitors of synaptic activity in the central and peripheral nervous system. In the central nervous system (CNS), this appears to arise primarily by inhibition of presynaptic release of transmitters, including glutamate, which is possibly the major excitatory transmitter in the brain. In addition, postsynaptic effects of adenosine have been reported which would also serve to reduce neurotransmission. The mechanism by which adenosine inhibits CNS neurotransmission is unknown, although it appears to exert its effect via an A1 receptor which in some systems is negatively coupled to adenylate cyclase. In an attempt to elucidate the mechanism of inhibition, we have examined the effect of pertussis toxin (PTX) on the ability of the stable adenosine analogue (-)phenylisopropyladenosine (PIA) to inhibit glutamate release from cerebellar neurones maintained in primary culture. PTX, by ADP-ribosylating the nucleotide-binding protein Ni, prevents coupling of inhibitory receptors such as the A1 receptor to adenylate cyclase. As reported here, we found that PTX, as well as preventing inhibition of adenylate cyclase by PIA, also converts the PIA-induced inhibition of glutamate release to a stimulation. Our results suggest strongly that purinergic inhibitory modulation of transmitter release occurs by inhibition of adenylate cyclase.
The heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) act as switches that regulate information processing circuits connecting cell surface receptors to a variety of effectors. The G proteins are present in all eukaryotic cells, and they control metabolic, humoral, neural, and developmental functions. More than a hundred different kinds of receptors and many different effectors have been described. The G proteins that coordinate receptor-effector activity are derived from a large gene family. At present, the family is known to contain at least sixteen different genes that encode the alpha subunit of the heterotrimer, four that encode beta subunits, and multiple genes encoding gamma subunits. Specific transient interactions between these components generate the pathways that modulate cellular responses to complex chemical signals.
Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) types 1 and 2 encode their own ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) (EC 1.17.4.1) to convert ribonucleoside diphosphates into the corresponding deoxyribonucleotides. Like other iron-dependent RNRs, the viral enzyme is formed by the reversible association of two distinct homodimeric subunits. The carboxy terminus of the RNR small subunit (R2) is critical for subunit association and synthetic peptides containing these amino-acid sequences selectively inhibit the viral enzyme by preventing subunit association. Increasing evidence indicates that the HSV RNR is important for virulence and reactivation from latency. Previously, we reported on the design of HSV RNR inhibitors with enhanced inhibitory potency in vitro. We now report on BILD 1263, which to our knowledge is the first HSV RNR subunit-association inhibitor with antiviral activity in vivo. This compound suppresses the replication of HSV-1, HSV-2 and acyclovir-resistant HSV strains in cell culture, and also strongly potentiates the antiviral activity of acyclovir. Most importantly, its anti-herpetic activity is shown in a murine ocular model of HSV-1-induced keratitis, providing an example of potent nonsubstrate-based antiviral agents that prevent protein-protein interactions. The unique antiviral properties of BILD 1263 may lead to the design of new strategies to treat herpesvirus infections in humans.
Production of type I interferon (IFN-I) is a critical host defense triggered by pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) of the innate immune system. Deubiquitinating enzyme A (DUBA), an ovarian tumor domain-containing deubiquitinating enzyme, was discovered in a small interfering RNA-based screen as a regulator of IFN-I production. Reduction of DUBA augmented the PRR-induced IFN-I response, whereas ectopic expression of DUBA had the converse effect. DUBA bound tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3), an adaptor protein essential for the IFN-I response. TRAF3 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that preferentially assembled lysine-63-linked polyubiquitin chains. DUBA selectively cleaved the lysine-63-linked polyubiquitin chains on TRAF3, resulting in its dissociation from the downstream signaling complex containing TANK-binding kinase 1. A discrete ubiquitin interaction motif within DUBA was required for efficient deubiquitination of TRAF3 and optimal suppression of IFN-I. Our data identify DUBA as a negative regulator of innate immune responses.
We have isolated a large number of polynucleotide kinase ribozymes from a pool of RNA molecules consisting of an ATP-binding domain flanked by regions of random sequence. Different classes of kinases catalyse the transfer of the gamma-thiophosphate of ATP-gamma S to the 5'-hydroxyl or to internal 2'-hydroxyls. An engineered version of one class is able to catalyse the transfer of thiophosphate from ATP-gamma S to the 5'-hydroxyl of an exogenous oligoribonucleotide substrate with multiple turnover, thus acting as a true enzyme.
Trichomonas vaginalis is a unicellular microaerophilic eukaryote that lacks mitochondria yet contains an alternative organelle, the hydrogenosome, involved in pyruvate metabolism. Pathways between the two organelles differ substantially: in hydrogenosomes, pyruvate oxidation is catalysed by pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR), with electrons donated to an [Fe]-hydrogenase which produces hydrogen. ATP is generated exclusively by substrate-level phosphorylation in hydrogenosomes, as opposed to oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria. PFOR and hydrogenase are found in eubacteria and amitochondriate eukaryotes, but not in typical mitochondria. Analyses of mitochondrial genomes indicate that mitochondria have a single endosymbiotic origin from an alpha-proteobacterial-type progenitor. The absence of a genome in trichomonad hydrogenosomes precludes such comparisons, leaving the endosymbiotic history of this organelle unclear. Although phylogenetic reconstructions of a few proteins indicate that trichomonad hydrogenosomes share a common origin with mitochondria, others do not. Here we describe a novel NADH dehydrogenase module of respiratory complex I that is coupled to the central hydrogenosomal fermentative pathway to form a hydrogenosomal oxidoreductase complex that seems to function independently of quinones. Phylogenetic analyses of hydrogenosomal complex I-like proteins Ndh51 and Ndh24 reveal that neither has a common origin with mitochondrial homologues. These studies argue against a vertical origin of trichomonad hydrogenosomes from the proto-mitochondrial endosymbiont.
Transcriptional elongation involves dynamic interactions among RNA polymerase and single-stranded and double-stranded nucleic acids in the ternary complex. In prokaryotes its regulation provides an important mechanism of genetic control. Analogous eukaryotic mechanisms are not well understood, but may control expression of proto-oncogenes and viruses, including the human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 (ref. 8). The highly conserved eukaryotic transcriptional elongation factor TFIIS enables RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) to read though pause or termination sites, nucleosomes and sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins. Two distinct domains of human TFIIS, which bind RNAPII and nucleic acids, regulate read-through and possibly nascent transcript cleavage. Here we describe the three-dimensional NMR structure of a Cys4 nucleic-acid-binding domain from human TFIIS. Unlike previously characterized zinc modules, which contain an alpha-helix, this structure consists of a three-stranded beta-sheet. Analogous Cys4 structural motifs may occur in other proteins involved in DNA or RNA transactions, including RNAPII itself. This new structure, designated the Zn ribbon, extends the repertoire of Zn-mediated peptide architectures and highlights the growing recognition of the beta-sheet as a motif of nucleic-acid recognition.
Poly(A) polymerase has a critical role in the synthesis of messenger RNA in eukaryotic cells. The isolation and characterization of complementary DNAs encoding bovine poly(A) polymerase is described here. The predicted sequences of the mRNA and protein reveal features that provide insights into how the enzyme functions and how it might be regulated. Poly(A) polymerase expressed from a cloned cDNA is fully functional in in vitro assays, and mutational analyses have identified a putative regulatory domain that enhances, but is not essential for, activity.
Ribonuclease P (RNase P) RNA is the catalytic moiety of the ribonucleoprotein enzyme that removes precursor sequences from the 5' ends of pre-transfer RNAs in eubacteria. Phylogenetic variation according to recently proposed secondary structure models was used to identify structural elements of the RNase P RNA that are dispensable for catalysis. A simplified RNase P RNA that consists only of evolutionarily conserved features was designed, synthesized, and characterized. Although the simplified RNA (Min 1 RNA) is only 263 nucleotides in length, in contrast to the 354 to 417 nucleotides of naturally occurring RNase P RNAs, its specificity of pre-tRNA cleavage is identical to that of the native enzymes. Moreover, the catalytic efficiencies of the Min 1 RNA and the native RNA enzymes are similar. These results focus the search for the catalytic elements of RNase P RNAs to their conserved structure.
Lipases are hydrolytic enzymes which break down triacylglycerides into free fatty acids and glycerols. They have been classified as serine hydrolases owing to their inhibition by diethyl p-nitrophenyl phosphate. Lipase activity is greatly increased at the lipid-water interface, a phenomenon known as interfacial activation. X-ray analysis has revealed the atomic structures of two triacylglycerol lipases, unrelated in sequence: the human pancreatic lipase (hPL)4, and an enzyme isolated from the fungus Rhizomucor (formerly Mucor) miehei (RmL). In both enzymes the active centres contain structurally analogous Asp-His-Ser triads (characteristic of serine proteinases), which are buried completely beneath a short helical segment, or 'lid'. Here we present the crystal structure (at 3 A resolution) of a complex of R. miehei lipase with n-hexylphosphonate ethyl ester in which the enzyme's active site is exposed by the movement of the helical lid. This movement also increases the nonpolarity of the surface surrounding the catalytic site. We propose that the structure of the enzyme in this complex is equivalent to the activated state generated by the oil-water interface.
Single-molecule force spectroscopy allows superb mechanical control of protein conformation. We used a custom-built low-drift atomic force microscope to observe mechanically induced conformational equilibrium fluctuations of single molecules of the eukaryotic calcium-dependent signal transducer calmodulin (CaM). From this data, the ligand dependence of the full energy landscape can be reconstructed. We find that calcium ions affect the folding kinetics of the individual CaM domains, whereas target peptides stabilize the already folded structure. Single-molecule data of full length CaM reveal that a wasp venom peptide binds noncooperatively to CaM with 2:1 stoichiometry, whereas a target enzyme peptide binds cooperatively with 1:1 stoichiometry. If mechanical load is applied directly to the target peptide, real-time binding/unbinding transitions can be observed.
The single-subunit bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase carries out the transcription cycle in an identical manner to that of bacterial and eukaryotic multisubunit enzymes. Here we report the crystal structure of a T7 RNA polymerase elongation complex, which shows that incorporation of an 8-base-pair RNA-DNA hybrid into the active site of the enzyme induces a marked rearrangement of the amino-terminal domain. This rearrangement involves alternative folding of about 130 residues and a marked reorientation (about 130 degrees rotation) of a stable core subdomain, resulting in a structure that provides elements required for stable transcription elongation. A wide opening on the enzyme surface that is probably an RNA exit pathway is formed, and the RNA-DNA hybrid is completely buried in a newly formed, deep protein cavity. Binding of 10 base pairs of downstream DNA is stabilized mostly by long-distance electrostatic interactions. The structure implies plausible mechanisms for the various phases of the transcription cycle, and reveals important structural similarities with the multisubunit RNA polymerases.
A central question in the development of multicellular organisms pertains to the timing and mechanisms of specification of the embryonic axes. In many organisms, specification of the dorsoventral axis requires signalling by proteins of the Transforming growth factor-beta and Wnt families. Here we show that maternal transcripts of the zebrafish Nodal-related morphogen, Squint (Sqt), can localize to two blastomeres at the four-cell stage and predict the dorsal axis. Removal of cells containing sqt transcripts from four-to-eight-cell embryos or injection of antisense morpholino oligonucleotides targeting sqt into oocytes can cause a loss of dorsal structures. Localization of sqt transcripts is independent of maternal Wnt pathway function and requires a highly conserved sequence in the 3' untranslated region. Thus, the dorsoventral axis is apparent by early cleavage stages and may require the maternally encoded morphogen Sqt and its associated factors. Because the 3' untranslated region of the human nodal gene can also localize exogenous sequences to dorsal cells, this mechanism may be evolutionarily conserved.
Synapsin I is a synaptic vesicle-associated phosphoprotein that is involved in the modulation of neurotransmitter release. Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, which phosphorylates two sites in the carboxy-terminal region of synapsin I, causes synapsin I to dissociate from synaptic vesicles and increases neurotransmitter release. Conversely, the dephosphorylated form of synapsin I, but not the form phosphorylated by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, inhibits neurotransmitter release. The amino-terminal region of synapsin I interacts with membrane phospholipids, whereas the C-terminal region binds to a protein component of synaptic vesicles. Here we demonstrate that the binding of the C-terminal region of synapsin I involves the regulatory domain of a synaptic vesicle-associated form of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Our results indicate that this form of the kinase functions both as a binding protein for synapsin I, and as an enzyme that phosphorylates synapsin I and promotes its dissociation from the vesicles.
Extremophilic organisms require specialized enzymes for their exotic metabolisms. Acid-loving thermophilic Archaea that live in the mudpots of volcanic solfataras obtain their energy from reduced sulphur compounds such as hydrogen sulphide (H(2)S) and carbon disulphide (CS(2)). The oxidation of these compounds into sulphuric acid creates the extremely acidic environment that characterizes solfataras. The hyperthermophilic Acidianus strain A1-3, which was isolated from the fumarolic, ancient sauna building at the Solfatara volcano (Naples, Italy), was shown to rapidly convert CS(2) into H(2)S and carbon dioxide (CO(2)), but nothing has been known about the modes of action and the evolution of the enzyme(s) involved. Here we describe the structure, the proposed mechanism and evolution of a CS(2) hydrolase from Acidianus A1-3. The enzyme monomer displays a typical b-carbonic anhydrase fold and active site, yet CO(2) is not one of its substrates. Owing to large carboxy- and amino-terminal arms, an unusual hexadecameric catenane oligomer has evolved. This structure results in the blocking of the entrance to the active site that is found in canonical b-carbonic anhydrases and the formation of a single 15-A-long, highly hydrophobic tunnel that functions as a specificity filter. The tunnel determines the enzyme's substrate specificity for CS(2), which is hydrophobic. The transposon sequences that surround the gene encoding this CS(2) hydrolase point to horizontal gene transfer as a mechanism for its acquisition during evolution. Our results show how the ancient b-carbonic anhydrase, which is central to global carbon metabolism, was transformed by divergent evolution into a crucial enzyme in CS(2) metabolism.
We previously determined the nucleotide sequence of the 3' end of Moloney leukaemia virus and discovered the potential coding region for an unknown protein, R. We now show that this region does encode a protein. A pentadecapeptide of R was chemically synthesized and antibodies raised against it. Antisera to the synthetic peptide recognize the R protein and the env precursor polyprotein in infected cells. The strategy presented here should provide a general method for accessing proteins predicted by nucleotide sequences.
DNA complementary in sequence to the messenger RNA for pre-proparathyroid hormone was synthesised using reverse transcriptase. In a linked transcription-translation system using RNA polymerase and cell-free extract from wheat germ, the DNA directed the synthesis of a protein identified as pre-proparathyroid hormone by N-terminal sequencing and by electrophoretic and immunologic criteria.
Transmembrane receptors for hormones, neurotransmitters, light, and odorants mediate their cellular effects by activating heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins). Crystal structures have revealed contact surfaces between G protein subunits, but not the surfaces or molecular mechanism through which Galphabetagamma responds to activation by transmembrane receptors. Such a surface was identified from the results of testing 100 mutant alpha subunits of the retinal G protein transducin for their ability to interact with rhodopsin. Sites at which alanine substitutions impaired this interaction mapped to two distinct Galpha surfaces: a betagamma-binding surface and a putative receptor-interacting surface. On the basis of these results a mechanism for receptor-catalyzed exchange of guanosine diphosphate for guanosine triphosphate is proposed.
A non-discriminatory base analogue, or universal base, would be an invaluable component of oligonucleotide probes and primers for solving the design problems that arise as a result of the degeneracy of the genetic code, or when only fragmentary peptide sequence data are available. We have designed an alternative to previous universal nucleoside candidates, a new analogue, 1-(2'-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranosyl)-3-nitropyrrole (designated M; Fig. 1), which maximizes stacking while minimizing hydrogen-bonding interactions without sterically disrupting a DNA duplex. Oligonucleotides containing M at several sites were used as primers for sequencing and the polymerase chain reaction. The sequencing primer d(5'-CGT AAM CAM AAM ACM AT-3') is as effective as the exact match d(5'-CGT AAT CAG AAA ACA AT-3'). It is also possible to sequence using a primer containing M at several contiguous positions, for example d(5'-CGT AAT MMM MMM MMM AT-3'). Melting curves show that duplexes formed on hybridization of the sequences d(5'-CCT TTT TMT TTT TGG-3') and d(5'-CCA AAA AXA AAA AGG-3'), where X is A, C, G or T, melted at a lower temperature than the corresponding duplexes containing only d(A.T) and d(C.G) base pairs, but showing little variation among different X bases (Tm range 3 degrees C).
Viruses have evolved many distinct strategies to avoid the host's apoptotic response. Here we describe a new family of viral inhibitors (v-FLIPs) which interfere with apoptosis signalled through death receptors and which are present in several gamma-herpesviruses (including Kaposi's-sarcoma-associated human herpesvirus-8), as well as in the tumorigenic human molluscipoxvirus. v-FLIPs contain two death-effector domains which interact with the adaptor protein FADD, and this inhibits the recruitment and activation of the protease FLICE by the CD95 death receptor. Cells expressing v-FLIPs are protected against apoptosis induced by CD95 or by the related death receptors TRAMP and TRAIL-R. The herpesvirus saimiri FLIP is detected late during the lytic viral replication cycle, at a time when host cells are partially protected from CD95-ligand-mediated apoptosis. Protection of virus-infected cells against death-receptor-induced apoptosis may lead to higher virus production and contribute to the persistence and oncogenicity of several FLIP-encoding viruses.
According to the 'thermodynamic hypothesis', the sequence of a biological macromolecule defines its folded, active (or 'native') structure as a global energy minimum in the folding landscape. However, the enormous complexity of folding landscapes of large macromolecules raises the question of whether there is in fact a unique global minimum corresponding to a unique native conformation or whether there are deep local minima corresponding to alternative active conformations. The folding of many proteins is well described by two-state models, leading to highly simplified representations of protein folding landscapes with a single native conformation. Nevertheless, accumulating experimental evidence suggests a more complex topology of folding landscapes with multiple active conformations that can take seconds or longer to interconvert. Here we demonstrate, using single-molecule experiments, that an RNA enzyme folds into multiple distinct native states that interconvert on a timescale much longer than that of catalysis. These data demonstrate that severe ruggedness of RNA folding landscapes extends into conformational space occupied by native conformations.
Crown gall tumors are induced in plants by infection with the soil bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Because the tumor induction involves transfer of a portion of the tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid DNA from the bacterium to the plant cells, this system is of interest for the study of genetic exchange as well as tumor induction. The boundaries of the transferred DNA (T-DNA) have been cloned from transformed plant cells of tobacco. Detailed mapping with restriction enzymes and nucleotide sequence analysis of two independent clones were used to study the molecular structure of the ends of the T-DNA. One clone contains the two ends of the T-DNA joined together; the other contains one end of the T-DNA joined to repetitive plant DNA sequences. These studies provide direct evidence that the T-DNA can be integrated into the plant genome. In addition, the data suggest that in the plant, T-DNA can be tandemly repeated. Sequence analysis of the junction of crown gall clone 1 reveals several direct repeats as well as an inverted repeat; these structures may be involved in the transfer of the DNA from Agrobacterium to plant cells.
It has been proposed that dithiol-disulfide interchange and oxidation-reduction reactions may play a role in hormone-induced receptor activation. Inspection of the sequences of the gonadotropic hormones revealed a homologous tetrapeptide (Cys-Gly-Pro-Cys) between the beta subunit of lutropin (LH) and the active site of thioredoxin (TD). The beta subunit of follitropin (FSH) has a similar sequence (Cys-Gly-Lys-Cys). Thioredoxin is a ubiquitous protein serving as an electron donor for ribonucleotide reductase, but it also exhibits disulfide isomerase activity. The catalytic activity of TD was assayed by its ability to reactivate reduced and denatured ribonuclease. In this assay, the purified ovine FSH and bovine LH preparations tested were approximately 60 and approximately 300 times, respectively, as active as TD on a molar basis. This heretofore unsuspected catalytic property of FSH and LH may be important in understanding their mechanism of receptor activation and signal transduction.
The end-joining reaction catalysed by DNA ligases is required by all organisms and serves as the ultimate step of DNA replication, repair and recombination processes. One of three well characterized mammalian DNA ligases, DNA ligase I, joins Okazaki fragments during DNA replication. Here we report the crystal structure of human DNA ligase I (residues 233 to 919) in complex with a nicked, 5' adenylated DNA intermediate. The structure shows that the enzyme redirects the path of the double helix to expose the nick termini for the strand-joining reaction. It also reveals a unique feature of mammalian ligases: a DNA-binding domain that allows ligase I to encircle its DNA substrate, stabilizes the DNA in a distorted structure, and positions the catalytic core on the nick. Similarities in the toroidal shape and dimensions of DNA ligase I and the proliferating cell nuclear antigen sliding clamp are suggestive of an extensive protein-protein interface that may coordinate the joining of Okazaki fragments.
Ribosomal protein (RP) genes in eukaryotes are coordinately regulated in response to growth stimuli and environmental stress, thereby permitting cells to adjust ribosome number and overall protein synthetic capacity to physiological conditions. Approximately 50% of RNA polymerase II transcription is devoted to RP genes. The transcriptional regulator Rap1 binds most yeast RP promoters, and Rap1 sites are important for coordinate regulation of RP genes. However, Rap1 is not the specific regulator that controls RP transcription because it also functions as a repressor, and many Rap1-activated promoters are not coordinately regulated with RP promoters. Here we show that the transcription factors Fhl1 and Ifh1 associate almost exclusively with RP promoters; association depends on Rap1 and (to a lesser extent) a DNA element at many RP promoters. Ifh1 is recruited to promoters via the forkhead-associated (FHA) domain of Fhl1; the level of Ifh1 associated with RP promoters determines the level of transcription; and environmental stress causes a marked reduction in the association of Ifh1, but not Fhl1 or Rap1. Thus, Ifh1 association with promoters is the key regulatory step for coordinate expression of RP genes.
Non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS) and polyketide synthases (PKS) produce numerous secondary metabolites with various therapeutic/antibiotic properties. Like fatty acid synthases (FAS), these enzymes are organized in modular assembly lines in which each module, made of conserved domains, incorporates a given monomer unit into the growing chain. Knowledge about domain or module interactions may enable reengineering of this assembly line enzymatic organization and open avenues for the design of new bioactive compounds with improved therapeutic properties. So far, little structural information has been available on how the domains interact and communicate. This may be because of inherent interdomain mobility hindering crystallization, or because crystallized molecules may not represent the active domain orientations. In solution, the large size and internal dynamics of multidomain fragments (>35 kilodaltons) make structure determination by nuclear magnetic resonance a challenge and require advanced technologies. Here we present the solution structure of the apo-thiolation-thioesterase (T-TE) di-domain fragment of the Escherichia coli enterobactin synthetase EntF NRPS subunit. In the holoenzyme, the T domain carries the growing chain tethered to a 4'-phosphopantetheine whereas the TE domain catalyses hydrolysis and cyclization of the iron chelator enterobactin. The T-TE di-domain forms a compact but dynamic structure with a well-defined domain interface; the two active sites are at a suitable distance for substrate transfer from T to TE. We observe extensive interdomain and intradomain motions for well-defined regions and show that these are modulated by interactions with proteins that participate in the biosynthesis. The T-TE interaction described here provides a model for NRPS, PKS and FAS function in general as T-TE-like di-domains typically catalyse the last step in numerous assembly-line chain-termination machineries.
Blood coagulation can be initiated when factor VII or VIIa, a plasma protease, binds to its essential cofactor, tissue factor (TF), and proteolytically activates factors IX and X, triggering a cascade of events which eventually leads to the formation of thrombin and a fibrin clot. Plasma contains a lipoprotein-associated coagulation inhibitor (LACI) which inhibits activated factor X (Xa) directly and, in a Xa-dependent way, inhibits VII(a)/TF activity, presumably by forming a quaternary Xa/LACI/VII(a)/TF complex. Sequence analysis of complementary DNA clones has shown that LACI contains three tandemly repeated Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitory domains. To investigate the relationship between these Kunitz structures and LACI function, we have used site-directed mutagenesis to produce altered forms of LACI in which the residue at the active-site cleft of each Kunitz domain has been individually changed. The second Kunitz domain is required for efficient binding and inhibition of Xa, and both Kunitz domains 1 and 2 are required for the inhibition of VIIa/TF activity; but alteration of the active-site residue of the third Kunitz domain has no significant effect on either function. We propose that in the putative inhibitory complex, Kunitz domain 1 is bound to the active site of VII(a)/TF and that Kunitz domain 2 is bound to Xa's active site.
The Xenopus c-mos proto-oncogene product, pp39mos, accumulates in the unfertilized egg during maturation, is hyperphosphorylated and exhibits protein kinase activity. On fertilization, or soon after the completion of meiosis, the accumulated pp39mos undergoes selective proteolysis. Using an in vitro protease assay system, we show here that this specific proteolysis is caused by the calcium-dependent cysteine protease, calpain.
The homeostasis of animals is regulated not only by the growth and differentiation of cells, but also by cell death through a process known as apoptosis. Apoptosis is mediated by members of the caspase family of proteases, and eventually causes the degradation of chromosomal DNA. A caspase-activated deoxyribonuclease (CAD) and its inhibitor (ICAD) have now been identified in the cytoplasmic fraction of mouse lymphoma cells. CAD is a protein of 343 amino acids which carries a nuclear-localization signal; ICAD exists in a long and a short form. Recombinant ICAD specifically inhibits CAD-induced degradation of nuclear DNA and its DNase activity. When CAD is expressed with ICAD in COS cells or in a cell-free system, CAD is produced as a complex with ICAD: treatment with caspase 3 releases the DNase activity which causes DNA fragmentation in nuclei. ICAD therefore seems to function as a chaperone for CAD during its synthesis, remaining complexed with CAD to inhibit its DNase activity; caspases activated by apoptotic stimuli then cleave ICAD, allowing CAD to enter the nucleus and degrade chromosomal DNA.
Most cases of early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD) are caused by mutations in the genes encoding the presenilin 1 (PS1) and PS2 proteins, both of which undergo regulated endoproteolytic processing. During apoptosis, PS1 and PS2 were shown to be cleaved at sites distal to their normal cleavage sites by a caspase-3 family protease. In cells expressing PS2 containing the asparagine-141 FAD mutant, the ratio of alternative to normal PS2 cleavage fragments was increased relative to wild-type PS2-expressing cells, suggesting a potential role for apoptosis-associated cleavage of presenilins in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.
The two main proteins involved in muscular contraction and cell motility, myosin and actin, possess the intrinsic property of being able to form filamentous structures. This property poses a serious impediment to the study of their structures and interactions, and a considerable effort has thus been made to isolate their functional domains. The globular part of myosin, subfragment-1 (S1), which possesses ATPase and actin-binding sites as well as supporting the movement of actin filaments during in vitro assays, has been isolated. But because S1 is efficient in inducing actin polymerization, as is myosin, it has not been possible to prepare and characterize a complex of S1 with monomeric actin (G-actin). We have now used chromatographically purified proteins to show that only the S1 isoenzyme carrying the A1 light-chain subunit promotes actin polymerization. The other isoenzyme, S1 (A2), carrying the A2 light-chain subunit, binds to actin, forming a tight complex of G-actin and S1 in a 1:1 ratio. This new functional difference between myosin isoforms directly implicates the A1 light-chain in myosin-induced actin polymerization. Additionally, this finding should lead to the purification of the stable G-actin-S1 complex needed to resolve the structure and to understand the molecular dynamics of the actin-myosin system.
We determined the minimal portion of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (RNAP) holoenzyme able to accomplish promoter melting, the crucial step in transcription initiation that provides RNAP access to the template strand. Upon duplex DNA binding, the N terminus of the beta' subunit (amino acids 1 to 314) and amino acids 94 to 507 of the sigma subunit, together comprising less than one-fifth of RNAP holoenzyme, were able to melt an extended -10 promoter in a reaction remarkably similar to that of authentic holoenzyme. Our results support the model that capture of nontemplate bases extruded from the DNA helix underlies the melting process.
The introduction of impermeant aqueous solutes into individual cells by microinjection has long been established but the difficulties of manipulating the cytosol composition of large populations of microscopic cells have only recently been overcome. Successful techniques include a dielectric breakdown procedure, treatment with micromolar concentrations of ATP4- (ref. 7) and also with very small (that is nonagglutinating, non-fusogenic) amounts of Sendai virus. So far, attention has been concentrated on the behaviour of the cells (generally their response to applied Ca2+ buffers) at the time when the membrane permeability lesions are open, and thus cytosol and external medium are in contact. I now report a novel technique for monitoring the state of molecular solute permeability in cell membranes and show that the lesions generated by ATP4- in the membrane of mast cells can be closed within seconds of adding Mg2+ so that a cycle of permeabilization and resealing can be used to explore the effect of foreign compounds trapped in the cytosol of effectively intact cells. I show that non-hydrolysable GTP analogues, introduced into the cytosol of mast cells, cause them to undergo exocytotic secretion in response to addition of extracellular Ca2+. This finding is discussed in the light of previous experience relating guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins as intermediaries between receptors and the transducers which they control.
Most biological catalysts are made of protein; however, eight classes of natural ribozymes have been discovered that catalyse fundamental biochemical reactions. The central functions of ribozymes in modern organisms support the hypothesis that life passed through an 'RNA world' before the emergence of proteins and DNA. We have identified a new class of ribozymes that cleaves the messenger RNA of the glmS gene in Gram-positive bacteria. The ribozyme is activated by glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcN6P), which is the metabolic product of the GlmS enzyme. Additional data indicate that the ribozyme serves as a metabolite-responsive genetic switch that represses the glmS gene in response to rising GlcN6P concentrations. These findings demonstrate that ribozyme switches may have functioned as metabolite sensors in primitive organisms, and further suggest that modern cells retain some of these ancient genetic control systems.
Excitatory synaptic transmission in the central nervous system is mediated primarily by the release of glutamate from presynaptic terminals onto postsynaptic channels gated by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate (AMPA) receptors. The myriad intracellular responses arising from the activation of the NMDA and AMPA receptors have previously been attributed to the flow of Ca2+ and/or Na+ through these ion channels. Here we report that the binding of the agonist AMPA to its receptor can generate intracellular signals that are independent of Ca2+ and Na+ in rat cortical neurons. In the absence of intracellular Ca2+ and Na+, AMPA, but not NMDA, brought about changes in a guanine-nucleotide-binding protein (Galpha[il]) that inhibited pertussis toxin-mediated ADP-ribosylation of the protein in an in vitro assay. This effect was observed in intact neurons treated with AMPA as well as in isolated membranes exposed to AMPA, and was also found in MIN6 cells, which express functional AMPA receptors but have no metabotropic glutamate receptors. AMPA also inhibited forskolin-stimulated activity of adenylate cyclase in neurons, demonstrating that Gi proteins were activated. Moreover, both Gbetagamma blockage and co-precipitation experiments demonstrated that the modulation of the Gi protein arose from the association of Galpha(il) with the glutamate receptor-1 (GluR1) subunit. These results suggest that, as well as acting as an ion channel, the AMPA receptor can exhibit metabotropic activity.
The cyclosporines are a family of cyclic endecapeptides that cause a profound suppression of primary immune stimulation both in vitro and in vivo. Recently, the regulatory protein calmodulin (CaM) has been implicated as a target for cyclosporin A (CsA) binding. This study utilized two less-active isomers of CsA to evaluate the specificity and biological significance of CaM binding. The three cyclosporines exhibited equivalent in vitro binding to CaM, regardless of immunosuppressive activity. Furthermore, CaM-dependent enzyme systems were inhibited equally by active and inactive cyclosporines, but only at concentrations 100 times those necessary to block lymphocyte activation. Thus the exquisite immunosuppressive stereospecificity displayed by cyclosporine isomers is not reflected in the binding to and inhibition of CaM, suggesting that inhibition of CaM-dependent processes is not sufficient to explain the immunosuppressive activity of CsA.
During neurogenesis in Drosophila, groups of equipotential, neurally competent cells choose between epidermal and neural fates. Notch, a phylogenetically conserved transmembrane protein, may act as a receptor in a lateral signalling pathway in which a single neural precursor is chosen from each group and the neural fate of the other cells is inhibited, causing them to differentiate into epidermis. Possible intracellular transduction events mediating signals from Notch are, however, unknown. shaggy is also required for the lateral signal and encodes serine/threonine protein kinases with homology to the glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) enzymes that act in signal transduction pathways in vertebrates. We report here that, in transgenic flies, GSK-3 beta can substitute for shaggy, and we also present a study of epistatic relationships between shaggy and gain and loss of function alleles of Notch. The results indicate that shaggy/GSK-3 is part of a signalling pathway downstream of Notch.
The bacteriophage N4 single-stranded DNA binding protein (N4SSB) activates transcription by the Escherichia coli final sigma70-RNA polymerase at N4 late promoters. Here it is shown that the single-stranded DNA binding activity of N4SSB is not required for transcriptional activation. N4SSB interacts with the carboxyl terminus of the RNA polymerase beta' subunit in a region that is highly conserved in the largest subunits of prokaryotic and eukaryotic RNA polymerases.
RNA can act as a template for DNA synthesis in the reverse transcription of retroviruses and retrotransposons and in the elongation of telomeres. Despite its abundance in the nucleus, there has been no evidence for a direct role of RNA as a template in the repair of any chromosomal DNA lesions, including DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), which are repaired in most organisms by homologous recombination or by non-homologous end joining. An indirect role for RNA in DNA repair, following reverse transcription and formation of a complementary DNA, has been observed in the non-homologous joining of DSB ends. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, in which homologous recombination is efficient, RNA was shown to mediate recombination, but only indirectly through a cDNA intermediate generated by the reverse transcriptase function of Ty retrotransposons in Ty particles in the cytoplasm. Although pairing between duplex DNA and single-strand (ss)RNA can occur in vitro and in vivo, direct homologous exchange of genetic information between RNA and DNA molecules has not been observed. We show here that RNA can serve as a template for DNA synthesis during repair of a chromosomal DSB in yeast. The repair was accomplished with RNA oligonucleotides complementary to the broken ends. This and the observation that even yeast replicative DNA polymerases such as alpha and delta can copy short RNA template tracts in vitro demonstrate that RNA can transfer genetic information in vivo through direct homologous interaction with chromosomal DNA.
Nitric oxide (NO) serves as a signal in plants. An Arabidopsis mutant (Atnos1) was identified that had impaired NO production, organ growth, and abscisic acid-induced stomatal movements. Expression of AtNOS1 with a viral promoter in Atnos1 mutant plants resulted in overproduction of NO. Purified AtNOS1 protein used the substrates arginine and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate and was activated by Ca2+ and calmodulin-like mammalian endothelial nitric oxide synthase and neuronal nitric oxide synthase, yet it is a distinct enzyme with no sequence similarities to any mammalian isoform. Thus, AtNOS1 encodes a distinct nitric oxide synthase that regulates growth and hormonal signaling in plants.
Eukaryotic chromosomes are capped with repetitive telomere sequences that protect the ends from damage and rearrangements. Telomere repeats are synthesized by telomerase, a ribonucleic acid (RNA)-protein complex. Here, the cloning of the RNA component of human telomerase, termed hTR, is described. The template region of hTR encompasses 11 nucleotides (5'-CUAACCCUAAC) complementary to the human telomere sequence (TTAGGG)n. Germline tissues and tumor cell lines expressed more hTR than normal somatic cells and tissues, which have no detectable telomerase activity. Human cell lines that expressed hTR mutated in the template region generated the predicted mutant telomerase activity. HeLa cells transfected with an antisense hTR lost telomeric DNA and began to die after 23 to 26 doublings. Thus, human telomerase is a critical enzyme for the long-term proliferation of immortal tumor cells.
The structures of RNA molecules are often important for their function and regulation, yet there are no experimental techniques for genome-scale measurement of RNA structure. Here we describe a novel strategy termed parallel analysis of RNA structure (PARS), which is based on deep sequencing fragments of RNAs that were treated with structure-specific enzymes, thus providing simultaneous in vitro profiling of the secondary structure of thousands of RNA species at single nucleotide resolution. We apply PARS to profile the secondary structure of the messenger RNAs (mRNAs) of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and obtain structural profiles for over 3,000 distinct transcripts. Analysis of these profiles reveals several RNA structural properties of yeast transcripts, including the existence of more secondary structure over coding regions compared with untranslated regions, a three-nucleotide periodicity of secondary structure across coding regions and an anti-correlation between the efficiency with which an mRNA is translated and the structure over its translation start site. PARS is readily applicable to other organisms and to profiling RNA structure in diverse conditions, thus enabling studies of the dynamics of secondary structure at a genomic scale.
The crystal structure of Escherichia coli glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase (GlnRS) complexed with its cognate glutaminyl transfer RNA (tRNA(Gln] and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) has been derived from a 2.8 angstrom resolution electron density map and the known protein and tRNA sequences. The 63.4-kilodalton monomeric enzyme consists of four domains arranged to give an elongated molecule with an axial ratio greater than 3 to 1. Its interactions with the tRNA extend from the anticodon to the acceptor stem along the entire inside of the L of the tRNA. The complexed tRNA retains the overall conformation of the yeast phenylalanine tRNA (tRNA(Phe] with two major differences: the 3' acceptor strand of tRNA(Gln) makes a hairpin turn toward the inside of the L, with the disruption of the final base pair of the acceptor stem, and the anticodon loop adopts a conformation not seen in any of the previously determined tRNA structures. Specific recognition elements identified so far include (i) enzyme contacts with the 2-amino groups of guanine via the tRNA minor groove in the acceptor stem at G2 and G3; (ii) interactions between the enzyme and the anticodon nucleotides; and (iii) the ability of the nucleotides G73 and U1.A72 of the cognate tRNA to assume a conformation stabilized by the protein at a lower free energy cost than noncognate sequences. The central domain of this synthetase binds ATP, glutamine, and the acceptor end of the tRNA as well as making specific interactions with the acceptor stem.2+t is
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) represent a group of common progressive encephalopathies of children which have a global incidence of 1 in 12,500. These severe brain diseases are divided into three autosomal recessive subtypes, assigned to different chromosomal loci. The infantile subtype of NCL (INCL), linked to chromosome 1p32, is characterized by early visual loss and rapidly progressing mental deterioration, resulting in a flat electroencephalogram by 3 years of age; death occurs at 8 to 11 years, and characteristic storage bodies are found in brain and other tissues at autopsy. The molecular pathogenesis underlying the selective loss of neurons of neocortical origin has remained unknown. Here we report the identification, by positional candidate methods, of defects in the palmitoyl-protein thioesterase gene in all 42 Finnish INCL patients and several non-Finnish patients. The most common mutation results in intracellular accumulation of the polypeptide and undetectable enzyme activity in the brain of patients.
To cause diseases in plants, pathogenic microorganisms have evolved mechanisms to deliver proteins directly into plant cells, where they suppress plant defences and facilitate tissue invasion. How plant pathogenic fungi, which cause many of the world's most serious plant diseases, deliver proteins during plant infection is currently unknown. Here we report the characterization of a P-type ATPase-encoding gene, MgAPT2, in the economically important rice blast pathogen Magnaporthe grisea, which is required for exocytosis during plant infection. Targeted gene replacement showed that MgAPT2 is required for both foliar and root infection by the fungus, and for the rapid induction of host defence responses in an incompatible reaction. DeltaMgapt2 mutants are impaired in the secretion of a range of extracellular enzymes and accumulate abnormal Golgi-like cisternae. However, the loss of MgAPT2 does not significantly affect hyphal growth or sporulation, indicating that the establishment of rice blast disease involves the use of MgApt2-dependent exocytotic processes that operate during plant infection.
Ligand-gated membrane channels selectively facilitate the entry of iron into prokaryotic cells. The essential role of iron in metabolism makes its acquisition a determinant of bacterial pathogenesis and a target for therapeutic strategies. In Gram-negative bacteria, TonB-dependent outer membrane proteins form energized, gated pores that bind iron chelates (siderophores) and internalize them. The time-resolved operation of the Escherichia coli ferric enterobactin receptor FepA was observed in vivo with electron spin resonance spectroscopy by monitoring the mobility of covalently bound nitroxide spin labels. A ligand-binding surface loop of FepA, which normally closes its transmembrane channel, exhibited energy-dependent structural changes during iron and toxin (colicin) transport. These changes were not merely associated with ligand binding, but occurred during ligand uptake through the outer membrane bilayer. The results demonstrate by a physical method that gated-porin channels open and close during membrane transport in vivo.
Cellulose is the major polysaccharide component of plant cell walls and is the most abundant organic compound on the planet. A number of bacterial and fungal organisms can use cellulose as a food source, possessing cellulases (cellobiohydrolases and endoglucanases) that can catalyse the hydrolysis of the beta-(1,4) glycosidic bonds. They can be classified into seven distinct families. The three-dimensional structures of members of two of these families are known. Here we report the structure of a third cellulase, endoglucanase V, whose sequence is not represented in any of the above families. The enzyme is structurally distinct from the previously determined cellulases but is similar to a recently characterized plant defence protein. The active site region resembles that of lysozyme, despite the lack of structural similarity between these two enzymes.
The small G protein ARF1 is involved in the coating of vesicles that bud from the Golgi compartments. Its activation is controlled by as-yet unidentified guanine-nucleotide exchange factors. Gea1, the first ARF exchange factor to be discovered in yeast, is a large protein containing a domain of homology with Sec7, another yeast protein that is also involved in secretion. Here we characterized a smaller human protein (relative molecular mass 47K) named ARNO, which contains a central Sec7 domain that promotes guanine-nucleotide exchange on ARF1. ARNO also contains an amino-terminal coiled-coil motif and a carboxy-terminal pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain. The PH domain mediates an enhancement of ARNO exchange activity by negatively charged phospholipid vesicles supplemented with phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate. The exchange activity of ARNO is not inhibited by brefeldin A, an agent known to block vesicular transport and inhibit the exchange activity on ARF1 in cell extracts. This suggests that a regulatory component which is sensitive to brefeldin A associates with ARNO in vivo, possibly through the amino-terminal coiled-coil. We propose that other proteins with a Sec7 domain regulate different members of the ARF family.
The recent emergence of highly pathogenic avian influenza A virus strains with subtype H5N1 pose a global threat to human health. Elucidation of the underlying mechanisms of viral replication is critical for development of anti-influenza virus drugs. The influenza RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) heterotrimer has crucial roles in viral RNA replication and transcription. It contains three proteins: PA, PB1 and PB2. PB1 harbours polymerase and endonuclease activities and PB2 is responsible for cap binding; PA is implicated in RNA replication and proteolytic activity, although its function is less clearly defined. Here we report the 2.9 angstrom structure of avian H5N1 influenza A virus PA (PA(C), residues 257-716) in complex with the PA-binding region of PB1 (PB1(N), residues 1-25). PA(C) has a fold resembling a dragon's head with PB1(N) clamped into its open 'jaws'. PB1(N) is a known inhibitor that blocks assembly of the polymerase heterotrimer and abolishes viral replication. Our structure provides details for the binding of PB1(N) to PA(C) at the atomic level, demonstrating a potential target for novel anti-influenza therapeutics. We also discuss a potential nucleotide binding site and the roles of some known residues involved in polymerase activity. Furthermore, to explore the role of PA in viral replication and transcription, we propose a model for the influenza RdRp heterotrimer by comparing PA(C) with the lambda3 reovirus polymerase structure, and docking the PA(C) structure into an available low resolution electron microscopy map.
The entire DNA complementary to murine alpha-fetoprotein mRNA has been cloned in the plasmid vector pBR322 and its complete nucleotide sequence determined. The deduced amino acid sequence identifies a hydrophobic prepeptide of 19 amino acids and the complete primary structure of alpha-fetoprotein. Its structure reveals extensive homology to serum albumin and suggests that there are 15 disulphide bridges in the alpha-fetoprotein molecule, all at the same positions as those found in albumin. The AFP molecule can be organized into a three-domain structure almost identical to that of serum albumin, suggesting a common ancestral origin of the two proteins.
The crystal structure of mammalian protein phosphatase-1, complexed with the toxin microcystin and determined at 2.1 A resolution, reveals that it is a metalloenzyme unrelated in architecture to the tyrosine phosphatases. Two metal ions are positioned by a central beta-alpha-beta-alpha-beta scaffold at the active site, from which emanate three surface grooves that are potential binding sites for substrates and inhibitors. The carboxy terminus is positioned at the end of one of the grooves such that regulatory sequences following the domain might modulate function. The fold of the catalytic domain is expected to be closely preserved in protein phosphatases 2A and 2B (calcineurin).
Carboxypeptidase E (enkephalin convertase) was first identified as the carboxypeptidase B-like enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of enkephalin in bovine adrenal chromaffin granules. A similar enzyme is present in many brain regions and in purified secretory granules from rat pituitary and rat insulinoma. Within the secretory granules, carboxypeptidase E (CPE) activity is found in both a soluble and a membrane-bound form, which differ slightly in relative molecular mass (Mr). Here, to investigate whether the CPE activities in the various tissues are produced from a single gene, purified CPE was partially sequenced and oligonucleotide probes were used to isolate a clone encoding CPE from a bovine pituitary complementary DNA library. This cDNA hybridizes to bovine pituitary poly(A)+ RNAs of approximately 3.3, 2.6 and 2.1 kilobases (kb), with the 3.3-kb messenger RNA the predominant species. The predicted amino-acid sequence of the cDNA clone contains the partially determined sequences of CPE, several pairs of basic amino acids and displays some homology with both carboxypeptidases A and B. Restriction analysis of bovine genomic DNA suggests only one gene for CPE. This is consistent with a broad role for CPE in the biosynthesis of many neuropeptides.
Human adenovirus (Ad2), like many other viruses, contains a virion-associated proteinase essential for the synthesis of infectious virus particles. We observed proteinase activity in wild-type virus but not in the ts-1 virus, which contains a mutation in the Ad2 L3 endoprotease gene that confers temperature-sensitive processing of virion precursor proteins. Unexpectedly, we did not observe proteinase activity with purified recombinant endoprotease protein (M(r) 23 K). Purified recombinant endoprotease protein, however, complemented the mutation in ts-1 virions, restoring proteinase activity when mixed together. This implied that cofactors may be required. Here we reconstitute proteinase activity in vitro with three purified viral components: (1) the recombinant endoprotease protein; (2) an 11-amino-acid peptide that originates from the carboxy terminus of pVI, the precursor to virion component VI; and (3) adenovirus DNA. The use of DNA for a proteinase activity is unprecedented.
RNA interference (RNAi) pathways have evolved as important modulators of gene expression that operate in the cytoplasm by degrading RNA target molecules through the activity of short (21-30 nucleotide) RNAs. RNAi components have been reported to have a role in the nucleus, as they are involved in epigenetic regulation and heterochromatin formation. However, although RNAi-mediated post-transcriptional gene silencing is well documented, the mechanisms of RNAi-mediated transcriptional gene silencing and, in particular, the role of RNAi components in chromatin dynamics, especially in animal multicellular organisms, are elusive. Here we show that the key RNAi components Dicer 2 (DCR2) and Argonaute 2 (AGO2) associate with chromatin (with a strong preference for euchromatic, transcriptionally active, loci) and interact with the core transcription machinery. Notably, loss of function of DCR2 or AGO2 showed that transcriptional defects are accompanied by the perturbation of RNA polymerase II positioning on promoters. Furthermore, after heat shock, both Dcr2 and Ago2 null mutations, as well as missense mutations that compromise the RNAi activity, impaired the global dynamics of RNA polymerase II. Finally, the deep sequencing of the AGO2-associated small RNAs (AGO2 RIP-seq) revealed that AGO2 is strongly enriched in small RNAs that encompass the promoter regions and other regions of heat-shock and other genetic loci on both the sense and antisense DNA strands, but with a strong bias for the antisense strand, particularly after heat shock. Taken together, our results show that DCR2 and AGO2 are globally associated with transcriptionally active loci and may have a pivotal role in shaping the transcriptome by controlling the processivity of RNA polymerase II.
In the presence of costimulation, Ca2+ influx in T cells leads to activation (transcription of interleukin-2; ref. 2) via calcineurin. In the absence of costimulation, Ca2+ influx results in anergy (interleukin-2 transcriptional block) through an unknown mechanism. Specific attenuation of interleukin-2 transcriptional induction occurs in Jurkat T cells following pretreatment with a Ca2+ ionophore. A > 90% block of inducible interleukin-2 reporter gene activity was initiated by transfection of a constitutively active mutant of multifunctional Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase or CaM kinase II), but not by constitutive mutants of CaM kinase IV, calcineurin or protein kinase C. The block was complete six hours after kinase transfection and showed specificity for interleukin-2; there was no change in beta-actin transcription or in c-fos transcription induced by phorbol myristyl acetate, and a Rous sarcoma virus promoter was stimulated threefold. Multifunctional CaM kinase also attenuated interleukin-2 activation by calcineurin plus phorbol ester. T-cell receptor signalling activates multifunctional CaM kinase. These findings suggest that two Ca2+/calmodulin-responsive enzymes, multifunctional CaM kinase and calcineurin, could mediate the divergent effects of Ca2+ signals in T-lymphocyte regulation.
The REV3 and REV7 genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are required for DNA damage-induced mutagenesis. The Rev3 and Rev7 proteins were shown to form a complex with DNA polymerase activity. This polymerase replicated past a thymine-thymine cis-syn cyclobutane dimer, a lesion that normally severely inhibits replication, with an efficiency of approximately 10 percent. In contrast, bypass replication efficiency with yeast DNA polymerase alpha was no more than 1 percent. The Rev3-Rev7 complex is the sixth eukaryotic DNA polymerase to be described, and is therefore called DNA polymerase zeta.
In cystic fibrosis (CF), numerous epithelial cell functions are abnormal, including Cl- conductance, sodium absorption, mucin sulphation and enzyme secretion. Although the CF gene product, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), functions as a small linear Cl- channel, it is difficult to attribute such pleiotropic disease manifestations solely to a defect in Cl- conductance. This has led to speculation that CFTR regulates the activity of other proteins. One possible example is the protein kinase A activation of outward rectifying Cl- channels (ORCC), which is defective in membrane patches excised from CF cells. Whether CFTR regulates the activity of an independent anion channel is debatable, because ORCC occur exclusively in excised membrane patches and could be an excision-induced molecular derivative of CFTR. 'Knockout' mice that lack CFTR provide a means to define the relationship between CFTR and ORCC. Here we report that ORCC are present in CFTR(-/-) mouse nasal epithelial cells and thus cannot be a derivative of the CFTR molecule. Also ORCC were regulated by protein kinase A in membrane patches from normal but not CFTR(-/-) cells. These observations are the first, to our knowledge definitive demonstration that CFTR regulates the activity of another protein.
The cellular prion protein (PrPC) is a sialoglycoprotein of M(r) 33-35K that is expressed predominantly in neurons. In transmissible and genetic neurodegenerative disorders such as scrapie of sheep, spongiform encephalopathy of cattle and Creutzfeldt-Jakob or Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker diseases of humans, PrPC is converted into an altered form (termed PrPSc) which is distinguishable from its normal homologue by its relative resistance to protease digestion. PrPSc accumulates in the central nervous system of affected individuals, and its protease-resistant core aggregates extracellularly into amyloid fibrils. The process is accompanied by nerve cell loss, whose pathogenesis and molecular basis are not understood. We report here that neuronal death results from chronic exposure of primary rat hippocampal cultures to micromolar concentrations of a peptide corresponding to residues 106-126 of the amino-acid sequence deduced from human PrP complementary DNA. DNA fragmentation of degenerating neurons indicates that cell death occurred by apoptosis. The PrP peptide 106-126 has a high intrinsic ability to polymerize into amyloid-like fibrils in vitro. These findings indicate that cerebral accumulation of PrPSc and its degradation products may play a role in the nerve cell degeneration that occurs in prion-related encephalopathies.
To establish productive infection, a retrovirus must insert a DNA replica of its genome into host cell chromosomal DNA. This process is operated by the intasome, a nucleoprotein complex composed of an integrase tetramer (IN) assembled on the viral DNA ends. The intasome engages chromosomal DNA within a target capture complex to carry out strand transfer, irreversibly joining the viral and cellular DNA molecules. Although several intasome/transpososome structures from the DDE(D) recombinase superfamily have been reported, the mechanics of target DNA capture and strand transfer by these enzymes remained unclear. Here we report crystal structures of the intasome from prototype foamy virus in complex with target DNA, elucidating the pre-integration target DNA capture and post-catalytic strand transfer intermediates of the retroviral integration process. The cleft between IN dimers within the intasome accommodates chromosomal DNA in a severely bent conformation, allowing widely spaced IN active sites to access the scissile phosphodiester bonds. Our results resolve the structural basis for retroviral DNA integration and provide a framework for the design of INs with altered target sequences.
In bacteria, the binding of a single protein, the initiation factor sigma, to a multi-subunit RNA polymerase core enzyme results in the formation of a holoenzyme, the active form of RNA polymerase essential for transcription initiation. Here we report the crystal structure of a bacterial RNA polymerase holoenzyme from Thermus thermophilus at 2.6 A resolution. In the structure, two amino-terminal domains of the sigma subunit form a V-shaped structure near the opening of the upstream DNA-binding channel of the active site cleft. The carboxy-terminal domain of sigma is near the outlet of the RNA-exit channel, about 57 A from the N-terminal domains. The extended linker domain forms a hairpin protruding into the active site cleft, then stretching through the RNA-exit channel to connect the N- and C-terminal domains. The holoenzyme structure provides insight into the structural organization of transcription intermediate complexes and into the mechanism of transcription initiation.
It is now generally accepted that 16S and 23S ribosomal RNA play important roles in the decoding and peptidyl transferase activities of ribosomes. Despite their complex structures and numerous associated proteins it is possible that small domains of these rRNAs can fold and function autonomously, particularly those that appear devoid of protein interactions. One candidate for such a domain is the decoding region, located near the 3' end of 16S rRNA (Fig. 1a, b). Consistent with this hypothesis, aminoglycoside antibiotics that interact with the decoding region in 30S subunits interact with other RNAs in the absence of proteins. In addition, certain activities of self-splicing introns, at least superficially, resemble translational decoding. We report here that an oligoribonucleotide analogue of the decoding region interacts with both antibiotic and RNA ligands of the 30S subunit in a manner that correlates with normal subunit function. The activities of the decoding region analogue suggest that the intimidating structural complexity of the ribosome can be, to some degree, circumvented.
The crystal structure of the catalytic subunit of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase complexed with a 20-amino acid substrate analog inhibitor has been solved and partially refined at 2.7 A resolution to an R factor of 0.212. The magnesium adenosine triphosphate (MgATP) binding site was located by difference Fourier synthesis. The enzyme structure is bilobal with a deep cleft between the lobes. The cleft is filled by MgATP and a portion of the inhibitor peptide. The smaller lobe, consisting mostly of amino-terminal sequence, is associated with nucleotide binding, and its largely antiparallel beta sheet architecture constitutes an unusual nucleotide binding motif. The larger lobe is dominated by helical structure with a single beta sheet at the domain interface. This lobe is primarily involved in peptide binding and catalysis. Residues 40 through 280 constitute a conserved catalytic core that is shared by more than 100 protein kinases. Most of the invariant amino acids in this conserved catalytic core are clustered at the sites of nucleotide binding and catalysis.
During fasting, increased concentrations of circulating catecholamines promote the mobilization of lipid stores from adipose tissue in part by phosphorylating and inactivating acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase (ACC), the rate-limiting enzyme in fatty acid synthesis. Here, we describe a parallel pathway, in which the pseudokinase Tribbles 3 (TRB3), whose abundance is increased during fasting, stimulates lipolysis by triggering the degradation of ACC in adipose tissue. TRB3 promoted ACC ubiquitination through an association with the E3 ubiquitin ligase constitutive photomorphogenic protein 1 (COP1). Indeed, adipocytes deficient in TRB3 accumulated larger amounts of ACC protein than did wild-type cells. Because transgenic mice expressing TRB3 in adipose tissue are protected from diet-induced obesity due to enhanced fatty acid oxidation, these results demonstrate how phosphorylation and ubiquitination pathways converge on a key regulator of lipid metabolism to maintain energy homeostasis.
The mammalian growth factor receptor-binding protein Grb2 is an adaptor that mediates activation of guanine nucleotide exchange on Ras. Grb2 binds to the receptor through its SH2 domain and to the carboxyl-terminal domain of Son of sevenless through its two SH3 domains. It is thus a key element in the signal transduction pathway. The crystal structure of Grb2 was determined to 3.1 angstrom resolution. The asymmetric unit is composed of an embedded dimer. The interlaced junctions between the SH2 and SH3 domains bring the two adjacent faces of the SH3 domains in van der Waals contact but leave room for the binding of proline-rich peptides.
We present an atomic model for glutamine synthetase, an enzyme of central importance in bacterial nitrogen metabolism, from X-ray crystallography. The 12 identical subunits are arranged as the carbon atoms in two face-to-face benzene rings, with unusual subunit contacts. Our model, which places the active sites at the subunit interfaces, suggests a mechanism for the main functional role of glutamine synthetase: how the enzyme regulates the rate of synthesis of glutamine in response to covalent modification and feedback inhibition.
Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors are phosphorylated by kinases that mediate agonist-dependent receptor deactivation. Although many receptor kinases have been isolated, the corresponding phosphatases, necessary for restoring the ground state of the receptor, have not been identified. Drosophila RDGC (retinal degeneration C) is a phosphatase required for rhodopsin dephosphorylation in vivo. Loss of RDGC caused severe defects in the termination of the light response as well as extensive light-dependent retinal degeneration. These phenotypes resulted from the hyperphosphorylation of rhodopsin because expression of a truncated rhodopsin lacking the phosphorylation sites restored normal photoreceptor function. These results suggest the existence of a family of receptor phosphatases involved in the regulation of G protein-coupled signaling cascades.
Agouti protein and agouti-related protein are homologous paracrine signalling molecules that normally regulate hair colour and body weight, respectively, by antagonizing signalling through melanocortin receptors. Expression of Agouti is normally limited to the skin, but rare alleles from which Agouti is expressed ubiquitously, such as lethal yellow, have pleiotropic effects that include a yellow coat, obesity, increased linear growth, and immune defects. The mahogany (mg) mutation suppresses the effects of lethal yellow on pigmentation and body weight, and results of our previous genetic studies place mg downstream of transcription of Agouti but upstream of melanocortin receptors. Here we use positional cloning to identify a candidate gene for mahogany, Mgca. The predicted protein encoded by Mgca is a 1,428-amino-acid, single-transmembrane-domain protein that is expressed in many tissues, including pigment cells and the hypothalamus. The extracellular domain of the Mgca protein is the orthologue of human attractin, a circulating molecule produced by activated T cells that has been implicated in immune-cell interactions. These observations provide new insight into the regulation of energy metabolism and indicate a molecular basis for crosstalk between melanocortin-receptor signalling and immune function.
Antiviral immunity against a pathogen is mounted upon recognition by the host of virally associated structures. One of these viral 'signatures', double-stranded (ds) RNA, is a replication product of most viruses within infected cells and is sensed by Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and the recently identified cytosolic RNA helicases RIG-I (retinoic acid inducible gene I, also known as Ddx58) and Mda5 (melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5, also known as Ifih1 or Helicard). Both helicases detect dsRNA, and through their protein-interacting CARD domains, relay an undefined signal resulting in the activation of the transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-kappaB. Here we describe Cardif, a new CARD-containing adaptor protein that interacts with RIG-I and recruits IKKalpha, IKKbeta and IKKvarepsilon kinases by means of its C-terminal region, leading to the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3. Overexpression of Cardif results in interferon-beta and NF-kappaB promoter activation, and knockdown of Cardif by short interfering RNA inhibits RIG-I-dependent antiviral responses. Cardif is targeted and inactivated by NS3-4A, a serine protease from hepatitis C virus known to block interferon-beta production. Cardif thus functions as an adaptor, linking the cytoplasmic dsRNA receptor RIG-I to the initiation of antiviral programmes.
The cytochrome bc1 is one of the three major respiratory enzyme complexes residing in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Cytochrome bc1 transfers electrons from ubiquinol to cytochrome c and uses the energy thus released to form an electrochemical gradient across the inner membrane. Our X-ray crystal structures of the complex from chicken, cow and rabbit in both the presence and absence of inhibitors of quinone oxidation, reveal two different locations for the extrinsic domain of one component of the enzyme, an iron-sulphur protein. One location is close enough to the supposed quinol oxidation site to allow reduction of the Fe-S protein by ubiquinol. The other site is close enough to cytochrome c1 to allow oxidation of the Fe-S protein by the cytochrome. As neither location will allow both reactions to proceed at a suitable rate, the reaction mechanism must involve movement of the extrinsic domain of the Fe-S component in order to shuttle electrons from ubiquinol to cytochrome c1. Such a mechanism has not previously been observed in redox protein complexes.
Methylating agents generate cytotoxic and mutagenic DNA damage. Cells use 3-methyladenine-DNA glycosylases to excise some methylated bases from DNA, and suicidal O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferases to transfer alkyl groups from other lesions onto a cysteine residue. Here we report that the highly conserved AlkB protein repairs DNA alkylation damage by means of an unprecedented mechanism. AlkB has no detectable nuclease, DNA glycosylase or methyltransferase activity; however, Escherichia coli alkB mutants are defective in processing methylation damage generated in single-stranded DNA. Theoretical protein fold recognition had suggested that AlkB resembles the Fe(ii)- and alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, which use iron-oxo intermediates to oxidize chemically inert compounds. We show here that purified AlkB repairs the cytotoxic lesions 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine in single- and double-stranded DNA in a reaction that is dependent on oxygen, alpha-ketoglutarate and Fe(ii). The AlkB enzyme couples oxidative decarboxylation of alpha-ketoglutarate to the hydroxylation of these methylated bases in DNA, resulting in direct reversion to the unmodified base and the release of formaldehyde.
Integrins mediate cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix and transmit signals within the cell that stimulate cell spreading, retraction, migration, and proliferation. The mechanism of integrin outside-in signaling has been unclear. We found that the heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein) Galpha13 directly bound to the integrin beta3 cytoplasmic domain and that Galpha13-integrin interaction was promoted by ligand binding to the integrin alphaIIbbeta3 and by guanosine triphosphate (GTP) loading of Galpha13. Interference of Galpha13 expression or a myristoylated fragment of Galpha13 that inhibited interaction of alphaIIbbeta3 with Galpha13 diminished activation of protein kinase c-Src and stimulated the small guanosine triphosphatase RhoA, consequently inhibiting cell spreading and accelerating cell retraction. We conclude that integrins are noncanonical Galpha13-coupled receptors that provide a mechanism for dynamic regulation of RhoA.
The enzyme (2-5A synthetase) which synthesizes ppp(A2'p)nA where n=2 to 4 (collectively referred to as 2-5A) is widely distributed in a variety of cells and tissues in amounts which increase response to interferon and vary with growth and hormone status. 2-5A activates a nuclease which inhibits protein synthesis. The non-phosphorylated 'core' of 2-5A ((A2'p)nA, n=2 to 4) can inhibit DNA synthesis and cell growth. Here we describe convenient and sensitive radioimmune (RI) and radiobinding (RB) assays for core and 2-5A. In combination with more satisfactory high performance liquid chromatography (HPCL) methods using reverse-phase C18 columns, these assays have been used to detect core and 2-5A in crude extracts from interferon-treated cells. The novel 2-5A synthetase products NAD2'p5' A2'p5'A and A5'p45'A2'p5'A2'p5'A (ref. 13), which can also be detected using the RB assay, were not found in significant amounts. The natural occurrence of core has not been described previously.
The genome of Aspergillus oryzae, a fungus important for the production of traditional fermented foods and beverages in Japan, has been sequenced. The ability to secrete large amounts of proteins and the development of a transformation system have facilitated the use of A. oryzae in modern biotechnology. Although both A. oryzae and Aspergillus flavus belong to the section Flavi of the subgenus Circumdati of Aspergillus, A. oryzae, unlike A. flavus, does not produce aflatoxin, and its long history of use in the food industry has proved its safety. Here we show that the 37-megabase (Mb) genome of A. oryzae contains 12,074 genes and is expanded by 7-9 Mb in comparison with the genomes of Aspergillus nidulans and Aspergillus fumigatus. Comparison of the three aspergilli species revealed the presence of syntenic blocks and A. oryzae-specific blocks (lacking synteny with A. nidulans and A. fumigatus) in a mosaic manner throughout the genome of A. oryzae. The blocks of A. oryzae-specific sequence are enriched for genes involved in metabolism, particularly those for the synthesis of secondary metabolites. Specific expansion of genes for secretory hydrolytic enzymes, amino acid metabolism and amino acid/sugar uptake transporters supports the idea that A. oryzae is an ideal microorganism for fermentation.
The three-dimensional structure of the amino-terminal 44K ATPase fragment of the 70K bovine heat-shock cognate protein has been solved to a resolution of 2.2 A. The ATPase fragment has two structural lobes with a deep cleft between them; ATP binds at the base of the cleft. Surprisingly, the nucleotide-binding 'core' of the ATPase fragment has a tertiary structure similar to that of hexokinase, although the remainder of the structures of the two proteins are completely dissimilar, suggesting that both the phosphotransferase mechanism and the substrate-induced conformational change intrinsic to the hexokinases may be used by the 70K heat shock-related proteins.
Ras proteins regulate cellular growth and differentiation, and are mutated in 30% of cancers. We have shown recently that Ras is activated on and transmits signals from the Golgi apparatus as well as the plasma membrane but the mechanism of compartmentalized signalling was not determined. Here we show that, in response to Src-dependent activation of phospholipase Cgamma1, the Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor RasGRP1 translocated to the Golgi where it activated Ras. Whereas Ca(2+) positively regulated Ras on the Golgi apparatus through RasGRP1, the same second messenger negatively regulated Ras on the plasma membrane by means of the Ras GTPase-activating protein CAPRI. Ras activation after T-cell receptor stimulation in Jurkat cells, rich in RasGRP1, was limited to the Golgi apparatus through the action of CAPRI, demonstrating unambiguously a physiological role for Ras on Golgi. Activation of Ras on Golgi also induced differentiation of PC12 cells, transformed fibroblasts and mediated radioresistance. Thus, activation of Ras on Golgi has important biological consequences and proceeds through a pathway distinct from the one that activates Ras on the plasma membrane.
Cell membrane receptors for hormones and neurotransmitters form oligomeric complexes with GTP-regulatory proteins and inhibit the latter from reacting with GTP. Hormones and neurotransmitters act by releasing the inhibitory constraints imposed by the receptors, thus allowing the GTP-regulatory proteins to interact with and control the activity of enzymes such as adenylate cyclase. This theory may apply generally to membrane signal transduction involving surface receptors.
A group of hydrolytic enzymes, including phosphatases and nucleases, is selectively released from E. coli and certain other Gram-negative bacteria by a process designated as osmotic shock. This procedure involves exposure of the cells to ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) in 0.5 molar sucrose followed by a sudden osmotic transition to cold, dilute MgCl(2). Osmotic shock also results in an alteration of the permeability barrier of the bacterial cell and a depletion of the pool of acid-soluble nucleotides, but there is no loss of viability. On being restored to growth medium, the shocked cells recover after a lag period. Formation of spheroplasts by treatment with EDTA and lysozyme leads to selective release of the same group of enzymes. We believe that the selectively released enzymes are confined in a region between the bacterial cell wall and the cytoplasmic membrane. Histochemical studies indicate such a localization. Further, the enzyme activities are measurable with intact cells, even when the substrate is a nucleotide, to which whole cells are impermeable. Another piece of evidence concerns a mutant E. coli with a defective cell wall. In contrast to normal bacteria, this organism loses one of these enzymes into the medium in the course of growth. After osmotic shock, the bacteria show reduced uptake of sulfate,betagalactosides, galactose, and certain amino acids. Furthermore, the shock treatment causes the release of nondialyzable factors able to bind sulfate, galactose, and the same amino acids. A possible interpretation of these observations is the following: the binding proteins occupy sites near the bacterial surface, and they may be components of active transport systems responsible for the concentrative uptake of these nutrients.
Retroviral nucleocapsid and gag-precursor proteins from all known strains of retroviruses contain one or two copies of an invariant sequence, Cys-X2-Cys-X4-His-X4-Cys, that is populated with zinc in mature particles. Modification of cysteine or histidine residues results in defective packaging of genomic viral RNA and formation of non-infectious particles, making these structures potentially attractive targets for antiviral therapy. We recently reported that aromatic C-nitroso ligands of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase preferentially destabilize one of the two (Cys-X2-Cys-X28-His-X2-Cys) zinc-fingers with concomitant loss of enzymatic activity, coincidental with selective cytocidal action of the C-nitroso substituted ligands on cancer cells. Based on the occurrence of (3Cys, 1His) zinc-binding sites in both retroviral nucleocapsid and gag proteins and in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, we reasoned that the C-nitroso compounds may also have antiretroviral effects. We show here that two such compounds, 3-nitrosobenzamide and 6-nitroso-1,2-benzopyrone, inhibit infection of human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 in human lymphocytes and also eject zinc from isoalted HIV-1 nucleocapsid zinc fingers and from intact HIV-1 virions. Thus the design of zinc-ejecting agents that target retroviral zinc fingers represents a new approach to the chemotherapy of AIDS.
The binding of trinucleoside diphosphates to long helical rods of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) protein is shown to depend on base sequence, 5' AAG 3' binding being the strongest of the 25 trinucleoside diphosphate sequences measured. As TMV has a stoichiometry of three nucleotides per protein subunit, the sequence of TMV RNA suggested to be the nucleation site for self-assembly of the virus has three possible binding frames. From our binding constant data the most likely frame is predicted and shown to have two contiguous AAG sequences in a hairpin loop region.
In prokaryotic organisms, the control of gene expression is mediated by regulatory proteins that activate or repress transcription. However, the molecular mechanisms of positive and negative control are different. In terms of negative control, repressor proteins bind to sites located within the promoter region and as a consequence sterically interfere with functional binding by RNA polymerase. Here, I examine the properties of a regulatory sequence that specifies catabolite (glucose) repression in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Specifically, a DNA segment containing this regulatory site was fused upstream of the intact his3 promoter region and structural gene at several locations. Normally, his3 expression in these derivatives occurs at a basal level which can be induced by conditions of amino-acid starvation. However, in glucose medium, the catabolite regulatory sequence overrides the normal his3 promoter elements and reduces transcription both in normal and starvation conditions. The implication from these results is that in contrast to catabolite repression in Escherichia coli, which is mediated by catabolite-activating protein (CAP), catabolite repression in yeast occurs by a negative control mechanism involving a putative repressor protein. The observation that this regulatory site exerts its repressing effects even when located upstream of an intact promoter region suggests that repression in yeast is not mediated by steric interference between regulatory proteins and the transcriptional apparatus.
Severe constriction of the abdominal aorta and simultaneous injection of isoproterenol in rats induced depression in heart function and reductions in cardiac adenosine triphosphate and total adenine nucleotides. When ribose was continuously infused for 24 hours, biosynthesis of cardiac adenine nucleotides was stimulated to such an extent that the reductions in adenosine triphosphate and total adenine nucleotides were prevented and left ventricular hemodynamic parameters were normal. These results support the hypothesis that adenosine triphosphate is primarily responsible for depression in myocardial contractility and that ribose is cardioprotective through its pronounced effects on adenine nucleotide metabolism in heart muscle.
The H+-ATPase from the plasma membrane of Neurospora crassa is an integral membrane protein of relative molecular mass 100K, which belongs to the P-type ATPase family that includes the plasma membrane Na+/K+-ATPase and the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase. The H+-ATPase pumps protons across the cell's plasma membrane using ATP as an energy source, generating a membrane potential in excess of 200mV. Despite the importance of P-type ATPases in controlling membrane potential and intracellular ion concentrations, little is known about the molecular mechanism they use for ion transport. This is largely due to the difficulty in growing well ordered crystals and the resulting lack of detail in the three-dimensional structure of these large membrane proteins. We have now obtained a three-dimensional map of the H+-ATPase by electron crystallography of two-dimensional crystals grown directly on electron microscope grids. At an in-plane resolution of 8 A, this map reveals ten membrane-spanning alpha-helices in the membrane domain, and four major cytoplasmic domains in the open conformation of the enzyme without bound ligands.
Pyruvate oxidase from Lactobacillus plantarum is a tetrameric enzyme that decarboxylates pyruvate, producing hydrogen peroxide and the energy-storage metabolite acetylphosphate. Structure determination at 2.1 angstroms showed that the cofactors thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) are bound at the carboxyl termini of six-stranded parallel beta sheets. The pyrophosphate moiety of TPP is bound to a metal ion and to a beta alpha alpha beta unit corresponding to an established sequence fingerprint. The spatial arrangement of TPP and FAD suggests that the oxidation of the oxyethyl intermediate does not occur by hydride displacement but rather by a two-step transfer of two electrons.
The rate and extent of the agonist-dependent phosphorylation of beta 2-adrenergic receptors and rhodopsin by beta-adrenergic receptor kinase (beta ARK) are markedly enhanced on addition of G protein beta gamma subunits. With a model peptide substrate it was demonstrated that direct activation of the kinase could not account for this effect. G protein beta gamma subunits were shown to interact directly with the COOH-terminal region of beta ARK, and formation of this beta ARK-beta gamma complex resulted in receptor-facilitated membrane localization of the enzyme. The beta gamma subunits of transducin were less effective at both enhancing the rate of receptor phosphorylation and binding to the COOH-terminus of beta ARK, suggesting that the enzyme preferentially binds specific beta gamma complexes. The beta gamma-mediated membrane localization of beta ARK serves to intimately link receptor activation to beta ARK-mediated desensitization.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous approximately 22-nucleotide RNAs, some of which are known to play important regulatory roles in animals by targeting the messages of protein-coding genes for translational repression. We find that miR-196, a miRNA encoded at three paralogous locations in the A, B, and C mammalian HOX clusters, has extensive, evolutionarily conserved complementarity to messages of HOXB8, HOXC8, and HOXD8. RNA fragments diagnostic of miR-196-directed cleavage of HOXB8 were detected in mouse embryos. Cell culture experiments demonstrated down-regulation of HOXB8, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXA7 and supported the cleavage mechanism for miR-196-directed repression of HOXB8. These results point to a miRNA-mediated mechanism for the posttranscriptional restriction of HOX gene expression during vertebrate development and demonstrate that metazoan miRNAs can repress expression of their natural targets through mRNA cleavage in addition to inhibiting productive translation.
Proteolytic enzymes have many physiological functions, ranging from generalized protein digestion to more specific regulated processes such as the activation of zymogens, blood coagulation and the lysis of fibrin clots, the release of hormones and pharmacologically active peptides from precursor proteins, and the transport of secretory proteins across membranes. They are present in all forms of living organisms. Comparisons of amino acid sequences, three-dimensional structures, and enzymatic reaction mechanisms of proteases indicate that there are distinct families of these proteins. Changes in molecular structure and function have accompanied the evolution of proteolytic enzymes and their inhibitors, each having relatively simple roles in primitive organisms and more diverse and more complex functions in higher organisms.
The complete nucleotide sequence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromosome VII has 572 predicted open reading frames (ORFs), of which 341 are new. No correlation was found between G+C content and gene density along the chromosome, and their variations are random. Of the ORFs, 17% show high similarity to human proteins. Almost half of the ORFs could be classified in functional categories, and there is a slight increase in the number of transcription (7.0%) and translation (5.2%) factors when compared with the complete S. cerevisiae genome. Accurate verification procedures demonstrate that there are less than two errors per 10,000 base pairs in the published sequence.
The best understood system for transduction of extracellular messages into intracellular signals is the hormone receptor-coupled adenylate cyclase. In such systems receptors are functionally coupled to the enzyme by two special proteins, termed the stimulatory and inhibitory guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins (Ns and Ni, respectively). These proteins, thought to mediate, respectively, stimulatory and inhibitory influences on the adenylate cyclase, are members of a larger class of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins involved in membrane signal transduction. We have studied the interactions of the various components of the adenylate cyclase system by co-reconstituting pure beta-adrenergic receptors, pure Ns and Ni, and functionally resolved preparations of the catalyst in phospholipid vesicles. In the absence of Ni, beta-adrenergic receptor/Ns-mediated catecholamine stimulation of the enzyme is relatively modest (approximately 1.3-fold). Surprisingly, however, when Ni is also present, stimulation increases dramatically (up to 7-8-fold) because of a greater suppression of basal relative to agonist-stimulated enzyme activity. Thus, Ni may actually be required for maximal agonist stimulation as well as for inhibition of the adenylate cyclase.
Positive control of transcription often involves stimulatory protein-protein interactions between regulatory factors and RNA polymerase. Critical steps in the activation process itself are seldom ascribed to protein-DNA distortions. Activator-induced DNA bending is typically assigned a role in binding-site recognition, alterations in DNA loop structures or optimal positioning of the activator for interaction with polymerase. Here we present a transcriptional activation mechanism that does not require a signal-induced DNA bend but rather a receptor-induced untwisting of duplex DNA. The allosterically modulated transcription factor MerR is a repressor and an Hg(II)-responsive activator of bacterial mercury-resistance genes. Escherichia coli RNA polymerase binds to the MerR-promoter complex but cannot proceed to a transcriptionally active open complex until Hg(II) binds to MerR (ref. 6). Chemical nuclease studies show that the activator form, but not the repressor, induces a unique alteration of the helical structure localized at the centre of the DNA-binding site. Data presented here indicate that this Hg-MerR-induced DNA distortion corresponds to a local underwinding of the spacer region of the promoter by about 33 degrees relative to the MerR-operator complex. The magnitude and the direction of the Hg-MerR-induced change in twist angle are consistent with a positive control mechanism involving reorientation of conserved, but suboptimally phased, promoter elements and are consistent with a role for torsional stress in formation of an open complex.
A new class of protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors was identified that is based on an oxindole core (indolinones). Two compounds from this class inhibited the kinase activity of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) and showed differential specificity toward other receptor tyrosine kinases. Crystal structures of the tyrosine kinase domain of FGFR1 in complex with the two compounds were determined. The oxindole occupies the site in which the adenine of adenosine triphosphate binds, whereas the moieties that extend from the oxindole contact residues in the hinge region between the two kinase lobes. The more specific inhibitor of FGFR1 induces a conformational change in the nucleotide-binding loop. This structural information will facilitate the design of new inhibitors for use in the treatment of cancer and other diseases in which cell signaling by tyrosine kinases plays a crucial role in disease pathogenesis.
The mechanism of replication of the simian virus 40 (SV40) genome closely resembles that of cellular chromosomes, thereby providing an excellent model system for examining the enzymatic requirements for DNA replication. Only one viral gene product, the large tumour antigen (large-T antigen), is required for viral replication, so the majority of replication enzymes must be cellular. Indeed, a number of enzymatic activities associated with replication and the S phase of the cell cycle are induced upon SV40 infection. Cell-free extracts derived from human cells, when supplemented with immunopurified SV40 large-T antigen support efficient replication of plasmids that contain the SV40 origin of DNA replication. Using this system, a cellular protein of relative molecular mass 36,000 (Mr = 36K) that is required for the elongation stage of SV40 DNA replication in vitro has been purified and identified as a known cell-cycle regulated protein, alternatively called the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) or cyclin. It was noticed that, in its physical characteristics, PCNA closely resembles a protein that regulates the activity of calf thymus DNA polymerase-delta. Here we show that PCNA and the polymerase-delta auxiliary protein have similar electrophoretic behaviour and are both recognized by anti-PCNA human autoantibodies. More importantly, both proteins are functionally equivalent; they stimulate SV40 DNA replication in vitro and increase the processivity of calf thymus DNA polymerase-delta. These results implicate a novel animal cell DNA polymerase, DNA polymerase-delta, in the elongation stage of replicative DNA synthesis in vitro.
Here we report the genome sequence of the honeybee Apis mellifera, a key model for social behaviour and essential to global ecology through pollination. Compared with other sequenced insect genomes, the A. mellifera genome has high A+T and CpG contents, lacks major transposon families, evolves more slowly, and is more similar to vertebrates for circadian rhythm, RNA interference and DNA methylation genes, among others. Furthermore, A. mellifera has fewer genes for innate immunity, detoxification enzymes, cuticle-forming proteins and gustatory receptors, more genes for odorant receptors, and novel genes for nectar and pollen utilization, consistent with its ecology and social organization. Compared to Drosophila, genes in early developmental pathways differ in Apis, whereas similarities exist for functions that differ markedly, such as sex determination, brain function and behaviour. Population genetics suggests a novel African origin for the species A. mellifera and insights into whether Africanized bees spread throughout the New World via hybridization or displacement.
To investigate whether a particular receptor subtype can be coupled to multiple effector systems, recombinant M2 muscarinic receptors were expressed in cells lacking endogenous receptor. The muscarinic agonist carbachol both inhibited adenylyl cyclase and stimulated phosphoinositide hydrolysis. The stimulation of phosphoinositide hydrolysis was significantly less efficient and more dependent on receptor levels than the inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. Both responses were mediated by guanine nucleotide binding proteins, as evidenced by their inhibition by pertussis toxin; the more efficiently coupled adenylyl cyclase response was significantly more sensitive. Thus, individual subtypes of a given receptor are capable of regulating multiple effector pathways.
Thrombin is a coagulation protease that activates platelets, leukocytes, endothelial and mesenchymal cells at sites of vascular injury, acting partly through an unusual proteolytically activated G-protein-coupled receptor. Knockout of the gene encoding this receptor provided definitive evidence for a second thrombin receptor in mouse platelets and for tissue-specific roles for different thrombin receptors. We now report the cloning and characterization of a new human thrombin receptor, designated protease-activated receptor 3 (PAR3). PAR3 can mediate thrombin-triggered phosphoinositide hydrolysis and is expressed in a variety of tissues, including human bone marrow and mouse megakaryocytes, making it a candidate for the sought-after second platelet thrombin receptor. PAR3 provides a new tool for understanding thrombin signalling and a possible target for therapeutics designed selectively to block thrombotic, inflammatory and proliferative responses to thrombin.
In many animals, establishment of the germ line depends on segregation of a specialized cytoplasm, or 'germ plasm', to a small number of germline precursor cells during early embryogenesis. Germ plasm asymmetry involves targeting of RNAs and proteins to a specific region of the oocyte and/or embryo. Here we demonstrate that germ plasm asymmetry also depends on degradation of germline proteins in non-germline (somatic) cells. We show that five CCCH finger proteins, components of the Caenorhabditis elegans germ plasm, are targeted for degradation by the novel CCCH-finger-binding protein ZIF-1. ZIF-1 is a SOCS-box protein that interacts with the E3 ubiquitin ligase subunit elongin C. Elongin C, the cullin CUL-2, the ring finger protein RBX-1 and the E2 ubiquitin conjugation enzyme UBC5 (also known as LET-70) are all required in vivo for CCCH finger protein degradation. Degradation is activated in somatic cells by the redundant CCCH finger proteins MEX-5 and MEX-6, which are counteracted in the germ line by the PAR-1 kinase. We propose that segregation of the germ plasm involves both stabilization of germline proteins in the germ line and cullin-dependent degradation in the soma.
The phosphorylation of the human estrogen receptor (ER) serine residue at position 118 is required for full activity of the ER activation function 1 (AF-1). This Ser118 is phosphorylated by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in vitro and in cells treated with epidermal growth factor (EGF) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) in vivo. Overexpression of MAPK kinase (MAPKK) or of the guanine nucleotide binding protein Ras, both of which activate MAPK, enhanced estrogen-induced and antiestrogen (tamoxifen)-induced transcriptional activity of wild-type ER, but not that of a mutant ER with an alanine in place of Ser118. Thus, the activity of the amino-terminal AF-1 of the ER is modulated by the phosphorylation of Ser118 through the Ras-MAPK cascade of the growth factor signaling pathways.
Frequency-dependent selection provides a means for maintaining genetic variability within populations, without incurring a large genetic load. There is a wealth of experimental evidence for the existence of frequency-dependent changes in genotypic fitness among a wide variety of organisms. Examples of traits which have been shown to be subject to frequency-dependent selection include the self-incompatibility alleles of plants, chromosomal rearrangements in Drosophila, visible mutations, enzyme variants and rare-male mating advantage in Drosophila. These experiments have been interpreted in a number of different ways. Principally, frequency dependence of genotype fitness may result from intergenotype facilitation due to the production of biotic residues, or from the differential use of resources by the competing genotypes. However, it has proved extremely difficult to isolate and identify any biotic residue of importance or, alternatively, to understand the manner in which genotypes partition the environment. Thus, the difficulty in the interpretation of experiments which show frequency-dependent selective effects stems largely from our lack of understanding of the exact physiological mechanisms which produce these frequency-dependent effects. The principal aim of this study was to investigate the mechanisms associated with frequency-dependent selection at the amylase locus in Drosophila melanogaster. The excretion of catalytically active amylase enzyme and its effect on food medium composition were correlated with the outcome of intraspecific competition between amylase-deficient and amylase-producing genotypes. Amylase-producing genotypes were shown to excrete enzymatically active amylase protein into the food medium. The excreted amylase causes the external digestion of dietary starch; this accounts for the frequency-dependent increase in the viability of the amylase-deficient mutants in mixed cultures, maintained on a starch-rich diet.
Adenosine 3'5'-cyclic phosphate stimulated the conversion of added cholesterol to pregnenolone in "coupled" rat adrenal mitochondria provided with succinate, and in "leaky" mitochondria fortified with reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. Adenine nucleotides other than adenosine 3',5'-cyclic phosphate did not duplicate these actions. The cyclic nucleotide was also effective in supernatants from sonically disrupted mitochondria. The minimum effective concentration was 50 micromoles per liter or less. The results suggest that adenosine 3',5'-cyclic phosphate stimulates corticosteroidogenesis by activating the mitochondrial enzymes which are rate-limiting in the utilization of cholesterol.
Cytochrome P450 enzymes are responsible for the phase I metabolism of approximately 75% of known pharmaceuticals. P450s perform this and other important biological functions through the controlled activation of C-H bonds. Here, we report the spectroscopic and kinetic characterization of the long-sought principal intermediate involved in this process, P450 compound I (P450-I), which we prepared in approximately 75% yield by reacting ferric CYP119 with m-chloroperbenzoic acid. The Mossbauer spectrum of CYP119-I is similar to that of chloroperoxidase compound I, although its electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum reflects an increase in |J|/D, the ratio of the exchange coupling to the zero-field splitting. CYP119-I hydroxylates the unactivated C-H bonds of lauric acid [D(C-H) ~ 100 kilocalories per mole], with an apparent second-order rate constant of k(app) = 1.1 x 10(7) per molar per second at 4degC. Direct measurements put a lower limit of k >= 210 per second on the rate constant for bound substrate oxidation, whereas analyses involving kinetic isotope effects predict a value in excess of 1400 per second.
The role of the aspartic acid residue in the serine protease catalytic triad Asp, His, and Ser has been tested by replacing Asp102 of trypsin with Asn by site-directed mutagenesis. The naturally occurring and mutant enzymes were produced in a heterologous expression system, purified to homogeneity, and characterized. At neutral pH the mutant enzyme activity with an ester substrate and with the Ser195-specific reagent diisopropylfluorophosphate is approximately 10(4) times less than that of the unmodified enzyme. In contrast to the dramatic loss in reactivity of Ser195, the mutant trypsin reacts with the His57-specific reagent, tosyl-L-lysine chloromethylketone, only five times less efficiently than the unmodified enzyme. Thus, the ability of His57 to react with this affinity label is not severely compromised. The catalytic activity of the mutant enzyme increases with increasing pH so that at pH 10.2 the kcat is 6 percent that of trypsin. Kinetic analysis of this novel activity suggests this is due in part to participation of either a titratable base or of hydroxide ion in the catalytic mechanism. By demonstrating the importance of the aspartate residue in catalysis, especially at physiological pH, these experiments provide a rationalization for the evolutionary conservation of the catalytic triad.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are mutagenic and may thereby promote cancer. Normally, ROS levels are tightly controlled by an inducible antioxidant program that responds to cellular stressors and is predominantly regulated by the transcription factor Nrf2 (also known as Nfe2l2) and its repressor protein Keap1 (refs 2-5). In contrast to the acute physiological regulation of Nrf2, in neoplasia there is evidence for increased basal activation of Nrf2. Indeed, somatic mutations that disrupt the Nrf2-Keap1 interaction to stabilize Nrf2 and increase the constitutive transcription of Nrf2 target genes were recently identified, indicating that enhanced ROS detoxification and additional Nrf2 functions may in fact be pro-tumorigenic. Here, we investigated ROS metabolism in primary murine cells following the expression of endogenous oncogenic alleles of Kras, Braf and Myc, and found that ROS are actively suppressed by these oncogenes. K-Ras(G12D), B-Raf(V619E) and Myc(ERT2) each increased the transcription of Nrf2 to stably elevate the basal Nrf2 antioxidant program and thereby lower intracellular ROS and confer a more reduced intracellular environment. Oncogene-directed increased expression of Nrf2 is a new mechanism for the activation of the Nrf2 antioxidant program, and is evident in primary cells and tissues of mice expressing K-Ras(G12D) and B-Raf(V619E), and in human pancreatic cancer. Furthermore, genetic targeting of the Nrf2 pathway impairs K-Ras(G12D)-induced proliferation and tumorigenesis in vivo. Thus, the Nrf2 antioxidant and cellular detoxification program represents a previously unappreciated mediator of oncogenesis.
Animal cells can convert 20-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acids into prostaglandins (PGs) and leukotrienes. These locally produced mediators of inflammatory and immunological reactions act in an autocrine or paracrine fashion. Arachidonic acid (AA), the precursor of most PGs and leukotrienes, is present in the form of lipid esters within plasma lipoproteins and cannot be synthesised de novo by animal cells. Therefore, AA or its plant-derived precursor, linoleic acid, must be provided to cells if PGs or leukotrienes are to be formed. Because several classes of lipoproteins, including low-density lipoproteins (LDL), very-low-density lipoproteins, and chylomicron remnants, are taken up by means of the LDL receptor, and because LDL and very-low-density lipoproteins, but not high-density lipoproteins, stimulate PG synthesis, we have suggested previously that PG formation is directly linked to the LDL pathway. Using fibroblasts with the receptor-negative phenotype of familial hypercholesterolaemia and anti-LDL receptor antibodies, we show here that LDL deliver AA for PG production and that an LDL receptor-dependent feedback mechanism inhibits the activity of PGH synthase, the rate-limiting enzyme of PG synthesis. These results indicate that the LDL pathway has a regulatory role in PG synthesis, in addition to its well-known role in the maintenance of cellular cholesterol homeostasis.
Experiments with an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase ("replicase") purified from Escherichia coli infected with an RNA bacteriophage (Qbeta) demonstrate that the enzyme generates a polynucleotide of the same molecular weight as viral RNA; the "replicase" cannot distinguish the polynucleotide from its own RNA genome. By starting reactions at input ratios below the saturation levels of template to enzyme, autocatalytic kinetics of RNA increase are observed. The data are consistent with the conclusion that self-propagation of complete viral genomes is occurring in this simple system.
Extracts of livers from diabetic rats contain normal amounts of the enzymes needed to convert 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid to nicotinic acid nucleotide. The decreased capacity of diabetic animals to synthesize nicotinic acid is therefore attributed to increased amounts of picolinic carboxylase, which competes for a common intermediate with the spontaneous reaction in which quinolinic acid is formed as a precursor of nicotinic acid. These studies were facilitated by the synthesis of 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid labeled with carbon-14 in positions 3 and 6
The normal cellular form of prion protein (PrPC) is a precursor to the pathogenic protease-resistant forms (PrPSc) believed to cause scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Its amino terminus contains the octapeptide PHGGGWGQ, which is repeated four times and is among the best-preserved regions of mammalian PrPC. Here we show that the amino-terminal domain of PrPC exhibits five to six sites that bind copper (Cu(II)) presented as a glycine chelate. At neutral pH, binding occurs with positive cooperativity, with binding affinity compatible with estimates for extracellular, labile copper. Two lines of independently derived PrPC gene-ablated (Prnp0/0) mice exhibit severe reductions in the copper content of membrane-enriched brain extracts and similar reductions in synaptosomal and endosome-enriched subcellular fractions. Prnp0/0 mice also have altered cellular phenotypes, including a reduction in the activity of copper/zinc superoxide dismutase and altered electrophysiological responses in the presence of excess copper. These findings indicate that PrPC can exist in a Cu-metalloprotein form in vivo.
The second messenger hydrogen peroxide is required for optimal activation of numerous signal transduction pathways, particularly those mediated by protein tyrosine kinases. One mechanism by which hydrogen peroxide regulates cellular processes is the transient inhibition of protein tyrosine phosphatases through the reversible oxidization of their catalytic cysteine, which suppresses protein dephosphorylation. Here we describe a structural analysis of the redox-dependent regulation of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), which is reversibly inhibited by oxidation after cells are stimulated with insulin and epidermal growth factor. The sulphenic acid intermediate produced in response to PTP1B oxidation is rapidly converted into a previously unknown sulphenyl-amide species, in which the sulphur atom of the catalytic cysteine is covalently linked to the main chain nitrogen of an adjacent residue. Oxidation of PTP1B to the sulphenyl-amide form is accompanied by large conformational changes in the catalytic site that inhibit substrate binding. We propose that this unusual protein modification both protects the active-site cysteine residue of PTP1B from irreversible oxidation to sulphonic acid and permits redox regulation of the enzyme by promoting its reversible reduction by thiols.
All aspects of cellular RNA metabolism and the replication of many viruses require DExH/D proteins that manipulate RNA in a manner that requires nucleoside triphosphates. Although DExH/D proteins have been shown to unwind purified RNA duplexes, most RNA molecules in the cellular environment are complexed with proteins. It has therefore been speculated that DExH/D proteins may also affect RNA-protein interactions. We demonstrate that the DExH protein NPH-II from vaccinia virus can displace the protein U1A from RNA in an active adenosine triphosphate-dependent fashion. NPH-II increases the rate of U1A dissociation by more than three orders of magnitude while retaining helicase processivity. This indicates that DExH/D proteins can effectively catalyze protein displacement from RNA and thereby participate in the structural reorganization of ribonucleoprotein assemblies.
The developmental regulation of two kinds of Xenopus 5S RNA genes (oocyte and somatic types) can be explained by differences in the stability of protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions in a transcription complex that directs transcription initiation by RNA polymerase III. Dissociation of transcription factors from oocyte 5S RNA genes during development allows them to be repressed by chromatin assembly. In the same cells, somatic 5S RNA genes remain active because their transcription complexes are stable.
Since the initial discovery that the DNase I sensitivity of the globin genes in different cell types correlates with globin gene expression, this relationship has been shown to hold true for a variety of genes, including the genes for ovalbumin, conalbumun, alpha- and beta-globin in chicken, several heat-shock proteins in Drosophila, the r-chromatin of Tetrahymena and the viral polyoma minichromosome. Although genes transcribed by RNA polymerases I and II have been studied extensively, the genes transcribed by RNA polymerase III have not. We have therefore investigated the DNase I sensitivity of transfer RNA (tRNA) and oogenetic 5S RNA genes in the liver and erythocyte nuclei of Xenopus laevis. The oogenetic 5S genes are not transcribed in any known somatic cell, and tRNA genes are transcribed in the hepatocyte but are inactive in the erythrocyte. We show here that, although in these two cell types the correspondence between DNase I sensitivity and gene transcription holds good for globin and the ribosomal genes, the tRNA and oogenetic 5S genes are DNase I sensitive in both liver and erythrocyte nuclei. Thus for the genes transcribed by polymerase III the correspondence of sensitivity and expression breaks down.
RNA interference (RNAi) regulates gene expression by the cleavage of messenger RNA, by mRNA degradation and by preventing protein synthesis. These effects are mediated by a ribonucleoprotein complex known as RISC (RNA-induced silencing complex). We have previously identified four Drosophila components (short interfering RNAs, Argonaute 2 (ref. 2), VIG and FXR) of a RISC enzyme that degrades specific mRNAs in response to a double-stranded-RNA trigger. Here we show that Tudor-SN (tudor staphylococcal nuclease)--a protein containing five staphylococcal/micrococcal nuclease domains and a tudor domain--is a component of the RISC enzyme in Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila and mammals. Although Tudor-SN contains non-canonical active-site sequences, we show that purified Tudor-SN exhibits nuclease activity similar to that of other staphylococcal nucleases. Notably, both purified Tudor-SN and RISC are inhibited by a specific competitive inhibitor of micrococcal nuclease. Tudor-SN is the first RISC subunit to be identified that contains a recognizable nuclease domain, and could therefore contribute to the RNA degradation observed in RNAi.
Asparagine-linked glycosylation is a post-translational modification of proteins containing the conserved sequence motif Asn-X-Ser/Thr. The attachment of oligosaccharides is implicated in diverse processes such as protein folding and quality control, organism development or host-pathogen interactions. The reaction is catalysed by oligosaccharyltransferase (OST), a membrane protein complex located in the endoplasmic reticulum. The central, catalytic enzyme of OST is the STT3 subunit, which has homologues in bacteria and archaea. Here we report the X-ray structure of a bacterial OST, the PglB protein of Campylobacter lari, in complex with an acceptor peptide. The structure defines the fold of STT3 proteins and provides insight into glycosylation sequon recognition and amide nitrogen activation, both of which are prerequisites for the formation of the N-glycosidic linkage. We also identified and validated catalytically important, acidic amino acid residues. Our results provide the molecular basis for understanding the mechanism of N-linked glycosylation.
The complete 1.66-megabase pair genome sequence of an autotrophic archaeon, Methanococcus jannaschii, and its 58- and 16-kilobase pair extrachromosomal elements have been determined by whole-genome random sequencing. A total of 1738 predicted protein-coding genes were identified; however, only a minority of these (38 percent) could be assigned a putative cellular role with high confidence. Although the majority of genes related to energy production, cell division, and metabolism in M. jannaschii are most similar to those found in Bacteria, most of the genes involved in transcription, translation, and replication in M. jannaschii are more similar to those found in Eukaryotes.
Small structural perturbations in the enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) were made in order to evaluate the contribution of precise substrate alignment to the catalytic power of an enzyme. The reaction trajectory of IDH was modified (i) after the adenine moiety of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate was changed to hypoxanthine (the 6-amino was changed to 6-hydroxyl), and (ii) by replacing Mg2+, which has six coordinating ligands, with Ca2+, which has eight coordinating ligands. Both changes make large (10(-3) to 10(-5)) changes in the reaction velocity but only small changes in the orientation of the substrates (both distance and angle) as revealed by cryocrystallographic trapping of active IDH complexes. The results provide evidence that orbital overlap produced by optimal orientation of reacting orbitals plays a major quantitative role in the catalytic power of enzymes.
Plasmodium falciparum causes the virulent form of malaria and disease manifestations are linked to growth inside infected erythrocytes. To survive and evade host responses the parasite remodels the erythrocyte by exporting several hundred effector proteins beyond the surrounding parasitophorous vacuole membrane. A feature of exported proteins is a pentameric motif (RxLxE/Q/D) that is a substrate for an unknown protease. Here we show that the protein responsible for cleavage of this motif is plasmepsin V (PMV), an aspartic acid protease located in the endoplasmic reticulum. PMV cleavage reveals the export signal (xE/Q/D) at the amino terminus of cargo proteins. Expression of an identical mature protein with xQ at the N terminus generated by signal peptidase was not exported, demonstrating that PMV activity is essential and linked with other key export events. Identification of the protease responsible for export into erythrocytes provides a novel target for therapeutic intervention against this devastating disease.
The biosynthesis of several protein cofactors is subject to feedback regulation by riboswitches. Flavin mononucleotide (FMN)-specific riboswitches, also known as RFN elements, direct expression of bacterial genes involved in the biosynthesis and transport of riboflavin (vitamin B(2)) and related compounds. Here we present the crystal structures of the Fusobacterium nucleatum riboswitch bound to FMN, riboflavin and antibiotic roseoflavin. The FMN riboswitch structure, centred on an FMN-bound six-stem junction, does not fold by collinear stacking of adjacent helices, typical for folding of large RNAs. Rather, it adopts a butterfly-like scaffold, stapled together by opposingly directed but nearly identically folded peripheral domains. FMN is positioned asymmetrically within the junctional site and is specifically bound to RNA through interactions with the isoalloxazine ring chromophore and direct and Mg(2+)-mediated contacts with the phosphate moiety. Our structural data, complemented by binding and footprinting experiments, imply a largely pre-folded tertiary RNA architecture and FMN recognition mediated by conformational transitions within the junctional binding pocket. The inherent plasticity of the FMN-binding pocket and the availability of large openings make the riboswitch an attractive target for structure-based design of FMN-like antimicrobial compounds. Our studies also explain the effects of spontaneous and antibiotic-induced deregulatory mutations and provided molecular insights into FMN-based control of gene expression in normal and riboflavin-overproducing bacterial strains.
Single-stranded DNA can fold into well-defined sequence-dependent tertiary structures that specifically bind a variety of target molecules, raising the possibility that some folded single-stranded DNAs might exhibit catalytic activities similar to those of ribozymes and protein enzymes. Derivatives of the hammerhead ribozyme that contain a majority of deoxyribonucleotides retain the ability to cleave RNA, and a 'deoxyribozyme' was generated by leaving all essential ribonucleotides of the hammerhead on the RNA 'substrate'. Recently in vitro selection has been used to isolate a DNA sequence that shows Pb(2+)-dependent RNA-cleaving activity. Here we report the isolation by in vitro selection of a small single-stranded DNA that is a Zn2+/Cu(2+)-dependent metalloenzyme. The enzyme catalyses the formation of a new phosphodiester bond by the condensation of the 5'-hydroxyl of one oligodeoxynucleotide and a 3'-phosphorimidazolide on another oligodeoxynucleotide, and shows multiple turnover ligation.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis in the nitrogenase complex controls the cycle of association and dissociation between the electron donor adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) (Fe-protein) and its target catalytic protein (MoFe-protein), driving the reduction of dinitrogen into ammonia. Crystal structures in different nucleotide states have been determined that identify conformational changes in the nitrogenase complex during ATP turnover. These structures reveal distinct and mutually exclusive interaction sites on the MoFe-protein surface that are selectively populated, depending on the Fe-protein nucleotide state. A consequence of these different docking geometries is that the distance between redox cofactors, a critical determinant of the intermolecular electron transfer rate, is coupled to the nucleotide state. More generally, stabilization of distinct docking geometries by different nucleotide states, as seen for nitrogenase, could enable nucleotide hydrolysis to drive the relative motion of protein partners in molecular motors and other systems.
Extracellular gradients of signalling molecules can specify different thresholds of gene activity in development. A gradient of Decapentaplegic (Dpp) activity subdivides the dorsal ectoderm of the Drosophila embryo into amnioserosa and dorsal epidermis. The proteins Short gastrulation (Sog) and Tolloid (Tld) are required to shape this gradient. Sog has been proposed to form an inhibitory complex with either Dpp or the related ligand Screw, and is subsequently processed by the protease Tld. Paradoxically, Sog appears to be required for amnioserosa formation, which is specified by peak Dpp signalling activity. Here we show that the misexpression of sog using the even-skipped stripe-2 enhancer redistributes Dpp signalling in a mutant background in which dpp is expressed throughout the embryo. Dpp activity is diminished near the Sog stripe and peak Dpp signalling is detected far from this stripe. However, a tethered form of Sog suppresses local Dpp activity without augmenting Dpp activity at a distance, indicating that diffusion of Sog may be required for enhanced Dpp activity and consequent amnioserosa formation. The long-distance stimulation of Dpp activity by Sog requires Tld, whereas Sog-mediated inhibition of Dpp does not. The heterologous Dpp inhibitor Noggin inhibits Dpp signalling but fails to augment Dpp activity. These results suggest an unusual strategy for generating a gradient threshold of growth-factor activity, whereby Sog and its protease specify peak Dpp signalling far from a localized source of Sog.
Riboswitches are genetic regulatory elements found in the 5' untranslated region of messenger RNA that act in the absence of protein cofactors. They are broadly distributed across bacteria and account for the regulation of more than 2% of all genes in Bacillus subtilis, underscoring their importance in the control of cellular metabolism. The 5' untranslated region of many mRNAs of genes involved in purine metabolism and transport contain a guanine-responsive riboswitch that directly binds guanine, hypoxanthine or xanthine to terminate transcription. Here we report the crystal structure at 1.95 A resolution of the purine-binding domain of the guanine riboswitch from the xpt-pbuX operon of B. subtilis bound to hypoxanthine, a prevalent metabolite in the bacterial purine salvage pathway. This structure reveals a complex RNA fold involving several phylogenetically conserved nucleotides that create a binding pocket that almost completely envelops the ligand. Hypoxanthine functions to stabilize this structure and to promote the formation of a downstream transcriptional terminator element, thereby providing a mechanism for directly repressing gene expression in response to an increase in intracellular concentrations of metabolite.
Helicases are a ubiquitous class of enzymes involved in nearly all aspects of DNA and RNA metabolism. Despite recent progress in understanding their mechanism of action, limited resolution has left inaccessible the detailed mechanisms by which these enzymes couple the rearrangement of nucleic acid structures to the binding and hydrolysis of ATP. Observing individual mechanistic cycles of these motor proteins is central to understanding their cellular functions. Here we follow in real time, at a resolution of two base pairs and 20 ms, the RNA translocation and unwinding cycles of a hepatitis C virus helicase (NS3) monomer. NS3 is a representative superfamily-2 helicase essential for viral replication, and therefore a potentially important drug target. We show that the cyclic movement of NS3 is coordinated by ATP in discrete steps of 11 +/- 3 base pairs, and that actual unwinding occurs in rapid smaller substeps of 3.6 +/- 1.3 base pairs, also triggered by ATP binding, indicating that NS3 might move like an inchworm. This ATP-coupling mechanism is likely to be applicable to other non-hexameric helicases involved in many essential cellular functions. The assay developed here should be useful in investigating a broad range of nucleic acid translocation motors.
The aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetases (aaRS) catalyse the attachment of an amino acid to its cognate transfer RNA molecule in a highly specific two-step reaction. These proteins differ widely in size and oligomeric state, and have limited sequence homology. Out of the 18 known aaRS, only 9 referred to as class I synthetases (GlnRS, TyrRS, MetRS, GluRS, ArgRS, ValRS, IleRS, LeuRS, TrpRS), display two short common consensus sequences ('HIGH' and 'KMSKS') which indicate, as observed in three crystal structures, the presence of a structural domain (the Rossman fold) that binds ATP. We report here the sequence of Escherichia coli ProRS, a dimer of relative molecular mass 127,402, which is homologous to both ThrRS and SerRS. These three latter aaRS share three new sequence motifs with AspRS, AsnRS, LysRS, HisRS and the beta subunit of PheRS. These three motifs (motifs 1, 2 and 3), in a search through the entire data bank, proved to be specific for this set of aaRS (referred to as class II). Class II may also contain AlaRS and GlyRS, because these sequences have a typical motif 3. Surprisingly, this partition of aaRS in two classes is found to be strongly correlated on the functional level with the acylation occurring either on the 2' OH (class I) or 3' OH (class II) of the ribose of the last nucleotide of tRNA.
Biochemical analyses have suggested potential targets for transcriptional activation domains, which include several components of the RNA polymerase II machinery, as well as the chromatin template. Here we examine the mechanism of transcriptional activation in yeast cells by connecting a heterologous DNA-binding domain (LexA) to the TATA-binding protein (TBP). LexA-TBP efficiently activates transcription from a promoter containing a LexA operator upstream of a TATA element. Activation is promoter-specific and is sensitive to mutations on the DNA-binding surface of TBP; hence it is not due to a fortuitous activation domain on TBP. Thus a promoter-bound protein lacking an activation domain can stimulate transcription if it is directly connected to TBP. This suggests that recruitment of TBP to the promoter can be a rate-limiting step for transcription in vivo, and that interactions between activation domains and factors that function after TBP recruitment can be bypassed for activation.
Gangliosides participate in development and tissue differentiation. Cross-linking of the apoptosis-inducing CD95 protein (also called Fas or APO-1) in lymphoid and myeloid tumor cells triggered GD3 ganglioside synthesis and transient accumulation. CD95-induced GD3 accumulation depended on integral receptor "death domains" and on activation of a family of cysteine proteases called caspases. Cell-permeating ceramides, which are potent inducers of apoptosis, also triggered GD3 synthesis. GD3 disrupted mitochondrial transmembrane potential (DeltaPsim), and induced apoptosis, in a caspase-independent fashion. Transient overexpression of the GD3 synthase gene directly triggered apoptosis. Pharmacological inhibition of GD3 synthesis and exposure to GD3 synthase antisense oligodeoxynucleotides prevented CD95-induced apoptosis. Thus, GD3 ganglioside mediates the propagation of CD95-generated apoptotic signals in hematopoietic cells.
Phosphate moieties bind frequently at N-termini of helices in proteins. It is shown that this corresponds with an optimal interaction of the helix dipole and the charged phosphate. This favourable arrangement may have been discovered several times during evolution. In some enzymes, the helix dipole might be used in catalysis.
Palmitoylation of the alpha subunit of the guanine nucleotide-binding protein Gz inhibited by more than 90 percent its response to the guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)-accelerating activity of Gz GAP, a Gz-selective member of the regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) protein family of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Palmitoylation both decreased the affinity of Gz GAP for the GTP-bound form of Galphaz by at least 90 percent and decreased the maximum rate of GTP hydrolysis. Inhibition was reversed by removal of the palmitoyl group by dithiothreitol. Palmitoylation of Galphaz also inhibited its response to the GAP activity of Galpha-interacting protein (GAIP), another RGS protein, and palmitoylation of Galphai1 inhibited its response to RGS4. The extent of inhibition of Gz GAP, GAIP, RGS4, and RGS10 correlated roughly with their intrinsic GAP activities for the Galpha target used in the assay. Reversible palmitoylation is thus a major determinant of Gz deactivation after its stimulation by receptors, and may be a general mechanism for prolonging or potentiating G-protein signaling.
Modulation of neuronal excitability by regulation of K+ channels potentially plays a part in short-term memory but has not yet been studied at the molecular level. Regulation of K+ channels by protein phosphorylation and oxygen has been described for various tissues and cell types; regulation of fast-inactivating K+ channels mediating IK(A) currents has not yet been described. Functional expression of cloned mammalian K+ channels has provided a tool for studying their regulation at the molecular level. We report here that fast-inactivating K+ currents mediated by cloned K+ channel subunits derived from mammalian brain expressed in Xenopus oocytes are regulated by the reducing agent glutathione. This type of regulation may have a role in vivo to link metabolism to excitability and to regulate excitability in specific membrane areas of mammalian neurons.
The E1 protein of papillomavirus is a hexameric ring helicase belonging to the AAA + family. The mechanism that couples the ATP cycle to DNA translocation has been unclear. Here we present the crystal structure of the E1 hexamer with single-stranded DNA discretely bound within the hexamer channel and nucleotides at the subunit interfaces. This structure demonstrates that only one strand of DNA passes through the hexamer channel and that the DNA-binding hairpins of each subunit form a spiral 'staircase' that sequentially tracks the oligonucleotide backbone. Consecutively grouped ATP, ADP and apo configurations correlate with the height of the hairpin, suggesting a straightforward DNA translocation mechanism. Each subunit sequentially progresses through ATP, ADP and apo states while the associated DNA-binding hairpin travels from the top staircase position to the bottom, escorting one nucleotide of single-stranded DNA through the channel. These events permute sequentially around the ring from one subunit to the next.
Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) synthesizes the deoxyribonucleotides for DNA synthesis. The R2 protein of normal class I ribonucleotide reductases contains a diiron site that produces a stable tyrosyl free radical, essential for enzymatic activity. Structural and electron paramagnetic resonance studies of R2 from Chlamydia trachomatis reveal a protein lacking a tyrosyl radical site. Instead, the protein yields an iron-coupled radical upon reconstitution. The coordinating structure of the diiron site is similar to that of diiron oxidases/monoxygenases and supports a role for this radical in the RNR mechanism. The specific ligand pattern in the C. trachomatis R2 metal site characterizes a new group of R2 proteins that so far has been found in eight organisms, three of which are human pathogens.
Protein phosphorylation is a principal regulatory mechanism in the control of almost all cellular processes. The nature of the protein phosphatases that participate in these reactions has been a subject of controversy. Four enzymes, termed protein phosphatases 1, 2A, 2B, and 2C, account for virtually all of the phosphatase activity toward phosphoproteins involved in controlling glycogen metabolism, glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, fatty acid synthesis, cholesterol synthesis, and protein synthesis. The properties, physiological roles, and mechanisms for regulating the four protein phosphatases are reviewed.
A class of transcriptional regulator proteins bind to DNA at dyad-symmetric sites through a motif consisting of (i) a "leucine zipper" sequence that associates into noncovalent, parallel, alpha-helical dimers and (ii) a covalently connected basic region necessary for binding DNA. The basic regions are predicted to be disordered in the absence of DNA and to form alpha helices when bound to DNA. These helices bind in the major groove forming multiple hydrogen-bonded and van der Waals contacts with the nucleotide bases. To test this model, two peptides were designed that were identical to natural leucine zipper proteins only at positions hypothesized to be critical for dimerization and DNA recognition. The peptides form dimers that bind specifically to DNA with their basic regions in alpha-helical conformations.
Cell cycle progression in eukaryotes is controlled by the p34cdc2/CDC28 protein kinase and its short-lived, phase-specific regulatory subunits called cyclins. In Xenopus oocytes, degradation of M-phase (B-type) cyclins is required for exit from mitosis and is mediated by the ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic system. Here we show that B-type-cyclin degradation in yeast involves an essential nuclear ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, UBC9. Repression of UBC9 synthesis prevents cell cycle progression at the G2 or early M phase, causing the accumulation of large budded cells with a single nucleus, a short spindle and replicated DNA. In ubc9 mutants both CLB5, an S-phase cyclin, and CLB2, an M-phase cyclin, are stabilized. In wild-type cells the CLB5 protein is unstable throughout the cell cycle, whereas CLB2 turnover occurs only at a specific cell-cycle stage. Thus distinct degradation signals or regulated interaction with the ubiquitin-protein ligase system may determine the cell-cycle specificity of cyclin proteolysis.
The intracellular storage and utilization of lipids are critical to maintain cellular energy homeostasis. During nutrient deprivation, cellular lipids stored as triglycerides in lipid droplets are hydrolysed into fatty acids for energy. A second cellular response to starvation is the induction of autophagy, which delivers intracellular proteins and organelles sequestered in double-membrane vesicles (autophagosomes) to lysosomes for degradation and use as an energy source. Lipolysis and autophagy share similarities in regulation and function but are not known to be interrelated. Here we show a previously unknown function for autophagy in regulating intracellular lipid stores (macrolipophagy). Lipid droplets and autophagic components associated during nutrient deprivation, and inhibition of autophagy in cultured hepatocytes and mouse liver increased triglyceride storage in lipid droplets. This study identifies a critical function for autophagy in lipid metabolism that could have important implications for human diseases with lipid over-accumulation such as those that comprise the metabolic syndrome.
Uncoupling protein-3 (UCP-3) is a recently identified member of the mitochondrial transporter superfamily that is expressed predominantly in skeletal muscle. However, its close relative UCP-1 is expressed exclusively in brown adipose tissue, a tissue whose main function is fat combustion and thermogenesis. Studies on the expression of UCP-3 in animals and humans in different physiological situations support a role for UCP-3 in energy balance and lipid metabolism. However, direct evidence for these roles is lacking. Here we describe the creation of transgenic mice that overexpress human UCP-3 in skeletal muscle. These mice are hyperphagic but weigh less than their wild-type littermates. Magnetic resonance imaging shows a striking reduction in adipose tissue mass. The mice also exhibit lower fasting plasma glucose and insulin levels and an increased glucose clearance rate. This provides evidence that skeletal muscle UCP-3 has the potential to influence metabolic rate and glucose homeostasis in the whole animal.
Lipid metabolism is essential for growth and generates much of the energy needed during periods of starvation. In Drosophila, fasting larvae release large quantities of lipid from the fat body but it is unclear how and where this is processed. Here we identify the oenocyte as the principal cell type accumulating lipid droplets during starvation. Tissue-specific manipulations of the Slimfast amino-acid channel, the Lsd2 fat-storage regulator and the Brummer lipase indicate that oenocytes act downstream of the fat body. In turn, oenocytes are required for depleting stored lipid from the fat body during fasting. Hence, lipid-metabolic coupling between the fat body and oenocytes is bidirectional. When food is plentiful, oenocytes have critical roles in regulating growth, development and feeding behaviour. In addition, they specifically express many different lipid-metabolizing proteins, including Cyp4g1, an omega-hydroxylase regulating triacylglycerol composition. These findings provide evidence that some lipid-processing functions of the mammalian liver are performed in insects by oenocytes.
The genetic and biochemical networks which underlie such things as homeostasis in metabolism and the developmental programs of living cells, must withstand considerable variations and random perturbations of biochemical parameters. These occur as transient changes in, for example, transcription, translation, and RNA and protein degradation. The intensity and duration of these perturbations differ between cells in a population. The unique state of cells, and thus the diversity in a population, is owing to the different environmental stimuli the individual cells experience and the inherent stochastic nature of biochemical processes (for example, refs 5 and 6). It has been proposed, but not demonstrated, that autoregulatory, negative feedback loops in gene circuits provide stability, thereby limiting the range over which the concentrations of network components fluctuate. Here we have designed and constructed simple gene circuits consisting of a regulator and transcriptional repressor modules in Escherichia coli and we show the gain of stability produced by negative feedback.
The actins constitute a family of highly conserved proteins found in all eukaryotic cells. Their conservation through a very wide range of taxonomic groups and the existence of tissue-specific isoforms make the actin genes very interesting for the study of the evolution of genes and their controlling elements. On the basis of amino acid sequence data, at least six different mammalian actins have been identified (skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, two smooth muscle actins and the cytoplasmic beta- and gamma-actins). Rat spleen DNA digested by the EcoRI restriction enzyme contains at least 12 different fragments with actin-like sequences but only one which hybridized, in very stringent conditions, with the skeletal muscle cloned cDNA probe. Here we describe the sequence of the actin gene in that fragment. The nucleotide sequence codes for two amino acids, Met-Cys, preceding the known N-terminal Asp of the mature protein. There are five small introns in the coding region and a large intron in the 5'-untranslated region. Comparison of the structure of the rat skeletal muscle actin gene with available data on actin genes from other organisms shows that while the sequenced actin genes from Drosophila and yeast have introns at different locations, introns located at codons specifying amino acids 41, 121, 204 and 267 have been preserved at least from the echinoderm to the vertebrates. A similar analysis has been done by Davidson. An intron at codon 150 is common to a plant actin gene and the skeletal muscle acting gene.
Damage-specific recognition and incision of DNA during nucleotide excision repair in yeast and mammalian cells requires multiple gene products. Amino-acid sequence homology between several yeast and mammalian genes suggests that the mechanism of nucleotide excision repair is conserved in eukaryotes, but very little is known about its biochemistry. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae at least 6 genes are needed for this process, including RAD1 and RAD10 (ref. 1). Mutations in the two genes inactivate nucleotide excision repair and result in a reduced efficiency of mitotic recombinational events between repeated sequences. The Rad10 protein has a stable and specific interaction with Rad1 protein and also binds to single-stranded DNA and promotes annealing of homologous single-stranded DNA. The amino-acid sequence of the yeast Rad10 protein is homologous with that of the human excision repair gene ERCC1 (ref. 3). Here we demonstrate that a complex of purified Rad1 and Rad10 proteins specifically degrades single-stranded DNA by an endonucleolytic mechanism. This endonuclease activity is presumably required to remove non-homologous regions of single-stranded DNA during mitotic recombination between repeated sequences as previously suggested, and may also be responsible for the specific incision of damaged DNA during nucleotide excision repair.
Dehydration or desiccation is one of the most frequent and severe challenges to living cells. The bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans is the best known extremophile among the few organisms that can survive extremely high exposures to desiccation and ionizing radiation, which shatter its genome into hundreds of short DNA fragments. Remarkably, these fragments are readily reassembled into a functional 3.28-megabase genome. Here we describe the relevant two-stage DNA repair process, which involves a previously unknown molecular mechanism for fragment reassembly called 'extended synthesis-dependent strand annealing' (ESDSA), followed and completed by crossovers. At least two genome copies and random DNA breakage are requirements for effective ESDSA. In ESDSA, chromosomal fragments with overlapping homologies are used both as primers and as templates for massive synthesis of complementary single strands, as occurs in a single-round multiplex polymerase chain reaction. This synthesis depends on DNA polymerase I and incorporates more nucleotides than does normal replication in intact cells. Newly synthesized complementary single-stranded extensions become 'sticky ends' that anneal with high precision, joining together contiguous DNA fragments into long, linear, double-stranded intermediates. These intermediates require RecA-dependent crossovers to mature into circular chromosomes that comprise double-stranded patchworks of numerous DNA blocks synthesized before radiation, connected by DNA blocks synthesized after radiation.
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has dramatically altered how molecular studies are conducted as well as what questions can be asked. In addition to simplifying molecular tasks typically carried out with the use of recombinant DNA technology, PCR has allowed a spectrum of advances ranging from the identification of novel genes and pathogens to the quantitation of characterized nucleotide sequences. PCR can provide insights into the intricacies of single cells as well as the evolution of species. Some recent developments in instrumentation, methodology, and applications of the PCR are presented in this review.
The proteasome is a protease that controls diverse processes in eukaryotic cells. Its regulatory particle (RP) initiates the degradation of ubiquitin-protein conjugates by unfolding the substrate and translocating it into the proteasome core particle (CP) to be degraded. The RP has 19 subunits, and their pathway of assembly is not understood. Here we show that in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae three proteins are found associated with RP but not with the RP-CP holoenzyme: Nas6, Rpn14 and Hsm3. Mutations in the corresponding genes confer proteasome loss-of-function phenotypes, despite their virtual absence from the holoenzyme. These effects result from deficient RP assembly. Thus, Nas6, Rpn14 and Hsm3 are RP chaperones. The RP contains six ATPases-the Rpt proteins-and each RP chaperone binds to the carboxy-terminal domain of a specific Rpt. We show in an accompanying study that RP assembly is templated through the Rpt C termini, apparently by their insertion into binding pockets in the CP. Thus, RP chaperones may regulate proteasome assembly by directly restricting the accessibility of Rpt C termini to the CP. In addition, competition between the RP chaperones and the CP for Rpt engagement may explain the release of RP chaperones as proteasomes mature.
The mammalian cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (cdk8) gene has been linked with a subset of acute lymphoblastic leukaemias, and its corresponding protein has been functionally implicated in regulation of transcription. Mammalian cdk8 and cyclin C, and their respective yeast homologues, Srb10 and Srb11, are components of the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme complex where they function as a protein kinase that phosphorylates the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (ref. 7). The yeast SRB10 and SRB11 genes have been implicated in the negative regulation of transcription. The cdk8/cyclin C protein complex is also found in a number of mammalian Mediator-like protein complexes, which repress activated transcription independently of the CTD in vitro. Here we show that cdk8/cyclin C can regulate transcription by targeting the cdk7/cyclin H subunits of the general transcription initiation factor IIH (TFIIH). cdk8 phosphorylates mammalian cyclin H in the vicinity of its functionally unique amino-terminal and carboxy-terminal alpha-helical domains. This phosphorylation represses both the ability of TFIIH to activate transcription and its CTD kinase activity. In addition, mimicking cdk8 phosphorylation of cyclin H in vivo has a dominant-negative effect on cell growth. Our results link the Mediator complex and the basal transcription machinery by a regulatory pathway involving two cyclin-dependent kinases. This pathway appears to be unique to higher organisms.
The most common mutation in human melanoma, BRAF(V600E), activates the serine/threonine kinase BRAF and causes excessive activity in the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. BRAF(V600E) mutations are also present in benign melanocytic naevi, highlighting the importance of additional genetic alterations in the genesis of malignant tumours. Such changes include recurrent copy number variations that result in the amplification of oncogenes. For certain amplifications, the large number of genes in the interval has precluded an understanding of the cooperating oncogenic events. Here we have used a zebrafish melanoma model to test genes in a recurrently amplified region of chromosome 1 for the ability to cooperate with BRAF(V600E) and accelerate melanoma. SETDB1, an enzyme that methylates histone H3 on lysine 9 (H3K9), was found to accelerate melanoma formation significantly in zebrafish. Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with massively parallel DNA sequencing and gene expression analyses uncovered genes, including HOX genes, that are transcriptionally dysregulated in response to increased levels of SETDB1. Our studies establish SETDB1 as an oncogene in melanoma and underscore the role of chromatin factors in regulating tumorigenesis.
Since the liver is a central organ for lipid and lipoprotein synthesis and catabolism, hepatic receptors for specific apolipoproteins on plasma lipoproteins would be expected to modulate lipid and lipoprotein metabolism. The role of hepatic receptors for low density lipoproteins and apolipoprotein E-containing lipoproteins was evaluated in patients with complementary disorders in lipoprotein metabolism: abetalipoproteinemia and homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. In addition, hepatic membranes from a patient with familial hypercholesterolemia were studied and compared before and after portacaval shunt surgery. The results establish that the human liver has receptors for apolipoproteins B and E. Furthermore, in the human, hepatic receptors for low density lipoproteins and apolipoprotein E are genetically distinct and can undergo independent control.
It was first shown more than ten years ago that DNA oligonucleotides can be attached to gold nanoparticles rationally to direct the formation of larger assemblies. Since then, oligonucleotide-functionalized nanoparticles have been developed into powerful diagnostic tools for nucleic acids and proteins, and into intracellular probes and gene regulators. In contrast, the conceptually simple yet powerful idea that functionalized nanoparticles might serve as basic building blocks that can be rationally assembled through programmable base-pairing interactions into highly ordered macroscopic materials remains poorly developed. So far, the approach has mainly resulted in polymerization, with modest control over the placement of, the periodicity in, and the distance between particles within the assembled material. That is, most of the materials obtained thus far are best classified as amorphous polymers, although a few examples of colloidal crystal formation exist. Here, we demonstrate that DNA can be used to control the crystallization of nanoparticle-oligonucleotide conjugates to the extent that different DNA sequences guide the assembly of the same type of inorganic nanoparticle into different crystalline states. We show that the choice of DNA sequences attached to the nanoparticle building blocks, the DNA linking molecules and the absence or presence of a non-bonding single-base flexor can be adjusted so that gold nanoparticles assemble into micrometre-sized face-centred-cubic or body-centred-cubic crystal structures. Our findings thus clearly demonstrate that synthetically programmable colloidal crystallization is possible, and that a single-component system can be directed to form different structures.
The respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is an important human pathogen, yet neither a vaccine nor effective therapies are available to treat infection. To help elucidate the replication mechanism of this RNA virus, we determined the three-dimensional (3D) crystal structure at 3.3 A resolution of a decameric, annular ribonucleoprotein complex of the RSV nucleoprotein (N) bound to RNA. This complex mimics one turn of the viral helical nucleocapsid complex, which serves as template for viral RNA synthesis. The RNA wraps around the protein ring, with seven nucleotides contacting each N subunit, alternating rows of four and three stacked bases that are exposed and buried within a protein groove, respectively. Combined with electron microscopy data, this structure provides a detailed model for the RSV nucleocapsid, in which the bases are accessible for readout by the viral polymerase. Furthermore, the nucleoprotein structure highlights possible key sites for drug targeting.
Notch proteins are receptors for a conserved signaling pathway that affects numerous cell fate decisions. We found that in Drosophila, Protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (OFUT1), an enzyme that glycosylates epidermal growth factor-like domains of Notch, also has a distinct Notch chaperone activity. OFUT1 is an endoplasmic reticulum protein, and its localization was essential for function in vivo. OFUT1 could bind to Notch, was required for the trafficking of wild-type Notch out of the endoplasmic reticulum, and could partially rescue defects in secretion and ligand binding associated with Notch point mutations. This ability of OFUT1 to facilitate folding of Notch did not require its fucosyltransferase activity. Thus, a glycosyltransferase can bind its substrate in the endoplasmic reticulum to facilitate normal folding.
We report the specific transduction, via surface stress changes, of DNA hybridization and receptor-ligand binding into a direct nanomechanical response of microfabricated cantilevers. Cantilevers in an array were functionalized with a selection of biomolecules. The differential deflection of the cantilevers was found to provide a true molecular recognition signal despite large nonspecific responses of individual cantilevers. Hybridization of complementary oligonucleotides shows that a single base mismatch between two 12-mer oligonucleotides is clearly detectable. Similar experiments on protein A-immunoglobulin interactions demonstrate the wide-ranging applicability of nanomechanical transduction to detect biomolecular recognition.
Chromosome healing by de novo telomere addition at nontelomeric sites has been well characterized in several organisms. The Tetrahymena telomerase ribonucleoprotein uses an internal RNA template to catalyse d(TTGGGG)n telomere addition to the 3' end of telomeric sequence in vitro and in vivo. Studies of telomerase RNA indicated that hybridization of the RNA template region, 5'-CAACCCCAA-3', to the 3' end of single-stranded telomeric oligonucleotides might be important for primer recognition and utilization. The apparent requirement of telomerase for pre-existing telomeric sequence has raised questions regarding its role in chromosome healing. We report here that Tetrahymena telomerase can specifically elongate single-stranded DNA oligonucleotides whose termini are not complementary to the RNA template sequence 5'-CAACCCCAA-3'. These data suggest that telomerase may be able to heal chromosomes directly in vivo.
Much attention has been focused recently on the detection and physical characterization of individual molecules. Using such methods to study the chemical properties, such as reactivity, of single molecules offers the potential to investigate how these might vary from molecule to molecule, and for individual molecules as a function of time. The complex structures of biomolecules such as enzymes make them particularly attractive targets for studying how subtle changes or differences at the molecular level might influence chemical reactivity. We have shown previously that very small (zeptomole) amounts of enzymes can be studied using a fluorescence microassay; single enzyme molecules have also been detected in oil-dispersed droplets by fluorescence microscopy. Here we report the observation of reactions of individual molecules of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH-1), which produces NADH from lactate and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+). When they are present at very low concentrations in a narrow capillary, each enzyme molecule produces a discrete zone of NADH; these can be manipulated electrophoretically and monitored by fluorescence spectroscopy. We find that the activity of individual electrophoretically pure enzyme molecules can vary by up to a factor of four, and that these activities remain unchanged over a two-hour period. We suggest that the origin of the activity differences may lie in the presence of several stable forms of the enzyme.
Fructose 3-phosphate, a novel monosaccharide phosphate, has been identified in the lens of diabetic rats. This compound, which is not present in normal lenses, is a protein glycosylating agent and enzyme inactivator. In addition, because of its structural features, this metabolite is relatively labile and undergoes hydrolysis to yield inorganic phosphate and the potent glycosylating agent, 3-deoxyglucosone. The increase in the concentration of fructose 3-phosphate in the lens of diabetic rats suggests that it and its hydrolysis product, 3-deoxyglucosone, may be responsible in part for the development of some diabetic complications in the lens.
The frizzled receptors, which mediate development and display seven hydrophobic, membrane-spanning segments, are cell membrane-localized. We constructed a chimeric receptor with the ligand-binding and transmembrane segments from the beta2-adrenergic receptor (beta2AR) and the cytoplasmic domains from rat Frizzled-1 (Rfz1). Stimulation of mouse F9 clones expressing the chimera (beta2AR-Rfz1) with the beta-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol stimulated stabilization of beta-catenin, activation of a beta-catenin-sensitive promoter, and formation of primitive endoderm. The response was blocked by inactivation of pertussis toxin-sensitive, heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and by depletion of Galphaq and Galphao. Thus, G proteins are elements of Wnt/Frizzled-1 signaling to the beta-catenin-lymphoid-enhancer factor (LEF)-T cell factor (Tcf) pathway.
There are several mechanisms by which homeothermic animals increase heat production, including shivering, sympathetic nervous system activation and stimulation of thyroid hormone secretion. Studies in rats have shown that increased sympathetic activity causes increased heat production in brown adipose tissue (BAT) after cold exposure or food ingestion. Acute cold exposure also increases circulating thyroid hormones which in turn stimulate cellular metabolism through induction of various enzymes. Most metabolic effects of thyroxine (T4) are thought to be due to the triiodothyronine (T3) which is produced from T4 by a process of 5' monodeiodination. There are two enzymes responsible for this reaction: type I, or propylthiouracil (PTU)-sensitive iodothyronine deiodinase (5'D-I), which is reduced in hypothyroidism, stimulated in hyperthyroidism and probably provides most of the circulating T3 in the adult rat. Type II 5'-deiodinase (5'D-II) is characteristic of brain and pituitary, is increased by thyroidectomy, is not inhibited by PTU and provides 50-80% of the intracellular T3 in these two tissues. Recently, 5'D-II activity was identified in interscapular BAT. As the sympathetic nervous system influences the metabolic activation of BAT, we have studied the effects of noradrenaline and acute cold exposure on BAT 5'D-II. We report here that both noradrenaline and cold exposure increase BAT 5'D-II through alpha 1-adrenergic receptors, whereas depletion of catecholamines with alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine (MPT) prevents the effect of cold but not that of noradrenaline. These results suggest that the sympathetic nervous system may increase T3 production in rats by stimulating BAT 5'D-II. By increasing metabolic rate, this rise in T3 would enhance the thermogenic response to sympathetic stimulation.
The taxonomic composition of environmental communities is an important indicator of their ecology and function. We used a set of protein-coding marker genes, extracted from large-scale environmental shotgun sequencing data, to provide a more direct, quantitative, and accurate picture of community composition than that provided by traditional ribosomal RNA-based approaches depending on the polymerase chain reaction. Mapping marker genes from four diverse environmental data sets onto a reference species phylogeny shows that certain communities evolve faster than others. The method also enables determination of preferred habitats for entire microbial clades and provides evidence that such habitat preferences are often remarkably stable over time.
An example of two related enzymes that catalyse similar reactions but possess different active sites is provided by comparing the structure of Escherichia coli thioredoxin reductase with glutathione reductase. Both are dimeric enzymes that catalyse the reduction of disulphides by pyridine nucleotides through an enzyme disulphide and a flavin. Human glutathione reductase contains four structural domains within each molecule: the flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD)- and nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-binding domains, the 'central' domain and the C-terminal domain that provides the dimer interface and part of the active site. Although both enzymes share the same catalytic mechanism and similar tertiary structures, their active sites do not resemble each other. We have determined the crystal structure of E. coli thioredoxin reductase at 2 A resolution, and show that thioredoxin reductase lacks the domain that provides the dimer interface in glutathione reductase, and forms a completely different dimeric structure. The catalytically active disulphides are located in different domains on opposite sides of the flavin ring system. This suggests that these enzymes diverged from an ancestral nucleotide-binding protein and acquired their disulphide reductase activities independently.
The circadian clock is encoded by a transcription-translation feedback loop that synchronizes behavior and metabolism with the light-dark cycle. Here we report that both the rate-limiting enzyme in mammalian nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) biosynthesis, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), and levels of NAD+ display circadian oscillations that are regulated by the core clock machinery in mice. Inhibition of NAMPT promotes oscillation of the clock gene Per2 by releasing CLOCK:BMAL1 from suppression by SIRT1. In turn, the circadian transcription factor CLOCK binds to and up-regulates Nampt, thus completing a feedback loop involving NAMPT/NAD+ and SIRT1/CLOCK:BMAL1.
Eukaryotic cells rely on a surveillance mechanism known as the spindle checkpoint to ensure accurate chromosome segregation. The spindle checkpoint prevents sister chromatids from separating until all kinetochores achieve bipolar attachments to the mitotic spindle. Checkpoint proteins tightly inhibit the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), a ubiquitin ligase required for chromosome segregation and progression to anaphase. Unattached kinetochores promote the binding of checkpoint proteins Mad2 and BubR1 to the APC-activator Cdc20, rendering it unable to activate APC. Once all kinetochores are properly attached, however, cells inactivate the checkpoint within minutes, allowing for the rapid and synchronous segregation of chromosomes. How cells switch from strong APC inhibition before kinetochore attachment to rapid APC activation once attachment is complete remains a mystery. Here we show that checkpoint inactivation is an energy-consuming process involving APC-dependent multi-ubiquitination. Multi-ubiquitination by APC leads to the dissociation of Mad2 and BubR1 from Cdc20, a process that is reversed by a Cdc20-directed de-ubiquitinating enzyme. The mutual regulation between checkpoint proteins and APC leaves the cell poised for rapid checkpoint inactivation and ensures that chromosome segregation promptly follows the completion of kinetochore attachment. In addition, our results suggest a mechanistic basis for how cancer cells can have a compromised spindle checkpoint without corresponding mutations in checkpoint genes.
The conserved Sir2 family of proteins has protein deacetylase activity that is dependent on NAD (the oxidized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide). Although histones are one likely target for the enzymatic activity of eukaryotic Sir2 proteins, little is known about the substrates and roles of prokaryotic Sir2 homologs. We reveal that an archaeal Sir2 homolog interacts specifically with the major archaeal chromatin protein, Alba, and that Alba exists in acetylated and nonacetylated forms. Furthermore, we show that Sir2 can deacetylate Alba and mediate transcriptional repression in a reconstituted in vitro transcription system. These data provide a paradigm for how Sir2 family proteins influence transcription and suggest that modulation of chromatin structure by acetylation arose before the divergence of the archaeal and eukaryotic lineages.
alpha-Lytic protease (alphaLP), an extracellular bacterial protease, is synthesized with a large amino-terminal pro-region that is essential for its folding in vivo and in vitro. In the absence of the pro-region, the protease folds to an inactive, partially folded state, designated 'I'. The pro-region catalyses protease folding by directly stabilizing the folding transition state (>26kcal mol(-1)) which separates the native state 'N' from I. Although a basic tenet of protein folding is that the native state of a protein is at the minimum free energy, we show here that both the I and fully unfolded states of alphaLP are lower in free energy than the native state. Native alphaLP is thus metastable: its apparent stability derives from a large barrier to unfolding. Consequently, the evolution of alphaLP has been distinct from most other proteins: it has not been constrained by the free-energy difference between the native and unfolded states, but instead by the size of its unfolding barrier.
The absorption of light by the chromophore of rhodopsin initiates a series of interconversions between spectrally distinct intermediates. The possibility has been raised that one of these transitions is accompanied by a change in the state of rhodopsin, and that it is this change which instigates visual excitation via a cascade of enzyme catalysed reactions. It has been suggested that the initial step of this cascade, which leads to the activation of cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase (PDE), involves the interaction of a GTP-binding regulatory (G) protein with rhodopsin. The ability of rhodopsin to activate PDE may be inhibited by the phosphorylation of sites exposed on the opsin surface as a result of light-induced conformational changes. To obtain more information about the relationship between the postchemical and biochemical reactions of rhodopsin we have investigated which transition leads to the activation of rhodopsin as a substrate for rhodopsin kinase, and report here that it is the transition from lumirhodopsin to metarhodopsin I.
Excitatory amino-acid carrier 1 (EAAC1) is a high-affinity Na+-dependent L-glutamate/D,L-aspartate cell-membrane transport protein. It is expressed in brain as well as several non-nervous tissues. In brain, EAAC1 is the primary neuronal glutamate transporter. It has a polarized distribution in cells and mainly functions perisynaptically to transport glutamate from the extracellular environment. In the kidney it is involved in renal acidic amino-acid re-absorption and amino-acid metabolism. Here we describe the identification and characterization of an EAAC1-associated protein, GTRAP3-18. Like EAAC1, GTRAP3-18 is expressed in numerous tissues. It localizes to the cell membrane and cytoplasm, and specifically interacts with carboxy-terminal intracellular domain of EAAC1. Increasing the expression of GTRAP3-18 in cells reduces EAAC1-mediated glutamate transport by lowering substrate affinity. The expression of GTRAP3-18 can be upregulated by retinoic acid, which results in a specific reduction of EAAC1-mediated glutamate transport. These studies show that glutamate transport proteins can be regulated potently and that GTRAP can modulate the transport functions ascribed to EAAC1. GTRAP3-18 may be important in regulating the metabolic function of EAAC1.
When nutrients become limiting, many bacteria differentiate and become resistant to environmental stresses. For Escherichia coli, this process is mediated by the sigma s subunit of RNA polymerase. Expression of sigma s was induced by homoserine lactone, a metabolite synthesized from intermediates in threonine biosynthesis. Homoserine lactone-dependent synthesis of sigma s was prevented by overexpression of a newly identified protein, RspA. The function of homoserine lactone derivatives in many cell density-dependent phenomena and the similarity of RspA to a Streptomyces ambofaciens protein suggest that synthesis of homoserine lactone may be a general signal of starvation.
Three mutations of the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase were constructed by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis of the cloned Escherichia coli gene. The mutations--at residue 27, aspartic acid replaced with asparagine; at residue 39, proline replaced with cysteine; and at residue 95, glycine replaced with alanine--were designed to answer questions about the relations between molecular structure and function that were raised by the x-ray crystal structures. Properties of the mutant proteins show that Asp-27 is important for catalysis and that perturbation of the local structure at a conserved cis peptide bond following Gly-95 abolishes activity. Substitution of cysteine for proline at residue 39 results in the appearance of new forms of the enzyme that correspond to various oxidation states of the cysteine. One of these forms probably represents a species cross-linked by an intrachain disulfide bridge between the cysteine at position 85 and the new cysteine at position 39.
The signal peptidase (SPase) from Escherichia coli is a membrane-bound endopeptidase with two amino-terminal transmembrane segments and a carboxy-terminal catalytic region which resides in the periplasmic space. SPase functions to release proteins that have been translocated into the inner membrane from the cell interior, by cleaving off their signal peptides. We report here the X-ray crystal structure of a catalytically active soluble fragment of E. coli SPase (SPase delta2-75). We have determined this structure at 1.9 A resolution in a complex with an inhibitor, a beta-lactam (5S,6S penem), which is covalently bound as an acyl-enzyme intermediate to the gamma-oxygen of a serine residue at position 90, demonstrating that this residue acts as the nucleophile in the hydrolytic mechanism of signal-peptide cleavage. The structure is consistent with the use by SPase of Lys 145 as a general base in the activation of the nucleophilic Ser90, explains the specificity requirement at the signal-peptide cleavage site, and reveals a large exposed hydrophobic surface which could be a site for an intimate association with the membrane. As enzymes that are essential for cell viability, bacterial SPases present a feasible antibacterial target: our determination of the SPase structure therefore provides a template for the rational design of antibiotic compounds.
Thrombin, the central regulatory enzyme in coagulation, when incubated in nanomolar concentrations with murine neuroblastoma cells produced a rapid and marked increase in tritiated guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic GMP) formation that was blocked by hirudin and competitively antagonized by dansylarginine N-(3-ethyl-1,5-pentanediyl)amide. Diisopropylphosphofluoridate-inactivated thrombin as well as the serine protease trypsin were markedly less potent and less effective than alpha-thrombin in producing this effect. Thrombin-stimulated cyclic GMP formation was inhibited by mepacrine and nordihydroguaiaretic acid but unaffected by indomethacin, suggesting that lipoxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid are involved in the response. These results suggest that a thrombin-like protease in the brain may be involved with the function of neurons or that thrombin interactions with nerve cells, such as those following cerebral hemorrhage or other trauma of the central nervous system, may be important in the subsequent neuropathology.
Fragile X syndrome is the result of transcriptional suppression of the gene FMR1 as a result of a trinucleotide repeat expansion mutation. The normal function of the FMR1 protein (FMRP) and the mechanism by which its absence leads to mental retardation are unknown. Ribonucleoprotein particle (RNP) domains were identified within FMRP, and RNA was shown to bind in stoichiometric ratios, which suggests that there are two RNA binding sites per FMRP molecule. FMRP was able to bind to its own message with high affinity (dissociation constant = 5.7 nM) and interacted with approximately 4 percent of human fetal brain messages. The absence of the normal interaction of FMRP with a subset of RNA molecules might result in the pleiotropic phenotype associated with fragile X syndrome.
A major pathway of eukaryotic messenger RNA (mRNA) turnover begins with deadenylation, followed by decapping and 5' to 3' exonucleolytic decay. We provide evidence that mRNA decapping and 5' to 3' degradation occur in discrete cytoplasmic foci in yeast, which we call processing bodies (P bodies). First, proteins that activate or catalyze decapping are concentrated in P bodies. Second, inhibiting mRNA turnover before decapping leads to loss of P bodies; however, inhibiting turnover at, or after, decapping, increases the abundance and size of P bodies. Finally, mRNA degradation intermediates are localized to P bodies. These results define the flux of mRNAs between polysomes and P bodies as a critical aspect of cytoplasmic mRNA metabolism and a possible site for regulation of mRNA degradation.
The dominant exported proteins and protective antigens of Mycobacterium tuberculosis are a triad of related gene products called the antigen 85 (Ag85) complex. Each has also been implicated in disease pathogenesis through its fibronectin-binding capacities. A carboxylesterase domain was found within the amino acid sequences of Ag85A, B, and C, and each protein acted as a mycolyltransferase involved in the final stages of mycobacterial cell wall assembly, as shown by direct enzyme assay and site-directed mutagenesis. Furthermore, the use of an antagonist (6-azido-6-deoxy-alpha, alpha'-trehalose) of this activity demonstrates that these proteins are essential and potential targets for new antimycobacterial drugs.
Iron is required to produce haem and iron-sulphur (Fe-S) clusters, processes thought to occur independently. Here we show that the hypochromic anaemia in shiraz (sir) zebrafish mutants is caused by deficiency of glutaredoxin 5 (grx5), a gene required in yeast for Fe-S cluster assembly. We found that grx5 was expressed in erythroid cells of zebrafish and mice. Zebrafish grx5 rescued the assembly of grx5 yeast Fe-S, showing that the biochemical function of grx5 is evolutionarily conserved. In contrast to yeast, vertebrates use iron regulatory protein 1 (IRP1) to sense intracellular iron and regulate mRNA stability or the translation of iron metabolism genes. We found that loss of Fe-S cluster assembly in sir animals activated IRP1 and blocked haem biosynthesis catalysed by aminolaevulinate synthase 2 (ALAS2). Overexpression of ALAS2 RNA without the 5' iron response element that binds IRP1 rescued sir embryos, whereas overexpression of ALAS2 including the iron response element did not. Further, antisense knockdown of IRP1 restored sir embryo haemoglobin synthesis. These findings uncover a connection between haem biosynthesis and Fe-S clusters, indicating that haemoglobin production in the differentiating red cell is regulated through Fe-S cluster assembly.
A shortened form of the self-splicing ribosomal RNA (rRNA) intervening sequence of Tetrahymena thermophila acts as an enzyme in vitro. The enzyme catalyzes the cleavage and rejoining of oligonucleotide substrates in a sequence-dependent manner with Km = 42 microM and kcat = 2 min-1. The reaction mechanism resembles that of rRNA precursor self-splicing. With pentacytidylic acid as the substrate, successive cleavage and rejoining reactions lead to the synthesis of polycytidylic acid. Thus, the RNA molecule can act as an RNA polymerase, differing from the protein enzyme in that it uses an internal rather than an external template. At pH 9, the same RNA enzyme has activity as a sequence-specific ribonuclease.
The state of metabolic acidosis involves changes of a varied and subtle nature in other organs as well as in the kidney. This fact has been illustrated in metabolic studies with glutamine, a major substrate of the kidney and of various other organs. In addition to the well-described increase in renal glutaminase enzymes, the hexose monophosphate-shunt enzymes also are much more active during metabolic acidosis; this phenomenon is limited to the kidney; its exact meaning remains speculative, but its possible relation to renal excretion of acid, lipogenesis, and gluconeogenesis during acidosis has been discussed. In the kidney there are metabolic changes associated with ammonium chloride acidosis that affect the basic mechanisms of gene-directed growth. There is a renal regenerative process during this kind of acidosis that resembles in some respects the compensatory hypertrophy in the remaining kidney after unilateral nephrectomy, from which it also differs in important ways. Lastly, we must now regard the role of glutamine in renal metabolism as an affair that goes well beyond the specific needs of formation of ammonia during the normal and acidotic states. Glutamine enters the general metabolic mill of the kidney, its carbon skeleton is incorporated into all the major tissue components, and it is an important source material for gluconeogenesis in the kidney; all of these renal functions of glutamine are increased during metabolic acidosis. Thus there is a fruitful field of exploration ahead, not only in the biochemical aspects of the renal response, but also in the metabolic interrelations among different organs during various types of acid-base change. This article, in concentrating on metabolic acidosis, gives only a glimpse of a broader picture to come.
During unequal cell divisions a mitotic spindle is eccentrically positioned before cell cleavage. To determine the basis of the net force imbalance that causes spindle displacement in one-cell Caenorhabditis elegans embryos, we fragmented centrosomes with an ultraviolet laser. Analysis of the mean and variance of fragment speeds suggests that the force imbalance is due to a larger number of force generators pulling on astral microtubules of the posterior aster relative to the anterior aster. Moreover, activation of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide- binding protein (Gprotein) alpha subunits is required to generate these astral forces.
The beta-lactam antibiotics kill bacteria by inhibiting a set of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) that catalyse the final stages of peptidoglycan synthesis. In some bacteria the development of intrinsic resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics by the reduction in the affinity of PBPs causes serious clinical problems. The introduction of beta-lactam antibiotics that are resistant to hydrolysis by beta-lactamases may also result in the emergence of intrinsic resistance among the Enterobacteriaceae. The clinical problems that would arise from the emergence of resistant PBPs in enterobacteria have led us to examine the ease with which Escherichia coli can gain resistance to beta-lactams by the production of altered PBPs. The development of resistant PBPs also provides an interesting example of enzyme evolution, since it requires a subtle re-modeling of the enzyme active centre so that it retains affinity for its peptide substrate but excludes the structurally analogous beta-lactam antibiotics. We show here that only four amino-acid substitutions need to be introduced into PBP 3 of E. coli to produce a strain possessing substantial levels of resistance to a wide variety of cephalosporins. We also show that transfer of the gene encoding the resistant PBP 3 from the chromosome to a plasmid could result in the spread of intrinsic resistance not only to other strains of E. coli but also to other enterobacterial species.
In patients with hereditary fructose intolerance, which is characterized by deficient aldolase activity toward fructose-1-phosphate, fructose induces a renal tubular dysfunction that implicates only the proximal convoluted tubule. Because normal metabolism of fructose by way of fructose-1-phosphate requires fructokinase, aldolase "B," and triokinase, the exclusively cortical location of these enzymes indicates that the medulla is not involved in the metabolic abnormality presumably causal of the renal dysfunction.
The activities of some enzymes increase during the development of the cellular slime mould, Dictyostelium discoideum. Because optimal specific activity is attained by eachenzyme at a specific developmental stage, development can be followed as a function of enzyme activity. The activity of one of these enzymes, alkaline phosphatase, increases markedly during the late stages of development, making it a potentially useful marker for terminal differentiation. It has been suggested that this increase in activity is due to de novo enzyme synthesis because the increase in activity does not occur in the presence of inhibitors of RNA and protein synthesis. However, we present evidence here of reversible heat activation of membrane-bound alkaline phosphatase which suggests that the increase in alkaline phosphatase activity may be due to an unmasking of pre-existing enzyme by a novel membrane regulatory mechanism.
The passage of mammalian cells through the restriction point into the S phase of the cell cycle is regulated by the activities of Cdk4 and Cdk6 complexed with the D-type cyclins and by cyclin E/Cdk2. The activities of these holoenzymes are constrained by CDK inhibitory proteins. The importance of the restriction point is illustrated by its deregulation in many tumour cells and upon infection with DNA tumour viruses. Here we describe the properties of cyclins encoded by two herpesviruses, herpesvirus saimiri (HVS) which can transform blood lymphocytes and induce malignancies of lymphoid origin in New World primates, and human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) implicated as a causative agent of Kaposi's sarcoma and body cavity lymphomas. Both viral cyclins form active kinase complexes with Cdk6 that are resistant to inhibition by the CDK inhibitors p16(Ink4a), p21Cip1 and p27Kip1. Furthermore, ectopic expression of a viral cyclin prevents G1 arrest imposed by each inhibitor and stimulates cell-cycle progression in quiescent fibroblasts. These results suggest a new mechanism for deregulation of the cell cycle and indicate that the viral cyclins may contribute to the oncogenic nature of these viruses.
Mutagenesis induced by DNA damage in Saccharomyces cerevisiae requires the products of the REV1, REV3 and REV7 genes. The Rev3 and Rev7 proteins are subunits of DNA polymerase-zeta (Pol-zeta), an enzyme whose sole function appears to be translesion synthesis. Rev1 protein has weak homology with UmuC protein which facilitates translesion synthesis in Escherichia coli by an unknown mechanism. We show here that Rev1 protein has a deoxycytidyl transferase activity which transfers a dCMP residue from dCTP to the 3' end of a DNA primer in a template-dependent reaction. Efficient transfer occurred opposite a template abasic site, but approximately 20% transfer also occurred opposite a template guanine and approximately 10% opposite adenine or uracil; < or = 1% was seen opposite thymine or cytosine. Insertion of cytosine opposite an abasic site produced a terminus that was extended efficiently by Pol-zeta, but not by yeast Pol-alpha.
Costimulation of both the CD3 and CD28 receptors is essential for T cell activation. Induction of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP)-specific phosphodiesterase-7 (PDE7) was found to be a consequence of such costimulation. Increased PDE7 in T cells correlated with decreased cAMP, increased interleukin-2 expression, and increased proliferation. Selectively reducing PDE7 expression with a PDE7 antisense oligonucleotide inhibited T cell proliferation; inhibition was reversed by blocking the cAMP signaling pathways that operate through cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). Thus, PDE7 induction and consequent suppression of PKA activity is required for T cell activation, and inhibition of PDE7 could be an approach to treating T cell-dependent disorders.
In metazoans, the insulin signalling pathway has a key function in regulating energy metabolism and organismal growth. Its activation stimulates a highly conserved downstream kinase cascade that includes phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K) and the serine-threonine protein kinase Akt. This study identifies a new component of insulin signalling in Drosophila, the steppke gene (step). step encodes a member of the cytohesin family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which have been characterized as activators for ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) GTPases. In step mutant animals both cell size and cell number are reduced, resulting in decreased body size and body weight in larvae, pupae and adults. step acts upstream of PI(3)K and is required for the proper regulation of Akt and the transcription factor FOXO. Temporally controlled interference with the GEF activity of the Step protein by feeding the chemical inhibitor SecinH3 causes a block of insulin signalling and a phenocopy of the step mutant growth defect. Step represses its own expression and the synthesis of growth inhibitors such as the translational repressor 4E-BP. Our findings indicate a crucial role of an ARF-GEF in insulin signalling that has implications for understanding insulin-related disorders, such as diabetes and obesity.
The transfer process of T (transfer)-DNA of Agrobacterium tumefaciens is activated after the induction of the expression of the Ti plasmid virulence (vir) loci by plant signal molecules such as acetosyringone. The vir gene products then act to generate a free transferable single-stranded copy of the T-DNA, designated the T-strand. Although some vir proteins are responsible for the synthesis of the T-strand, others may mediate T-strand transfer to plant cells as part of a DNA-protein complex. Here, a novel 69-kilodalton vir-specific single-stranded DNA binding protein is identified in Agrobacterium harboring a nopaline-type Ti plasmid. This protein binds single-stranded but not double-stranded DNA regardless of nucleotide sequence composition. The molecular size of the vir-specific single-stranded DNA binding protein and its relative abundance in acetosyringone-induced Agrobacterium suggested that it might be the product of the virE locus; molecular cloning and expression of the virE region in Escherichia coli confirmed this prediction.
Nitric oxide (NO.), a potentially toxic molecule, has been implicated in a wide range of biological functions. Details of its biochemistry, however, remain poorly understood. The broader chemistry of nitrogen monoxide (NO) involves a redox array of species with distinctive properties and reactivities: NO+ (nitrosonium), NO., and NO- (nitroxyl anion). The integration of this chemistry with current perspectives of NO biology illuminates many aspects of NO biochemistry, including the enzymatic mechanism of synthesis, the mode of transport and targeting in biological systems, the means by which its toxicity is mitigated, and the function-regulating interaction with target proteins.
The protein coding region of the herpes simplex virus type-1 glycoprotein D (gD) gene was mapped, and the nucleotide sequence was determined. The predicted amino acid sequence of the gD polypeptide was found to contain a number of features in common with other virus glycoproteins. Insertion of this protein coding region into a bacterial expressor plasmid enabled synthesis in Escherichia coli of an immunoreactive gD-related polypeptide. The potential of this system for preparation of a type-common herpes simplex virus vaccine is discussed.
Stimuli-sensitive polymer hydrogels, which swell or shrink in response to changes in the environmental conditions, have been extensively investigated and used as 'smart' biomaterials and drug-delivery systems. Most of these responsive hydrogels are prepared from a limited number of synthetic polymers and their derivatives, such as copolymers of (meth)acrylic acid, acrylamide and N-isopropyl acrylamide. Water-soluble synthetic polymers have also been crosslinked with molecules of biological origin, such as oligopeptides and oligodeoxyribonucleotides, or with intact native proteins. Very often there are several factors influencing the relationship between structure and properties in these systems, making it difficult to engineer hydrogels with specified responses to particular stimuli. Here we report a hybrid hydrogel system assembled from water-soluble synthetic polymers and a well-defined protein-folding motif, the coiled coil. These hydrogels undergo temperature-induced collapse owing to the cooperative conformational transition of the coiled-coil protein domain. This system shows that well-characterized water-soluble synthetic polymers can be combined with well-defined folding motifs of proteins in hydrogels with engineered volume-change properties.
A model was developed for the structure of p21, the protein with a molecular weight of 21,000 that is produced by the ras genes. This model predicts that p21 consists of a central core of beta-sheet structure, connected by loops and alpha helices. Four of these loops comprise the guanine nucleotide binding site. The phosphoryl binding region is made up of amino acid sequences from 10 to 16 and from 57 to 63 of p21. The latter sequence may contain a site for magnesium binding. Amino acids defining guanine specificity are Asn-116 and Asp-119, and sequences around amino acid 145 may contribute to guanine binding. The model makes it possible to visualize how oncogenic mutations of p21 affect interaction with guanine nucleotides.
Signaling pathways using heterotrimeric guanine-nucleotide-binding-proteins (G proteins) trigger physiological responses elicited by hormones, neurotransmitters and sensory stimuli. GTP binding activates G proteins by dissociating G alpha from G beta gamma subunits, and GTP hydrolysis by G alpha subunits deactivates G proteins by allowing heterotrimers to reform. However, deactivation of G-protein signalling pathways in vivo can occur 10- to 100-fold faster than the rate of GTP hydrolysis of G alpha subunits in vitro, suggesting that GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) deactivate G alpha subunits. Here we report that RGS (for regulator of G-protein signalling) proteins are GAPs for G alpha subunits. RGS1, RGS4 and GAIP (for G alpha-interacting protein) bind specifically and tightly to G alphai and G alpha0 in cell membranes treated with GDP and AlF4(-), and are GAPs for G alphai, G alpha0 and transducin alpha-subunits, but not for G alphas. Thus, these RGS proteins are likely to regulate a subset of the G-protein signalling pathways in mammalian cells. Our results provide insight into the mechanisms that govern the duration and specificity of physiological responses elicited by G-protein-mediated signalling pathways.
A protein kinase characterized by its ability to phosphorylate microtubule-associated protein-2 (MAP2), is thought to be an early intermediate in an insulin-stimulated phosphorylation cascade and in a variety of other mammalian cell responses to extracellular signals. A complementary DNA that encodes this protein serine-threonine kinase has been cloned, and the protein designated extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 (ERK1). ERK1 has striking similarity to two protein kinases, KSS1 and FUS3, from yeast. The yeast kinases function in an antagonistic manner to regulate the cell cycle in response to mating factors. Thus, ERK1 and the two yeast kinases constitute a family of evolutionarily conserved enzymes involved in regulating the response of eukaryotic cells to extracellular signals.
Binding of acetylcholine (ACh) to cardiac muscarinic ACh receptors (mAChR) activates a potassium channel that slows pacemaker activity. Although the time course of this activation suggests a multi-step process with intrinsic delays of 30-100 ms, no second-messenger system has been demonstrated to link the mAChR to the channel. Changes in cyclic nucleotide levels (cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP) do not affect this K channel or its response to muscarinic agonists. Indeed, electrophysiological experiments argue against the involvement of any second messenger that diffuses through the cytoplasm. We report here that coupling of the mAChR in embryonic chick atrial cells to this inward rectifying K channel requires intracellular GTP. Furthermore, pretreatment of cells with IAP (islet-activating protein from the bacterium Bordetella pertussis) eliminates the ACh-induced inward rectification. As IAP specifically ADP-ribosylates two GTP-binding proteins, Ni and No, that can interact with mAChRs, we conclude that a guanyl nucleotide-binding protein couples ACh binding to channel activation. This represents the first demonstration that a GTP-binding protein can regulate the function of an ionic channel without acting through cyclic nucleotide second messengers.
The tpa-1 gene mediates the action of tumor-promoting phorbol esters in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. A genomic fragment that constitutes a portion of the tpa-1 gene was cloned by Tc1 transposon tagging and was used as a probe to screen a nematode complementary DNA library. One of the isolated complementary DNA clones had a nucleotide sequence that predicts a polypeptide of 526 amino acids. The predicted amino acid sequence revealed that the predicted tpa-1 protein sequence is highly similar to protein kinase C molecules from various animals, including man.
Arachidonic acid, as well as fatty acids that are not substrates for cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase enzymes, activated a specific type of potassium channel in freshly dissociated smooth muscle cells. Activation occurred in excised membrane patches in the absence of calcium and all nucleotides. Therefore signal transduction pathways that require such soluble factors, including the NADPH-dependent cytochrome P450 pathway, do not mediate the response. Thus, fatty acids directly activate potassium channels and so may constitute a class of signal molecules that regulate ion channels.
Pea seed-borne mosaic virus (PSbMV) RNA replication in pea cotyledonary tissues was restricted largely to a zone of cells close to the infection front. In situ hybridization probes representing nine genes from two pathways of metabolism failed to detect RNA transcripts within this zone, although transcripts were found in similar amounts in tissues on either side of the zone. Thus, in common with some animal viruses, PSbMV transiently suppresses the expression of host genes. Host protein accumulation was also affected. These observations provide insights into virus-plant interactions and symptom expression.
Influenza A virus is an RNA virus that encodes up to 11 proteins and this small coding capacity demands that the virus use the host cellular machinery for many aspects of its life cycle. Knowledge of these host cell requirements not only informs us of the molecular pathways exploited by the virus but also provides further targets that could be pursued for antiviral drug development. Here we use an integrative systems approach, based on genome-wide RNA interference screening, to identify 295 cellular cofactors required for early-stage influenza virus replication. Within this group, those involved in kinase-regulated signalling, ubiquitination and phosphatase activity are the most highly enriched, and 181 factors assemble into a highly significant host-pathogen interaction network. Moreover, 219 of the 295 factors were confirmed to be required for efficient wild-type influenza virus growth, and further analysis of a subset of genes showed 23 factors necessary for viral entry, including members of the vacuolar ATPase (vATPase) and COPI-protein families, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) proteins, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)-beta. Furthermore, 10 proteins were confirmed to be involved in post-entry steps of influenza virus replication. These include nuclear import components, proteases, and the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase) IIbeta (CAMK2B). Notably, growth of swine-origin H1N1 influenza virus is also dependent on the identified host factors, and we show that small molecule inhibitors of several factors, including vATPase and CAMK2B, antagonize influenza virus replication.
The lysozymes of hen egg-white and bacteriophage T4 have similar catalytic properties but their amino acid sequences are not homologous. The question therefore arises whether they are derived from a common ancestral protein or have arisen independently. On the basis of the data we have gathered, it is shown here that the two enzymes are similar in the conformation of their backbones, in their modes of binding substrates, in specific protein--substrate interactions and in their presumed modes of action. We conclude that the two enzymes have diverged from a common precursor. This seems to be the most convincing example to date of the divergence of proteins with nonhomologous amino acid sequences.
Reconstituted transcription reactions containing the seven general transcription factors, in addition to RNA polymerase II, respond poorly to transcriptional activators. Two factors, Dr2 and ACF, necessary for high levels of transcription in response to an activator have been identified. ACF can enhance basal and activated transcription. Dr2 represses basal transcription, but this can be overcome by transcriptional activators or TFIIA. Dr2 is human DNA topoisomerase I. The DNA relaxation activity of topoisomerase I is dispensable for transcriptional repression. The effect of Dr2 is specific for TATA-box-containing promoters and is mediated by the TATA-binding protein.
Most of the transcriptional effects of cyclic AMP are mediated by the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). After activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A, the catalytic subunits of this enzyme apparently mediate the phosphorylation and activation of CREB. As cAMP serves as a mitogenic signal for anterior pituitary somatotrophic cells, we investigated whether CREB similarly regulates proliferation of these cells. We prepared transgenic mice expressing a transcriptionally inactive mutant of CREB (CREBM1), which cannot be phosphorylated, in cells of the anterior pituitary. If CREB activity is required for proliferation, the overexpressed mutant protein would effectively compete with wild-type CREB activity and thereby block the response to cAMP. As predicted, the CREBM1 transgenic mice exhibited a dwarf phenotype with atrophied pituitary glands markedly deficient in somatotroph but not other cell types. We conclude that transcriptional activation of CREB is necessary for the normal development of a highly restricted cell type, and that environmental cues, possibly provided by the hypothalamic growth hormone-releasing factor, are necessary for population of the pituitary by somatotrophic cells.
The triplet-based genetic code requires that translating ribosomes maintain the reading frame of a messenger RNA faithfully to ensure correct protein synthesis. However, in programmed -1 ribosomal frameshifting, a specific subversion of frame maintenance takes place, wherein the ribosome is forced to shift one nucleotide backwards into an overlapping reading frame and to translate an entirely new sequence of amino acids. This process is indispensable in the replication of numerous viral pathogens, including HIV and the coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome, and is also exploited in the expression of several cellular genes. Frameshifting is promoted by an mRNA signal composed of two essential elements: a heptanucleotide 'slippery' sequence and an adjacent mRNA secondary structure, most often an mRNA pseudoknot. How these components operate together to manipulate the ribosome is unknown. Here we describe the observation of a ribosome-mRNA pseudoknot complex that is stalled in the process of -1 frameshifting. Cryoelectron microscopic imaging of purified mammalian 80S ribosomes from rabbit reticulocytes paused at a coronavirus pseudoknot reveals an intermediate of the frameshifting process. From this it can be seen how the pseudoknot interacts with the ribosome to block the mRNA entrance channel, compromising the translocation process and leading to a spring-like deformation of the P-site transfer RNA. In addition, we identify movements of the likely eukaryotic ribosomal helicase and confirm a direct interaction between the translocase eEF2 and the P-site tRNA. Together, the structural changes provide a mechanical explanation of how the pseudoknot manipulates the ribosome into a different reading frame.
Repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by homologous recombination requires resection of 5'-termini to generate 3'-single-strand DNA tails. Key components of this reaction are exonuclease 1 and the bifunctional endo/exonuclease, Mre11 (refs 2-4). Mre11 endonuclease activity is critical when DSB termini are blocked by bound protein--such as by the DNA end-joining complex, topoisomerases or the meiotic transesterase Spo11 (refs 7-13)--but a specific function for the Mre11 3'-5' exonuclease activity has remained elusive. Here we use Saccharomyces cerevisiae to reveal a role for the Mre11 exonuclease during the resection of Spo11-linked 5'-DNA termini in vivo. We show that the residual resection observed in Exo1-mutant cells is dependent on Mre11, and that both exonuclease activities are required for efficient DSB repair. Previous work has indicated that resection traverses unidirectionally. Using a combination of physical assays for 5'-end processing, our results indicate an alternative mechanism involving bidirectional resection. First, Mre11 nicks the strand to be resected up to 300 nucleotides from the 5'-terminus of the DSB--much further away than previously assumed. Second, this nick enables resection in a bidirectional manner, using Exo1 in the 5'-3' direction away from the DSB, and Mre11 in the 3'-5' direction towards the DSB end. Mre11 exonuclease activity also confers resistance to DNA damage in cycling cells, suggesting that Mre11-catalysed resection may be a general feature of various DNA repair pathways.
Neurodegeneration can be triggered by genetic or environmental factors. Although the precise cause is often unknown, many neurodegenerative diseases share common features such as protein aggregation and age dependence. Recent studies in Drosophila have uncovered protective effects of NAD synthase nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMNAT) against activity-induced neurodegeneration and injury-induced axonal degeneration. Here we show that NMNAT overexpression can also protect against spinocerebellar ataxia 1 (SCA1)-induced neurodegeneration, suggesting a general neuroprotective function of NMNAT. It protects against neurodegeneration partly through a proteasome-mediated pathway in a manner similar to heat-shock protein 70 (Hsp70). NMNAT displays chaperone function both in biochemical assays and cultured cells, and it shares significant structural similarity with known chaperones. Furthermore, it is upregulated in the brain upon overexpression of poly-glutamine expanded protein and recruited with the chaperone Hsp70 into protein aggregates. Our results implicate NMNAT as a stress-response protein that acts as a chaperone for neuronal maintenance and protection. Our studies provide an entry point for understanding how normal neurons maintain activity, and offer clues for the common mechanisms underlying different neurodegenerative conditions.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common recessive lethal genetic disorder, affecting 1 in 1,600 Caucasians. The disease causes defective regulation of chloride-ion transport in exocrine cells. Although in all CF families the disease is linked to a locus on chromosome 7q31, there is clinical heterogeneity in the severity of the disease and the age at which it is diagnosed. CF is caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. A three-nucleotide deletion (delta F508) causing the loss of a phenylalanine residue in the tenth exon of the CFTR gene has been found on 70% of CF chromosomes. We have now characterized a CF family in which neither parent of the affected individual carries the common mutation, and identified a two-nucleotide insertion in the CF allele of the mother. The mutation introduces a termination codon in exon 13 of the CFTR gene at residue 821, and is predicted to result in the production of a severely truncated nonfunctional protein.
Gonadal steroidogenesis is regulated by pituitary gonadotropins and a locally produced, unidentified factor. A 70-kilodalton (kD) protein complex secreted from rat Sertoli cells was isolated. The complex, composed of 28- and 38-kD proteins, stimulated steroidogenesis by Leydig cells and ovarian granulosa cells in a dose-dependent and adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-independent manner. The follicle-stimulating hormone-induced 28-kD protein appeared to be responsible for the bioactivity, but the 38-kD protein was indispensable for maximal activity. The 28- and 38-kD proteins were shown to be identical to the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) and the proenzyme form of cathepsin L, respectively. Thus, a TIMP-1-procathepsin L complex is a potent activator of steroidogenesis and may regulate steroid concentrations and, thus, germ cell development in both males and females.
Cell walls are crucial for development, signal transduction, and disease resistance in plants. Cell walls are made of cellulose, hemicelluloses, and pectins. Xyloglucan (XG), the principal load-bearing hemicellulose of dicotyledonous plants, has a terminal fucosyl residue. A 60-kilodalton fucosyltransferase (FTase) that adds this residue was purified from pea epicotyls. Peptide sequence information from the pea FTase allowed the cloning of a homologous gene, AtFT1, from Arabidopsis. Antibodies raised against recombinant AtFTase immunoprecipitate FTase enzyme activity from solubilized Arabidopsis membrane proteins, and AtFT1 expressed in mammalian COS cells results in the presence of XG FTase activity in these cells.
A basic principle of molecular biology is that the primary sequence of RNA faithfully reflects the primary sequence of the DNA from which it is transcribed. This concept has been challenged recently by the discovery of RNA editing, broadly defined as any process that changes the nucleotide sequence of an RNA molecule from that of the DNA template encoding it. Examples of RNA editing (see ref. 2 for review) include the insertion and deletion of uridine residues in mitochondrial messenger RNAs in kinetoplastid protozoa, the conversion of a cytidine to uridine in mammalian apolipoprotein-B mRNA, and the appearance of two non-templated guanosine residues in a paramyxovirus transcript. In these cases, RNA editing either re-tailors a non-functional transcript, producing a translatable mRNA, or modifies an already functional mRNA so that it generates a protein of altered amino-acid sequence. Here we report an editing phenomenon that involves the conversion of cytidine to uridine at multiple positions in the mRNA for subunit II of cytochrome c oxidase in wheat mitochondria. Such RNA editing provides an explanation for apparent coding anomalies in plant mitochondria.
A low dose of methyl mercuric chloride fed to female rats for 12 weeks caused extrusion of numerous cytoplasmic masses from kidney proximal tubule cells of the pars recta segment. These masses were characterized ultrastructurally by the presence of a smooth endoplasmic reticulum aggregate. The in vivo metabolism of methyl mercury to inorganic mercury may produce this effect and account for the proteinuria observed in persons occupationally exposed to organic mercury compounds.
Hypoxia is important in a wide range of biological processes, such as animal hibernation and cell survival, and is particularly relevant in many diseases. The sensitivity of cells and organisms to hypoxic injury varies widely, but the molecular basis for this variation is incompletely understood. Using forward genetic screens in Caenorhabditis elegans, we isolated a hypoxia-resistant reduction-of-function mutant of rrt-1 that encodes an arginyl-transfer RNA (tRNA) synthetase, an enzyme essential for protein translation. Knockdown of rrt-1, and of most other genes encoding aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, rescued animals from hypoxia-induced death, and the level of hypoxia resistance was inversely correlated with translation rate. The unfolded protein response was induced by hypoxia and was required for the hypoxia resistance of the reduction-of-function mutant of rrt-1. Thus, translational suppression produces hypoxia resistance, in part by reducing unfolded protein toxicity.
Therapeutics that are designed to engage RNA interference (RNAi) pathways have the potential to provide new, major ways of imparting therapy to patients. Long, double-stranded RNAs were first shown to mediate RNAi in Caenorhabditis elegans, and the potential use of RNAi for human therapy has been demonstrated by the finding that small interfering RNAs (siRNAs; approximately 21-base-pair double-stranded RNA) can elicit RNAi in mammalian cells without producing an interferon response. We are at present conducting the first in-human phase I clinical trial involving the systemic administration of siRNA to patients with solid cancers using a targeted, nanoparticle delivery system. Here we provide evidence of inducing an RNAi mechanism of action in a human from the delivered siRNA. Tumour biopsies from melanoma patients obtained after treatment show the presence of intracellularly localized nanoparticles in amounts that correlate with dose levels of the nanoparticles administered (this is, to our knowledge, a first for systemically delivered nanoparticles of any kind). Furthermore, a reduction was found in both the specific messenger RNA (M2 subunit of ribonucleotide reductase (RRM2)) and the protein (RRM2) levels when compared to pre-dosing tissue. Most notably, we detect the presence of an mRNA fragment that demonstrates that siRNA-mediated mRNA cleavage occurs specifically at the site predicted for an RNAi mechanism from a patient who received the highest dose of the nanoparticles. Together, these data demonstrate that siRNA administered systemically to a human can produce a specific gene inhibition (reduction in mRNA and protein) by an RNAi mechanism of action.
RNA polymerases I, II, and III each use the TATA-binding protein (TBP). Regulators that target this shared factor may therefore provide a means to coordinate the activities of the three nuclear RNA polymerases. The repressor Dr1 binds to TBP and blocks the interaction of TBP with polymerase II- and polymerase III-specific factors. This enables Dr1 to coordinately regulate transcription by RNA polymerases II and III. Under the same conditions, Dr1 does not inhibit polymerase I transcription. By selectively repressing polymerases II and III, Dr1 may shift the physiological balance of transcriptional output in favor of polymerase I.
Most of the mutant A proteins studied appear to be similar to the normal enzyme both in their apparent conformation about the critical cysteine residues and their ability to bind substrate. Two mutant proteins, in which a glutamic acid or arginine residue is substituted for a glycine residue, do appear abnormal suggesting that these primary structural changes radically affect the conformation in regions at or near the site or sites of substrate binding.
The mitochondrial inner membrane protease is required for the maturation of mitochondrial proteins that are delivered to the intermembrane space. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this protease is now shown to be a complex that contains two catalytic subunits, Imp2p and the previously identified Imp1p. Primary structure similarity indicates that Imp1p and Imp2p are related to each other and to the family of eubacterial and eukaryotic signal peptidases. Imp1p and Imp2p have separate, nonoverlapping substrate specificities. In addition to its catalyzing the cleavage of intermembrane space sorting signals, Imp2p is required for the stable and functional expression of Imp1p. Thus, inner membrane protease, and by analogy eukaryotic multisubunit signal peptidases, may have acquired multiple catalytic subunits by gene duplication to broaden their range of substrate specificity.
The formation of complexes between proteins and ligands is fundamental to biological processes at the molecular level. Manipulation of molecular recognition between ligands and proteins is therefore important for basic biological studies and has many biotechnological applications, including the construction of enzymes, biosensors, genetic circuits, signal transduction pathways and chiral separations. The systematic manipulation of binding sites remains a major challenge. Computational design offers enormous generality for engineering protein structure and function. Here we present a structure-based computational method that can drastically redesign protein ligand-binding specificities. This method was used to construct soluble receptors that bind trinitrotoluene, l-lactate or serotonin with high selectivity and affinity. These engineered receptors can function as biosensors for their new ligands; we also incorporated them into synthetic bacterial signal transduction pathways, regulating gene expression in response to extracellular trinitrotoluene or l-lactate. The use of various ligands and proteins shows that a high degree of control over biomolecular recognition has been established computationally. The biological and biosensing activities of the designed receptors illustrate potential applications of computational design.
The prohormone-processing endoprotease (KEX2 gene product) of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a membrane-bound, 135,000-dalton glycoprotein, which contains both asparagine-linked and serine- and threonine-linked oligosaccharide and resides in a secretory compartment. Analysis of mutant kex2 genes truncated at their 3' end indicates that carboxyl terminal domains of the enzyme are required for its proper localization within the cell. A human gene product, "furin," shares 50% identity with the catalytic domain of Kex2 protease and is, therefore, a candidate for a human prohormone-processing enzyme.
The nucleotide sequence of a 4.8-kilobase mRNA for hamster 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase, the endoplasmic reticulum enzyme that controls cholesterol biosynthesis, shows that it is a protein of 887 amino acids (molecular weight 97,092) which contains three potential sites for asparagine-linked glycosylation. The reductase is a transmembrane glycoprotein, but in contrast to many other transmembrane glycoproteins, it lacks a cleavable or hydrophobic NH2-terminal signal sequence.
Targeted protein degradation is largely performed by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, in which substrate proteins are marked by covalently attached ubiquitin chains that mediate recognition by the proteasome. It is currently unclear how the proteasome recognizes its substrates, as the only established ubiquitin receptor intrinsic to the proteasome is Rpn10/S5a (ref. 1), which is not essential for ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation in budding yeast. In the accompanying manuscript we report that Rpn13 (refs 3-7), a component of the nine-subunit proteasome base, functions as a ubiquitin receptor, complementing its known role in docking de-ubiquitinating enzyme Uch37/UCHL5 (refs 4-6) to the proteasome. Here we merge crystallography and NMR data to describe the ubiquitin-binding mechanism of Rpn13. We determine the structure of Rpn13 alone and complexed with ubiquitin. The co-complex reveals a novel ubiquitin-binding mode in which loops rather than secondary structural elements are used to capture ubiquitin. Further support for the role of Rpn13 as a proteasomal ubiquitin receptor is demonstrated by its ability to bind ubiquitin and proteasome subunit Rpn2/S1 simultaneously. Finally, we provide a model structure of Rpn13 complexed to diubiquitin, which provides insights into how Rpn13 as a ubiquitin receptor is coupled to substrate deubiquitination by Uch37.
Interaction of ligands with 'Ca2+-mobilizing' receptors is thought to result in the generation of two second messengers, inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol, from a common substrate, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2) (refs 1, 2), a component of plasma membranes. It is not known how the occupation of such receptors is translated into the activation of the catalytic unit polyphosphoinositide (PPI) phosphodiesterase, and then to cellular activation, but our recent experiments suggest that GTP regulatory proteins may be involved. In mast cells, non-hydrolysable analogues of GTP introduced and then trapped in the cytosol are able to substitute for external ligands in inducing exocytosis, a well-defined Ca2+-dependent process, suggesting that guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins may act by stimulating the catalytic activity of the PPI phosphodiesterase. We now provide evidence that mast cell secretion is inhibited by internalized neomycin, a compound known to interact with PPI. We also show that the PPI phosphodiesterase of human neutrophil plasma membranes can be activated simply by adding GTP analogues in the presence of concentrations of Ca2+ that pertain in unstimulated cells. These findings strongly support the idea that the coupling factor linking receptor and PPI phosphodiesterase is a guanine nucleotide binding protein analogous to those involved in the activation and inhibition of adenylate cyclase.
The Src-homology-3 (SH3) domains of the Caenorhabditis elegans protein SEM-5 and its human and Drosophila homologues, Grb2 and Drk (refs 1-4), bind proline-rich sequences found in the nucleotide-exchange factor Sos as part of their proposed function linking receptor tyrosine kinase activation to Ras activation. Here we report the crystal structure at 2.0 A resolution of the carboxy-terminal SH3 domain from SEM-5 complexed to the mSos-derived amino-acid sequence PPPVPPRRR. The peptide is found to bind in an orientation ('minus') that is precisely opposite to that observed previously ('plus' orientation) in other SH3-peptide complexes. This novel ability of peptide-recognition proteins to recognize peptides in two distinct modes may play an important role in the signalling specificity of pathways involving SH3 domains. Comparison of this structure with other SH3 complexes reveals how a conserved binding face can be used to recognize peptides in different orientations, and why the Sos peptide binds in this particular orientation.
Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by a polyglutamine repeat in the protein huntingtin (Htt) with mutant Htt (mHtt) expressed throughout the body and similarly in all brain regions. Yet, HD neuropathology is largely restricted to the corpus striatum. We report that the small guanine nucleotide-binding protein Rhes, which is localized very selectively to the striatum, binds physiologically to mHtt. Using cultured cells, we found Rhes induces sumoylation of mHtt, which leads to cytotoxicity. Thus, Rhes-mHtt interactions can account for the localized neuropathology of HD.
A variety of extracellular signals are transduced across the cell membrane by the enzyme phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C-beta (PLC-beta) coupled with guanine-nucleotide-binding G proteins. There are four isoenzymes of PLC-beta, beta1-beta4, but their functions in vivo are not known. Here we investigate the role of PLC-beta1 and PLC-beta4 in the brain by generating null mutations in mice: we found that PLCbeta1-/- mice developed epilepsy and PLCbeta4-/- mice showed ataxia. We determined the molecular basis of these phenotypes and show that PLC-beta1 is involved in signal transduction in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus by coupling predominantly to the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, whereas PLC-beta4 works through the metabotropic glutamate receptor in the cerebellum, illustrating how PLC-beta isoenzymes are used to generate different functions in the brain.
Scientists at the Scripps Research Institute are attempting to find out what life would look like if DNA contained more than four nucleotide bases and proteins more than 20 amino acids. By reengineering DNA, RNA, and the proteins that interact with them, they hope to create synthetic organisms with a chemical makeup fundamentally different from all life that has existed on Earth for the last 3.8 billion years. If they succeed, their biochemical reengineering could have a profound effect on everything from basic molecular biology to industrial chemistry.
The importance of alpha-thrombin in the clotting cascade is well-known, but it is also a potent mitogen. Like many other mitogens, thrombin causes receptor-mediated activation of a phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PLC), leading to the release of diacylglycerol and the subsequent activation of protein kinase C (refs 3-6). Protein kinase C is probably important in cell proliferation, as activation of this enzyme by phorbol esters promotes growth in many systems. Some growth factors have tyrosine kinase activity and function without activation of PLC or protein kinase C. In this report we show that alpha-thrombin retains its mitogenicity in vascular smooth muscle cells depleted of protein kinase C. Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) is found to be a potent growth inhibitor when added to vascular smooth muscle cells with alpha-thrombin. Moreover, growth inhibition is maximal when protein kinase C is activated 4 hours after exposure to thrombin, long after the completion of 'early events' induced by thrombin. Thus, PMA probes an event late in the G1 phase of the cell cycle or at the G1-S transition.
Human immunodeficiency virus gene expression is regulated transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally by the virally encoded tat protein (Tat). Tat functions through an RNA target sequence located in the untranslated region at the 5' end of viral transcripts. In Xenopus oocytes, translation of RNA containing the target sequence is specifically activated by Tat. This activation only occurs if the RNA is injected into the nucleus, and might be due to Tat-dependent, nucleus-specific chemical modification of the RNA which somehow facilitates translation. Here we demonstrate that Tat activation of its target RNA in the nucleus involves a Tat-dependent covalent modification. The modified RNA is competent for translation after reinjection into either the nucleus or the cytoplasm in the absence of Tat. Furthermore, we find that the nucleoside analogue 5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole, which inhibits processivity of RNA polymerase II (ref. 9), blocks this Tat-dependent modification.
NF-kappaB transcription factors mediate the effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-1beta. Failure to downregulate NF-kappaB transcriptional activity results in chronic inflammation and cell death, as observed in A20-deficient mice. A20 is a potent inhibitor of NF-kappaB signalling, but its mechanism of action is unknown. Here we show that A20 downregulates NF-kappaB signalling through the cooperative activity of its two ubiquitin-editing domains. The amino-terminal domain of A20, which is a de-ubiquitinating (DUB) enzyme of the OTU (ovarian tumour) family, removes lysine-63 (K63)-linked ubiquitin chains from receptor interacting protein (RIP), an essential mediator of the proximal TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) signalling complex. The carboxy-terminal domain of A20, composed of seven C2/C2 zinc fingers, then functions as a ubiquitin ligase by polyubiquitinating RIP with K48-linked ubiquitin chains, thereby targeting RIP for proteasomal degradation. Here we define a novel ubiquitin ligase domain and identify two sequential mechanisms by which A20 downregulates NF-kappaB signalling. We also provide an example of a protein containing separate ubiquitin ligase and DUB domains, both of which participate in mediating a distinct regulatory effect.
It has recently been reported that the sequences of the sis oncogene of simian sarcoma virus (SSV) and of human platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) are very similar, establishing the most solid link yet between the mitogenic actions of growth factors and the transforming proteins of retroviruses. To investigate molecular mechanisms of transformation I have produced antisera against synthetic peptides corresponding to segments of the protein sequences predicted by the nucleotide sequences of viral oncogenes. Applying this approach to the case of sis and PDGF, I report here the results of probing outdated human platelets with an antiserum directed against a synthetic peptide representing residues 139-155 of the predicted sequence of the SSV transforming protein, p28sis (ref. 3). I detected peptides of apparent molecular weights (MWs) 30,000 to 31,000 (30-31K) and 16-18K, which correspond to the apparent molecular weights of nonreduced and reduced PDGF. In addition, a peptide of MW 21,000 was detected in platelets and a protein of MW 56,000 was detected in SSV-infected marmoset cells.
Ubiquitin is a highly conserved polypeptide found in all eukaryotes. The major function of ubiquitin is to target proteins for complete or partial degradation by a multisubunit protein complex called the proteasome. Here, the Drosophila fat facets gene, which is required for the appropriate determination of particular cells in the fly eye, was shown to encode a ubiquitin-specific protease (Ubp), an enzyme that cleaves ubiquitin from ubiquitin-protein conjugates. The Fat facets protein (FAF) acts as a regulatory Ubp that prevents degradation of its substrate by the proteasome. Flies bearing fat facets gene mutations were used to show that a Ubp is cell type--and substrate-specific and a regulator of cell fate decisions in a multicellular organism.
Angiotensin II is dipsogenic, and vasopressin (ADH) regulates renal water excretion. Together, these hormones govern overall mammalian water balance. The Brattleboro rat with inherited diabetes insipidus (DI) lacks ADH and is therefore a convenient model with which to elucidate mechanisms regulating water metabolism. In the present studies, angiotensin II has also been removed from DI rats by the administration of an inhibitor (captopril, SQ 14225; D-2-methyl-3-mercaptopropanoyl-L-proline) of the enzyme which converts angiotensin I, the relatively inert component of the renin-angiotensin system, to angiotensin II, the biologically active substance. SQ 14225 reduced the drinking rates, and after 6 days lowered peripheral plasma aldosterone concentrations were associated with hyperkalaemia. We conclude that the polydipsia of diabetes insipidus partly results from elevated plasma renin activities and angiotensin II concentrations seen in this syndrome. Further, the apparent hypoaldosteronism of DI Brattleboro rats reflects differences in both tissue usage of the steroid and adrenocortical sensitivities associated with polyuria, hyperosmolarity and possibly potassium wasting.
During the initial phase of their development, sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) require target-derived trophic support for their survival, but as they mature they lose this requirement. Because many of these neurons express BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor) messenger RNA, we hypothesized that BDNF might act as an autocrine survival factor in adult DRG neurons, thus explaining their lack of dependence on exogenous growth factors. When cultured adult DRG cells were treated with antisense oligonucleotides to BDNF, expression of BDNF protein was reduced by 80%, and neuronal survival was reduced by 35%. These neurons could be rescued by exogenous BDNF or neurotrophin-3, but not by other growth factors. Similar results were obtained with single-neuron microcultures, whereas microcultures derived from mutant mice lacking BDNF were unaffected by antisense oligonucleotides. Our results strongly support an autocrine role for BDNF in mediating the survival of a subpopulation of adult DRG neurons.
All aspects of cellular RNA metabolism and processing involve DExH/D proteins, which are a family of enzymes that unwind or manipulate RNA in an ATP-dependent fashion. DExH/D proteins are also essential for the replication of many viruses, and therefore provide targets for the development of therapeutics. All DExH/D proteins characterized to date hydrolyse nucleoside triphosphates and, in most cases, this activity is stimulated by the addition of RNA or DNA. Several members of the family unwind RNA duplexes in an NTP-dependent fashion in vitro; therefore it has been proposed that DExH/D proteins couple NTP hydrolysis to RNA conformational change in complex macromolecular assemblies. Despite the central role of DExH/D proteins, their mechanism of RNA helicase activity remains unknown. Here we show that the DExH protein NPH-II unwinds RNA duplexes in a processive, unidirectional fashion with a step size of roughly one-half helix turn. We show that there is a quantitative connection between ATP utilization and helicase processivity, thereby providing direct evidence that DExH/D proteins can function as molecular motors on RNA.
Ribonuclease P is a ribonucleoprotein that cleaves precursors to transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules to yield the correct 5' terminal sequences of the mature tRNA's. The RNA moiety M1 RNA of ribonuclease P from Escherichia coli and the unprocessed transcript prepared in vitro of the gene for M1 RNA can both perform the cleavage reactions of the canonical enzyme in the absence of the protein moiety. When the transcript of the M1 RNA gene is combined with the protein moiety not only is a tRNA precursor cleaved but also the precursor to 4.5S RNA from Escherichia coli.
The ras genes are required for normal cell growth and mediate transformation by oncogenes encoding protein tyrosine kinases. Normal ras can transform cells in vitro and in vivo, but mutationally activated ras does so much more efficiently, and highly transforming mutant versions of ras have been isolated from a variety of human and animal tumours. The ras genes encode membrane-associated, guanine nucleotide-binding proteins that are active when GTP is bound and inactive when GDP is bound. The slow intrinsic GTPase activity of normal mammalian Ras proteins can be greatly accelerated by the GTPase-activating protein (GAP), which is predominantly cytoplasmic. This activity of GAP, which can increase with cell density in contact-inhibited cells, suggests that it functions as a negative, upstream regulator of ras. Other studies, however, show that GAP interacts with a region of ras-encoded protein implicated in ras effector function, which raises the possibility that GAP might also be a downstream target of ras. Mutationally activated ras-encoded proteins also interact with GAP, although they are resistant to its catalytic activity. In an attempt to define the role of GAP in ras-mediated transformation, we examined the effects on transformation of normal or mutant ras when cells overexpress GAP. We found that GAP suppresses transformation of NIH 3T3 cells by normal Ha-ras (c-ras) but does not inhibit transformation by activated Ha-ras (v-ras). These results support the hypothesis that GAP functions as a negative regulator of normal ras and make it unlikely that GAP alone is the ras target.
Protease nexin-II (PN-II) is a protease inhibitor that forms SDS-resistant inhibitory complexes with the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-binding protein, the gamma-subunit of nerve growth factor, and trypsin. The properties of PN-II indicate that it has a role in the regulation of certain proteases in the extracellular environment. Here we describe more of the amino-acid sequence of PN-II and its identity to the deduced sequence of the amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP). Amyloid beta-protein is present in neuritic plaques and cerebrovascular deposits in individuals with Alzheimer's disease and Down's syndrome. A monoclonal antibody against PN-II (designated mAbP2-1) recognized PN-II in immunoblots of serum-free culture medium from human glioblastoma cells and neuroblastoma cells, as well as in homogenates of normal and Alzheimer's disease brains. In addition, mAbP2-1 stained neuritic plaques in Alzheimer's disease brain. PN-II was a potent inhibitor of chymotrypsin with an inhibition constant Ki of 6 x 10(-10)M. Together, these data demonstrate that PN-II and APP are probably the same protein. The regulation of extracellular proteolysis by PN-II and the deposition of at least parts of the molecule in senile plaques is consistent with previous reports that implicate altered proteolysis in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.
Cyanobacteria of the Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus genera are important contributors to photosynthetic productivity in the open oceans. Recently, core photosystem II (PSII) genes were identified in cyanophages and proposed to function in photosynthesis and in increasing viral fitness by supplementing the host production of these proteins. Here we show evidence for the presence of photosystem I (PSI) genes in the genomes of viruses that infect these marine cyanobacteria, using pre-existing metagenomic data from the global ocean sampling expedition as well as from viral biomes. The seven cyanobacterial core PSI genes identified in this study, psaA, B, C, D, E, K and a unique J and F fusion, form a cluster in cyanophage genomes, suggestive of selection for a distinct function in the virus life cycle. The existence of this PSI cluster was confirmed with overlapping and long polymerase chain reaction on environmental DNA from the Northern Line Islands. Potentially, the seven proteins encoded by the viral genes are sufficient to form an intact monomeric PSI complex. Projection of viral predicted peptides on the cyanobacterial PSI crystal structure suggested that the viral-PSI components might provide a unique way of funnelling reducing power from respiratory and other electron transfer chains to the PSI.
RNA editing is a process that results in the production of a messenger RNA with nucleotide sequences that differ from those of the template DNA, and provides another mechanism for modulating gene expression. The phenomenon was initially described in the mitochondria of protozoa. Here we report that RNA editing is also required for the correct expression of plant mitochondrial genes. It has previously been proposed that in plant mitochondria there is a departure from the universal genetic code, with CGG specifying tryptophan instead of arginine. This was because CGG codons are often found in plant mitochondrial genes at positions corresponding to those encoding conserved tryptophans in other organisms. We have now found, however, wheat mitochondrial gene sequences containing C residues that are edited to U residues in the corresponding mRNA sequences. In this way, CGG codons can be changed to UGG codons in the mRNA so that tryptophan may be encoded according to the universal genetic code. Furthermore, for each codon modification resulting from a C----U conversion that we studied, we found a corresponding change in the amino acid that was encoded. RNA editing in wheat mitochondria can thus maintain genetic information at the RNA level and as a result contribute to the conservation of mitochondrial protein sequences among plants.
Dicarboxylic aciduria, an inborn error of metabolism in man, is thought to be caused by defective beta-oxidation of six-carbon to ten-carbon fatty acids. Oxidation of [1-14C]octanoate was impaired in intact fibroblasts from three unrelated patients with dicarboxylic aciduria (19 percent of control), as was the activity of medium-chain (octanoyl-)acyl-CoA dehydrogenase in the supernatants of sonicated fibroblast mitochondria (5 percent of control). These data confirm that dicarboxylic aciduria is caused by an enzyme defect in the beta-oxidation cycle.
Nisin is a posttranslationally modified antimicrobial peptide that is widely used as a food preservative. It contains five cyclic thioethers of varying sizes that are installed by a single enzyme, NisC. Reported here are the in vitro reconstitution of the cyclization process and the x-ray crystal structure of the NisC enzyme. The structure reveals similarities in fold and substrate activation with mammalian farnesyl transferases, suggesting that human homologs of NisC posttranslationally modify a cysteine of a protein substrate.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a major cause of blindness in the elderly. We report a genome-wide screen of 96 cases and 50 controls for polymorphisms associated with AMD. Among 116,204 single-nucleotide polymorphisms genotyped, an intronic and common variant in the complement factor H gene (CFH) is strongly associated with AMD (nominal P value <10(-7)). In individuals homozygous for the risk allele, the likelihood of AMD is increased by a factor of 7.4 (95% confidence interval 2.9 to 19). Resequencing revealed a polymorphism in linkage disequilibrium with the risk allele representing a tyrosine-histidine change at amino acid 402. This polymorphism is in a region of CFH that binds heparin and C-reactive protein. The CFH gene is located on chromosome 1 in a region repeatedly linked to AMD in family-based studies.
Resonance Raman (RR) spectroscopy was used to identify a methylnickel adduct (upsilon Ni-C = 422 wave numbers) of carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH) from Clostridium thermoaceticum. Formed at a nickel/iron-sulfur cluster on CODH called center A, the methylnickel species is the precursor of the methyl group of acetyl-coenzyme A in an anaerobic pathway of carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide fixation. Rapid kinetic and RR studies demonstrated that methylation of nickel occurs by heterolysis of the methyl-cobalt bond (upsilon Co-C = 429 wave numbers) of a methylated corrinoid/iron-sulfur protein. In combination with the earlier finding of an iron-carbonyl adduct at center A, detection of the methylnickel intermediate establishes a bimetallic mechanism for acetyl-coenzyme A synthesis.
The genetics of renal cancer is dominated by inactivation of the VHL tumour suppressor gene in clear cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the commonest histological subtype. A recent large-scale screen of ~3,500 genes by PCR-based exon re-sequencing identified several new cancer genes in ccRCC including UTX (also known as KDM6A), JARID1C (also known as KDM5C) and SETD2 (ref. 2). These genes encode enzymes that demethylate (UTX, JARID1C) or methylate (SETD2) key lysine residues of histone H3. Modification of the methylation state of these lysine residues of histone H3 regulates chromatin structure and is implicated in transcriptional control. However, together these mutations are present in fewer than 15% of ccRCC, suggesting the existence of additional, currently unidentified cancer genes. Here, we have sequenced the protein coding exome in a series of primary ccRCC and report the identification of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex gene PBRM1 (ref. 4) as a second major ccRCC cancer gene, with truncating mutations in 41% (92/227) of cases. These data further elucidate the somatic genetic architecture of ccRCC and emphasize the marked contribution of aberrant chromatin biology.
Although polyadenylation has commonly been regarded as a special feature of eukaryotic messenger RNA, there are many reports of polyA tails on bacterial RNA (for example, refs 3-8). In Escherichia coli, adenylation mediated by the pcnB gene greatly accelerates decay of RNA I, an antisense repressor of replication of ColE1 type plasmids that resembles highly structured transfer RNA but shows the rapid turnover characteristic of mRNA. Here we report that both 3' adenylation and 5' phosphorylation affect the rate of digestion of RNA I by the 3' exonuclease, polynucleotide phosphorylase; conversely, mutation of the polynucleotide phosphorylase-encoding pnp gene affects ribonuclease acting at the 5' end. Together these findings indicate that enzymes attacking RNA I at its separate termini can interact functionally. Additionally, our discovery that adenylation-mediated degradation by polynucleotide phosphorylase imparts an mRNA-like half-like to RNA I suggests a possible mechanism to account for the rapid decay of mRNA in E. coli.
Pyrazole (4 millimoles per kilogram or 272 milligrams per kilogram of body weight), given to fasted rats 10 minutes before gavage with ethanol (4 grams per kilogram), completely prevented both the disappearance of ethanol from the blood over a 16-hour period and the ethanol-induced reduction in the ratio of oxidized to reduced hepatic nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide. However, it did not affect the accumulation of triglycerides in the liver after the administration of ethanol. These results indicate that metabolism of ethanol is not required for production of fatty liver by a single, large dose of ethanol.
The structural components involved in transduction of extracellular signals as diverse as a photon of light impinging on the retina or a hormone molecule impinging on a cell have been highly conserved. These components include a recognition unit or receptor (for example, the beta-adrenergic receptor (beta AR) for catecholamines or the 'light receptor' rhodopsin), a guanine nucleotide regulatory or transducing protein, and an effector enzyme (for example, adenylate cyclase or cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase). Molecular cloning has revealed that the beta AR shares significant sequence and three-dimensional homology with rhodopsin. The function of the beta AR is diminished by exposure to stimulatory agonists, leading to desensitization. Similarly, 'light adaptation' involves decreased coupling of photoactivated rhodopsin to cGMP phosphodiesterase activation. Both forms of desensitization involve receptor phosphorylation. The latter is mediated by a unique protein kinase, rhodopsin kinase, which phosphorylates only the light-bleached form of rhodopsin. An analogous enzyme (termed beta AR kinase or beta ARK) phosphorylates only the agonist-occupied beta AR. We report here that beta ARK is also capable of phosphorylating rhodopsin in a totally light-dependent fashion. Moreover, rhodopsin kinase can phosphorylate the agonist-occupied beta AR. Thus the mechanisms which regulate the function of these disparate signalling systems also appear to be similar.
Language is a uniquely human trait likely to have been a prerequisite for the development of human culture. The ability to develop articulate speech relies on capabilities, such as fine control of the larynx and mouth, that are absent in chimpanzees and other great apes. FOXP2 is the first gene relevant to the human ability to develop language. A point mutation in FOXP2 co-segregates with a disorder in a family in which half of the members have severe articulation difficulties accompanied by linguistic and grammatical impairment. This gene is disrupted by translocation in an unrelated individual who has a similar disorder. Thus, two functional copies of FOXP2 seem to be required for acquisition of normal spoken language. We sequenced the complementary DNAs that encode the FOXP2 protein in the chimpanzee, gorilla, orang-utan, rhesus macaque and mouse, and compared them with the human cDNA. We also investigated intraspecific variation of the human FOXP2 gene. Here we show that human FOXP2 contains changes in amino-acid coding and a pattern of nucleotide polymorphism, which strongly suggest that this gene has been the target of selection during recent human evolution.
Phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K), activated through growth factor stimulation, generates a lipid second messenger, phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3). PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 is instrumental in signalling pathways that trigger cell activation, cytoskeletal rearrangement, survival and other reactions. However, some targets of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 are yet to be discovered. We demonstrate that SWAP-70, a unique signalling protein, specifically binds PtdIns(3,4,5)P3. On stimulation by growth factors, cytoplasmic SWAP-70, which is dependent on PI(3)K but independent of Ras, moved to cell membrane rearrangements known as ruffles. However, mutant SWAP-70 lacking the ability to bind PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 blocked membrane ruffling induced by epidermal growth factor or platelet-derived growth factor. SWAP-70 shows low homology with Rac-guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), and catalyses PtdIns(3,4,5)P3-dependent guanine nucleotide exchange to Rac. SWAP-70-deficient fibroblasts showed impaired membrane ruffling after stimulation with epidermal growth factor, and failed to activate Rac fully. We conclude that SWAP-70 is a new type of Rac-GEF which, independently of Ras, transduces signals from tyrosine kinase receptors to Rac.
Organelle introns share several distinctive features that set them apart from their counterparts in nuclear-encoded pre-messenger RNAs (reviewed in ref. 1): their termini do not obey the GU...AG rule; the introns are 'structured' (members of the same family or 'class' can theoretically adopt very similar RNA secondary conformations and several of the postulated pairings have been confirmed by studies of splicing mutants and their revertants (see, for example, ref. 4); many introns from both classes contain long open reading frames. We report here that the proteins potentially encoded by four class II introns are related to several RNA-dependent polymerases of viral and transposable element origins.
Dopamine receptors belong to a superfamily of receptors that exert their biological effects through guanine nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Two main dopamine receptor subtypes have been identified, D1 and D2, which differ in their pharmacological and biochemical characteristics. D1 stimulates adenylyl cyclase activity, whereas D2 inhibits it. Both receptors are primary targets for drugs used to treat many psychomotor diseases, including Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. Whereas the dopamine D1 receptor has been cloned, biochemical and behavioural data indicate that dopamine D1-like receptors exist which either are not linked to adenylyl cyclase or display different pharmacological activities. We report here the cloning of a gene encoding a 477-amino-acid protein with strong homology to the cloned D1 receptor. The receptor, called D5, binds drugs with a pharmacological profile similar to that of the cloned D1 receptor, but displays a 10-fold higher affinity for the endogenous agonist, dopamine. As with D1, the dopamine D5 receptor stimulates adenylyl cyclase activity. Northern blot and in situ hybridization analyses reveal that the receptor is neuron-specific, localized primarily within limbic regions of the brain; no messenger RNA was detected in kidney, liver, heart or parathyroid gland. The existence of a dopamine D1-like receptor with these characteristics had not been predicted and may represent an alternative pathway for dopamine-mediated events and regulation of D2 receptor activity.
Uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) diverts energy from ATP synthesis to thermogenesis in the mitochondria of brown adipose tissue by catalysing a regulated leak of protons across the inner membrane. The functions of its homologues, UCP2 and UCP3, in other tissues are debated. UCP2 and UCP3 are present at much lower abundance than UCP1, and the uncoupling with which they are associated is not significantly thermogenic. Mild uncoupling would, however, decrease the mitochondrial production of reactive oxygen species, which are important mediators of oxidative damage. Here we show that superoxide increases mitochondrial proton conductance through effects on UCP1, UCP2 and UCP3. Superoxide-induced uncoupling requires fatty acids and is inhibited by purine nucleotides. It correlates with the tissue expression of UCPs, appears in mitochondria from yeast expressing UCP1, and is absent in skeletal muscle mitochondria from UCP3 knockout mice. Our findings indicate that the interaction of superoxide with UCPs may be a mechanism for decreasing the concentrations of reactive oxygen species inside mitochondria.
Site-directed mutagenesis and Laue diffraction data to 2.5 A resolution were used to solve the structures of two sequential intermediates formed during the catalytic actions of isocitrate dehydrogenase. Both intermediates are distinct from the enzyme-substrate and enzyme-product complexes. Mutation of key catalytic residues changed the rate determining steps so that protein and substrate intermediates within the overall reaction pathway could be visualized.
The Escherichia coli catabolite activator protein (CAP) activates transcription at P(lac), P(gal), and other promoters through interactions with the RNA polymerase alpha subunit carboxyl-terminal domain (alphaCTD). We determined the crystal structure of the CAP-alphaCTD-DNA complex at a resolution of 3.1 angstroms. CAP makes direct protein-protein interactions with alphaCTD, and alphaCTD makes direct protein-DNA interactions with the DNA segment adjacent to the DNA site for CAP. There are no large-scale conformational changes in CAP and alphaCTD, and the interface between CAP and alphaCTD is small. These findings are consistent with the proposal that activation involves a simple "recruitment" mechanism.
The copper chaperone for the superoxide dismutase (CCS) gene is necessary for expression of an active, copper-bound form of superoxide dismutase (SOD1) in vivo in spite of the high affinity of SOD1 for copper (dissociation constant = 6 fM) and the high intracellular concentrations of both SOD1 (10 microM in yeast) and copper (70 microM in yeast). In vitro studies demonstrated that purified Cu(I)-yCCS protein is sufficient for direct copper activation of apo-ySOD1 but is necessary only when the concentration of free copper ions ([Cu]free) is strictly limited. Moreover, the physiological requirement for yCCS in vivo was readily bypassed by elevated copper concentrations and abrogation of intracellular copper-scavenging systems such as the metallothioneins. This metallochaperone protein activates the target enzyme through direct insertion of the copper cofactor and apparently functions to protect the metal ion from binding to intracellular copper scavengers. These results indicate that intracellular [Cu]free is limited to less than one free copper ion per cell and suggest that a pool of free copper ions is not used in physiological activation of metalloenzymes.
Calcium (Ca2+) seems to have an informational role in many tissues. In particular, it fulfills the requirements of a second messenger for gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH)-stimulated luteinizing hormone (LH) release from the pituitary gonadotrope (see ref. 1 for review). Very little is known about the effect of this ion on intracellular targets or the mechanism by which Ca2+ mobilization stimulates LH release. One intracellular target for Ca2+ is calmodulin, a ubiquitous intracellular Ca2+ receptor that has been shown to modulate many cellular functions, including cyclic nucleotide and glycogen metabolism, protein phosphorylation, microtubule assembly and disassembly, a Ca2+ flux, and the activities of NAD kinase, tryptophan 5' monooxidase and phospholipase A2 (see refs 2-5 for reviews). We have now used a specific and sensitive radioimmunoassay to determine the quantity and distribution of calmodulin in the gonadotrope before and during GnRH-stimulated LH release. The data indicate that GnRH stimulates redistribution of calmodulin from the cytosol to the plasma membrane and suggest that the molecule may have a role in the mechanism of stimulus-secretion coupling.
The essential mammalian enzyme O-linked b-N-acetylglucosamine transferase (O-GlcNAc transferase, here OGT) couples metabolic status to the regulation of a wide variety of cellular signalling pathways by acting as a nutrient sensor. OGT catalyses the transfer of N-acetylglucosamine from UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) to serines and threonines of cytoplasmic, nuclear and mitochondrial proteins, including numerous transcription factors, tumour suppressors, kinases, phosphatases and histone-modifying proteins. Aberrant glycosylation by OGT has been linked to insulin resistance, diabetic complications, cancer and neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's. Despite the importance of OGT, the details of how it recognizes and glycosylates its protein substrates are largely unknown. We report here two crystal structures of human OGT, as a binary complex with UDP (2.8 A resolution) and as a ternary complex with UDP and a peptide substrate (1.95 A). The structures provide clues to the enzyme mechanism, show how OGT recognizes target peptide sequences, and reveal the fold of the unique domain between the two halves of the catalytic region. This information will accelerate the rational design of biological experiments to investigate OGT's functions; it will also help the design of inhibitors for use as cellular probes and help to assess its potential as a therapeutic target.
Many cellular functions involve multi-domain proteins, which are composed of structurally independent modules connected by flexible linkers. Although it is often well understood how a given domain recognizes a cognate oligonucleotide or peptide motif, the dynamic interaction of multiple domains in the recognition of these ligands remains to be characterized. Here we have studied the molecular mechanisms of the recognition of the 3'-splice-site-associated polypyrimidine tract RNA by the large subunit of the human U2 snRNP auxiliary factor (U2AF65) as a key early step in pre-mRNA splicing. We show that the tandem RNA recognition motif domains of U2AF65 adopt two remarkably distinct domain arrangements in the absence or presence of a strong (that is, high affinity) polypyrimidine tract. Recognition of sequence variations in the polypyrimidine tract RNA involves a population shift between these closed and open conformations. The equilibrium between the two conformations functions as a molecular rheostat that quantitatively correlates the natural variations in polypyrimidine tract nucleotide composition, length and functional strength to the efficiency to recruit U2 snRNP to the intron during spliceosome assembly. Mutations that shift the conformational equilibrium without directly affecting RNA binding modulate splicing activity accordingly. Similar mechanisms of cooperative multi-domain conformational selection may operate more generally in the recognition of degenerate nucleotide or amino acid motifs by multi-domain proteins.
Noncoding small RNAs regulate gene expression in all organisms, in some cases through direct association with RNA polymerase (RNAP). Here we report that the mechanism of 6S RNA inhibition of transcription is through specific, stable interactions with the active site of Escherichia coli RNAP that exclude promoter DNA binding. In fact, the DNA-dependent RNAP uses bound 6S RNA as a template for RNA synthesis, producing 14-to 20-nucleotide RNA products (pRNA). These results demonstrate that 6S RNA is functionally engaged in the active site of RNAP. Synthesis of pRNA destabilizes 6S RNA-RNAP complexes leading to release of the pRNA-6S RNA hybrid. In vivo, 6S RNA-directed RNA synthesis occurs during outgrowth from the stationary phase and likely is responsible for liberating RNAP from 6S RNA in response to nutrient availability.
The steroid hormone, progesterone, enhances transcription in vivo from promoters containing progesterone response elements (PREs). We have recently shown that the progesterone receptor (PR) modulates transcription in a cell-free system by facilitating the formation of a stable preinitiation complex, apparently through interaction with RNA polymerase II and other basic transcription factors. The precise role of ligand in this activation process remains unclear, however. In order to dissect the role of steroid ligand in gene action, we sought to devise an in vitro transcription system that mimics the hormone-dependent transcriptional activation observed in vivo. We now report the successful reconstitution in vitro of progesterone-dependent RNA synthesis from a PRE-driven promoter in nuclear extracts of human breast carcinoma (T47D) cells. The transcriptional activation is triggered by the hormone-induced binding of endogenous PR to PREs and exhibits hormone-specificity. The receptor exists in a 4S form in our initial salt-treated extract and is apparently dissociated from the heat-shock protein hsp90. Nevertheless, hormone is still required for DNA binding and transcriptional activation. These results suggest that dissociation of hsp90 and conversion to an inactive 4S intermediate could occur before the final event in ligand-mediated transactivation of gene expression.
The kinetics of transcription by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase relate directly to the regulation of transcription and to the properties of processive enzymes in general, but analysis of RNA polymerase movement along the DNA template has so far been limited to the study of populations of enzyme molecules. The ability to view nanometre-sized particles with the light microscope suggested a method of monitoring transcription by individual RNA polymerase molecules. We describe here the behaviour of 40-nm-diameter particles of colloidal gold attached to the ends of DNA molecules being transcribed by RNA polymerase immobilized on a glass surface. The tethered gold particles are released from the surface at times after addition of nucleoside triphosphates that are consistent with the kinetics of transcription by RNA polymerase in solution. Analysis of the brownian motion of the gold particles enabled us to measure the movement along the template DNA of individual polymerase molecules.
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes many gene activators work synergistically. For example, two dimers of lambda repressor interact to promote binding of these proteins to DNA, a reaction that is crucial at the repressor concentrations found in lysogens. In this case one of the bound dimers activates transcription, evidently by touching RNA polymerase. In another example, the yeast transcriptional activator GAL4, which can stimulate transcription in many eukaryotes, binds to multiple sites on DNA to activate transcription synergistically; the presence of two such sites can elicit a level of transcription more than twice that found with a single site. In this paper we show that synergistic activation by each of several GAL4 derivatives involves a mechanism different from that illustrated by the lambda repressor: multiple activator molecules can work synergistically under conditions in which their binding sites on DNA are saturated. The accompanying paper shows that under similar conditions of activator excess, GAL4 derivatives work synergistically with a heterologous mammalian gene activator. These results support the idea that eukaryotic activators can cooperate not by directly interacting but by simultaneously touching some component(s) of the transcriptional machinery.
An RNA virus, designated hepatitis G virus (HGV), was identified from the plasma of a patient with chronic hepatitis. Extension from an immunoreactive complementary DNA clone yielded the entire genome (9392 nucleotides) encoding a polyprotein of 2873 amino acids. The virus is closely related to GB virus C (GBV-C) and distantly related to hepatitis C virus, GBV-A, and GBV-B. HGV was associated with acute and chronic hepatitis. Persistent viremia was detected for up to 9 years in patients with hepatitis. The virus is transfusion-transmissible. It has a global distribution and is present within the volunteer blood donor population in the United States.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) mediate post-transcriptional gene regulation through association with Argonaute proteins (AGOs). Crystal structures of archaeal and bacterial homologues of AGOs have shown that the MID (middle) domain mediates the interaction with the phosphorylated 5' end of the miRNA guide strand and this interaction is thought to be independent of the identity of the 5' nucleotide in these systems. However, analysis of the known sequences of eukaryotic miRNAs and co-immunoprecipitation experiments indicate that there is a clear bias for U or A at the 5' position. Here we report the crystal structure of a MID domain from a eukaryotic AGO protein, human AGO2. The structure, in complex with nucleoside monophosphates (AMP, CMP, GMP, and UMP) mimicking the 5' end of miRNAs, shows that there are specific contacts made between the base of UMP or AMP and a rigid loop in the MID domain. Notably, the structure of the loop discriminates against CMP and GMP and dissociation constants calculated from NMR titration experiments confirm these results, showing that AMP (0.26 mM) and UMP (0.12 mM) bind with up to 30-fold higher affinity than either CMP (3.6 mM) or GMP (3.3 mM). This study provides structural evidence for nucleotide-specific interactions in the MID domain of eukaryotic AGO proteins and explains the observed preference for U or A at the 5' end of miRNAs.
Protein trafficking from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi apparatus involves specific uptake into coat protein complex II (COPII)-coated vesicles of secretory and of vesicle targeting (v-SNARE) proteins. Here, two ER to Golgi v-SNAREs, Bet1p and Bos1p, were shown to interact specifically with Sar1p, Sec23p, and Sec24p, components of the COPII coat, in a guanine nucleotide-dependent fashion. Other v-SNAREs, Sec22p and Ykt6p, might interact more weakly with the COPII coat or interact indirectly by binding to Bet1p or Bos1p. The data suggest that transmembrane proteins can be taken up into COPII vesicles by direct interactions with the coat proteins and may play a structural role in the assembly of the COPII coat complex.
The isolated chromatin of higher organisms possesses several properties characteristic of the same chromatin in life. These include the presence of histone bound to DNA, the state of repression of the genetic material, and the ability to serve as template for the readout of the derepressed portion of the genome by RNA polymerase. The important respect in which isolated chromatin differs from the material in vivo, fragmentation of DNA into pieces shorter (5 x 10(6) to 20 x 10(6) molecular weight) than the original, does not appear to importantly alter such transcription. The study of isolated chromatin has already revealed the material basis of the restriction of template activity; it is the formation of a complex between histone and DNA. Chromatin isolated by the methods now available, together with the basis provided by our present knowledge of chromatin biochemistry and biophysics, should make possible and indeed assure rapid increase in our knowledge of chromosomal structure and of all aspects of the control of gene activity and hence of developmental processes.
In nature, organisms are exposed to chronic low-dose ultraviolet light (CLUV) as opposed to the acute high doses common to laboratory experiments. Analysis of the cellular response to acute high-dose exposure has delineated the importance of direct DNA repair by the nucleotide excision repair pathway and for checkpoint-induced cell cycle arrest in promoting cell survival. Here we examine the response of yeast cells to CLUV and identify a key role for the RAD6-RAD18-RAD5 error-free postreplication repair (RAD6 error-free PRR) pathway in promoting cell growth and survival. We show that loss of the RAD6 error-free PRR pathway results in DNA-damage-checkpoint-induced G2 arrest in CLUV-exposed cells, whereas wild-type and nucleotide-excision-repair-deficient cells are largely unaffected. Cell cycle arrest in the absence of the RAD6 error-free PRR pathway was not caused by a repair defect or by the accumulation of ultraviolet-induced photoproducts. Notably, we observed increased replication protein A (RPA)- and Rad52-yellow fluorescent protein foci in the CLUV-exposed rad18Delta cells and demonstrated that Rad52-mediated homologous recombination is required for the viability of the rad18Delta cells after release from CLUV-induced G2 arrest. These and other data presented suggest that, in response to environmental levels of ultraviolet exposure, the RAD6 error-free PRR pathway promotes replication of damaged templates without the generation of extensive single-stranded DNA regions. Thus, the error-free PRR pathway is specifically important during chronic low-dose ultraviolet exposure to prevent counter-productive DNA checkpoint activation and allow cells to proliferate normally.
The homodimeric mammalian fatty acid synthase is one of the most complex cellular multienzymes, in that each 270-kilodalton polypeptide chain carries all seven functional domains required for fatty acid synthesis. We have calculated a 4.5 angstrom-resolution x-ray crystallographic map of porcine fatty acid synthase, highly homologous to the human multienzyme, and placed homologous template structures of all individual catalytic domains responsible for the cyclic elongation of fatty acid chains into the electron density. The positioning of domains reveals the complex architecture of the multienzyme forming an intertwined dimer with two lateral semicircular reaction chambers, each containing a full set of catalytic domains required for fatty acid elongation. Large distances between active sites and conformational differences between the reaction chambers demonstrate that mobility of the acyl carrier protein and general flexibility of the multienzyme must accompany handover of the reaction intermediates during the reaction cycle.
A gene has been identified that is expressed specifically in stromal cells surrounding invasive breast carcinomas. On the basis of its sequence, the product of this gene, named stromelysin-3, is a new member of the family of metalloproteinase enzymes which degrade the extracellular matrix. The suggestion is that stromelysin-3 is one of the stroma-derived factors that have long been postulated to play an important part in progression of epithelial malignancies.
Adjustment of catalytic activity in response to diverse ambient temperatures is fundamental to life on Earth. A crucial example of this is photosynthesis, where solar energy is converted into electrochemical potential that drives oxygen and biomass generation at temperatures ranging from those of frigid Antarctica to those of scalding hot springs. The energy conversion proceeds by concerted mobilization of electrons and protons on photoexcitation of reaction centre protein complexes. Following physicochemical paradigms, the rates of imperative steps in this process were predicted to increase exponentially with rising temperatures, resulting in different yields of solar energy conversion at the distinct growth temperatures of photosynthetic mesophiles and extremophiles. In contrast, here we show a meticulous adjustment of energy conversion rate, resulting in similar yields from mesophiles and thermophiles. The key molecular players in the temperature adjustment process consist of a cluster of hitherto unrecognized protein cavities and an adjacent packing motif that jointly impart local flexibility crucial to the reaction centre proteins. Mutations within the packing motif of mesophiles that increase the bulkiness of the amino-acid side chains, and thus reduce the size of the cavities, promote thermophilic behaviour. This novel biomechanical mechanism accounts for the slowing of the catalytic reaction above physiological temperatures in contradiction to the classical Arrhenius paradigm. The mechanism provides new guidelines for manipulating the acclimatization of enzymes to the ambient temperatures of diverse habitats. More generally, it reveals novel protein elements that are of potential significance for modulating structure-activity relationships in membrane and globular proteins alike.
The helical path of the DNA in filamentous bacteriophage Pf1 was deduced from different kinds of existing structural information, including results from x-ray fiber diffraction. The DNA has the same pitch, 16 angstroms, as the surrounding helix of protein subunits; the rise and rotation per nucleotides are 6.1 angstroms and 132 degrees, respectively; and the phosphates are 2.5 angstroms from the axis. The DNA in Pf1 is, therefore, the most extended and twisted DNA structure known. On the basis of the DNA structure and extensive additional information about the protein, a model of the virion is proposed. In the model, the DNA bases reach out, into the protein, and the lysine and arginine side chains reach in, between the DNA bases, to stabilize the paraxial phosphate charges; the conformation of the protein subunit is a combination of alpha and 3(10) helices.
A macromolecular alteration occurs at the posttranscriptional level in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain. Compared with age-matched controls, total cellular RNA and polyadenylated RNA were substantially reduced in the AD cortex with many neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. RNA changes are associated with a significant increase in alkaline ribonuclease activity due to an abnormality in the ribonuclease-inhibitor complex. The decrease in protein synthesis in the AD brain, previously observed in patients severely affected with AD, and in translation systems in vitro with AD cortical messenger RNA, may be partly related to an enzyme-inhibitor alteration that affects RNA levels and activity. Decreased protein synthesis therefore may contribute to the characteristic decline in certain neurotransmitter enzymes and to the loss of neurons in the AD brain.
The ATP synthases of bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts, which use the energy of a transmembrane proton gradient to power the synthesis of ATP, consist of an integral membrane component F0--thought to contain a proton channel--and a catalytic component, F1. To help investigate the way F0 and F1 are coupled, we have sequenced the b-subunit of the Escherichia coli F0, which seems to be the counterpart of a thermophilic bacteria F0 subunit thought to be essential for F1 binding. We report here that its sequence is remarkable, being hydrophobic around the N-terminus and highly charged in the remainder. We propose that the N-terminal segment lies in the membrane and the rest outside. The extramembranous section contains two adjacent stretches of 31 amino acids where the sequence is very similar: in the second of these stretches there is further internal homology. These duplicated stretches of the polypeptide probably fold into two alpha-helices which have many common features able to make contact with F1 subunits. Thus protein b occupies a central position in the enzyme, where it may be involved in proton translocation. It is possibly also important in biosynthetic assembly.
Receptors for dopamine have been classified into two functional types, D1 and D2. They belong to the family of receptors acting through G (or guanine nucleotide-binding) proteins. D2 receptors inhibit adenylyl cyclase, but D1 receptors stimulate adenylyl cyclase and activate cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinases. Dopamine D1 and D2 receptors are targets of drug therapy in many psychomotor disorders, including Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia, and may also have a role in drug addiction and alcoholism. D1 receptors regulate neuron growth and differentiation, influence behaviour and modify dopamine D2 receptor-mediated events. We report here the cloning of the D1 receptor gene, which resides on an intronless region on the long arm of chromosome 5, near two other members of the G-linked receptor family. The expressed protein, encoded by 446 amino acids, binds drugs with affinities identical to the native human D1 receptor. The presence of a D1 receptor gene restriction fragment length polymorphism will be helpful for future disease linkage studies.
A two-fold (C2) symmetric inhibitor of the protease of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) has been designed on the basis of the three-dimensional symmetry of the enzyme active site. The symmetric molecule inhibited both protease activity and acute HIV-1 infection in vitro, was at least 10,000-fold more potent against HIV-1 protease than against related enzymes, and appeared to be stable to degradative enzymes. The 2.8 angstrom crystal structure of the inhibitor-enzyme complex demonstrated that the inhibitor binds to the enzyme in a highly symmetric fashion.
The trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) regulates expression of the tryptophan biosynthetic genes of several bacilli by binding single-stranded RNA. The binding sequence is composed of eleven triplet repeats, predominantly GAG, separated by two or three non-conserved nucleotides. Here we present the crystal structure of a complex of TRAP and a 53-base single-stranded RNA containing eleven GAG triplets, revealing that each triplet is accommodated in a binding pocket formed by beta-strands. In the complex, the RNA has an extended structure without any base-pairing and binds to the protein mostly by specific protein-base interactions. Eleven binding pockets on the circular TRAP 11-mer form a belt with a diameter of about 80 A. This simple but elegant mechanism of arresting the RNA segment by encircling it around a protein disk is applicable to both transcription, when TRAP binds the nascent RNA, and to translation, when TRAP binds the same sequence within a non-coding leader region of the messenger RNA.
Rap1 is a small, Ras-like GTPase that was first identified as a protein that could suppress the oncogenic transformation of cells by Ras. Rap1 is activated by several extracellular stimuli and may be involved in cellular processes such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, T-cell anergy and platelet activation. At least three different second messengers, namely diacylglycerol, calcium and cyclic AMP, are able to activate Rap1 by promoting its release of the guanine nucleotide GDP and its binding to GTP. Here we report that activation of Rap1 by forskolin and cAMP occurs independently of protein kinase A (also known as cAMP-activated protein kinase). We have cloned the gene encoding a guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) which we have named Epac (exchange protein directly activated by cAMP). This protein contains a cAMP-binding site and a domain that is homologous to domains of known GEFs for Ras and Rap1. Epac binds cAMP in vitro and exhibits in vivo and in vitro GEF activity towards Rap1. cAMP strongly induces the GEF activity of Epac towards Rap1 both in vivo and in vitro. We conclude that Epac is a GEF for Rap1 that is regulated directly by cAMP and that Epac is a new target protein for cAMP.
A cytoplasmic enzyme from guinea pig brain was shown to transfer methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine to only one of 19 arginine residues in the basic protein from human brain. The products were omega-N-monomethylarginine and omega-N,N'-dimethylarginine. These methylated arginines are adjacent to the main encephalitogenic determinant in the protein. Methylation may aid in the transfer of this region of the protein into the nonpolar environment within myelin and in maintaining the integrity of myelin.
In an effort to identify new genes and analyse their expression patterns, 174,472 partial complementary DNA sequences (expressed sequence tags (ESTs)), totalling more than 52 million nucleotides of human DNA sequence, have been generated from 300 cDNA libraries constructed from 37 distinct organs and tissues. These ESTs have been combined with an additional 118,406 ESTs from the database dbEST, for a total of 83 million nucleotides, and treated as a shotgun sequence assembly project. The assembly process yielded 29,599 distinct tentative human consensus (THC) sequences and 58,384 non-overlapping ESTs. Of these 87,983 distinct sequences, 10,214 further characterize previously known genes based on statistically significant similarity to sequences in the available databases; the remainder identify previously unknown genes. Thirty tissues were sampled by over 1,000 ESTs each; only eight genes were matched by ESTs from all 30 tissues, and 227 genes were represented in 20 or more of the tissues sampled with more than 1,000 ESTs. Approximately 40% of identified human genes appear to be associated with basic energy metabolism, cell structure, homeostasis and cell division, 22% with RNA and protein synthesis and processing, and 12% with cell signalling and communication.
Flies and moths are approximately as distant phylogenetically as are mammals and birds. In terms of morphology, physiology and biochemistry, the complex proteinaceous eggshell or chorion differs substantially in these two insect groups, which are typified by Drosophila melanogaster and Bombyx mori. The major chorion proteins of moths are encoded by two families of genes, A and B, which have no obvious homologues in flies. Unlike Drosophila, where chorion genes are oriented in tandem, moths show mostly chorion gene pairs (A plus B) that are divergently transcribed and coordinately expressed. The 5' ends of the paired genes are separated by a DNA segment of only 300 +/- 50 base pairs, which may well include at least some of the cis-regulatory elements necessary for gene expression. Despite these differences, we have tested whether moth chorion genes might be expressed in flies. Cloned DNA fragments bearing moth chorion genes were introduced into the Drosophila germ line by P-element-mediated transformation. Analysis of RNAs from transformed lines revealed that the genes are expressed with correct sex, tissue and temporal specificity, resulting in the accumulation of abundant moth chorion transcripts in late fly follicles.
The erythrocyte cytoskeleton, which consists primarily of a meshwork of spectrin and actin, controls cell shape and the disposition of proteins within the membrane. Proteins similar to spectrin have recently been found in diverse cells and tissues, and it is possible that they mediate the capping of cell-surface receptors, although this has not been demonstrated directly. In neurones, the spectrin-like protein fodrin lines the cortical cytoplasm and may link actin filaments to the membrane. Fodrin has been hypothesized to regulate the number of receptor binding sites on neuronal membranes for the putative neurotransmitter L-glutamate. Micromolar calcium concentrations activate the thiol protease calpain I, induce fodrin degradation and more than double the density of glutamate binding sites; these effects are all blocked by thiol protease inhibitors. We have now used specific antibodies to examine further the role of fodrin proteolysis in regulating glutamate receptors. We report that fodrin antibodies block the fodrin degradation and increase in glutamate binding normally induced by calcium, and so provide direct evidence for control of membrane receptors by a non-erythroid spectrin.
Tetrathiomolybdate (TM) is an orally active agent for treatment of disorders of copper metabolism. Here we describe how TM inhibits proteins that regulate copper physiology. Crystallographic results reveal that the surprising stability of the drug complex with the metallochaperone Atx1 arises from formation of a sulfur-bridged copper-molybdenum cluster reminiscent of those found in molybdenum and iron sulfur proteins. Spectroscopic studies indicate that this cluster is stable in solution and corresponds to physiological clusters isolated from TM-treated Wilson's disease animal models. Finally, mechanistic studies show that the drug-metallochaperone inhibits metal transfer functions between copper-trafficking proteins. The results are consistent with a model wherein TM can directly and reversibly down-regulate copper delivery to secreted metalloenzymes and suggest that proteins involved in metal regulation might be fruitful drug targets.
A membrane-bound protein kinase occurs in membranes derived from rat skeletal muscle and appears limited to a surface membrane fraction. The enzyme is magnesium dependent, is only minimally stimulated by cyclic nucleotides, and phosphorylates serine and to a lesser extent threonine residues of three membrane proteins with molecular weights of less than 30,000.
The structure of the bifunctional, pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme dialkylglycine decarboxylase was determined to 2.1-angstrom resolution. Model building suggests that a single cleavage site catalyzes both decarboxylation and transamination by maximizing stereoelectronic advantages and providing electrostatic and general base catalysis. The enzyme contains two binding sites for alkali metal ions. One is located near the active site and accounts for the dependence of activity on potassium ions. The other is located at the carboxyl terminus of an alpha helix. These sites help show how proteins can specifically bind alkali metals and how these ions can exert functional effects.
Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism, leads to severe combined immune deficiency in man. This enzyme, although constitutively expressed in most tissues, is expressed at high level in immature T cells, and study of the pathophysiology of the disorder indicates that increased deoxyadenosine or altered methylation capacity have toxic effects on T-cell maturation. Although bone marrow transplantation can correct the immune deficiency, this therapy is associated with graft-versus-host disease and incomplete immune restoration, and so our laboratory and others have sought to develop a method of gene replacement as a possible treatment for the disease. Moreover, characterization of the complementary DNA of the human ADA gene and some of its mutants makes it possible to design gene transfer strategies. We have now subcloned a human adenosine deaminase cDNA into the retrovirus shuttle vector pZIP-SV(B), and in this way have isolated a cell line, 4.2T, which produces high titres of replication-defective retrovirus which have been used to transfer the gene for human ADA to mouse bone marrow cells. Transfer and expression of the neomycin-resistance gene (neo) and the ADA gene in murine bone marrow colony-forming units (CFU) was demonstrated by in vitro colony formation in the presence of the antibiotic G418 or 9-xylofuranosyladenine plus deoxycoformycin, respectively. Isoenzyme analysis also showed human ADA expression in the cultured mouse bone marrow.
Because the mucosal epithelia are in constant contact with large numbers of microorganisms, these surfaces must be armed with efficient microbial control systems. Here, we show that the Drosophila nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase enzyme, dual oxidase (dDuox), is indispensable for gut antimicrobial activities. Adult flies in which dDuox expression is silenced showed a marked increase in mortality rate even after a minor infection through ingestion of microbe-contaminated food. This could be restored by the specific reintroduction of dDuox, demonstrating that this oxidase generates a unique epithelial oxidative burst that limits microbial proliferation in the gut. Thus, oxidant-mediated antimicrobial responses are not restricted to the phagocytes, but rather are used more broadly, including in mucosal barrier epithelia.
A major portion of the toxicity of hydrogen peroxide in Escherichia coli is attributed to DNA damage mediated by a Fenton reaction that generates active forms of hydroxyl radicals from hydrogen peroxide, DNA-bound iron, and a constant source of reducing equivalents. Kinetic peculiarities of DNA damage production by hydrogen peroxide in vivo can be reproduced by including DNA in an in vitro Fenton reaction system in which iron catalyzes the univalent reduction of hydrogen peroxide by the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH). To minimize the toxicity of oxygen radicals, the cell utilizes scavengers of these radicals and DNA repair enzymes. On the basis of observations with the model system, it is proposed that the cell may also decrease such toxicity by diminishing available NAD(P)H and by utilizing oxygen itself to scavenge active free radicals into superoxide, which is then destroyed by superoxide dismutase.
Most of the organisms of the phylum Nematoda are free living, but some are animal or plant parasites of major importance to man. During their life cycle all nematodes undergo a series of moults in which they shed an external cuticle, consisting of an outermost membrane-like layer of unknown composition and a series of fibrillar layers similar to collagens. Because of this structure, the cuticle has been viewed as an acellular exoskeleton with rather inert molecular components. However, observations have shown that it contains enzymes and sometimes haemoglobin, and that nutrients are absorbed through it in the infective larvae and adut stages of Brugia pahangi. It is bound by complement and antibody, resulting in the adherence of leukocytes, and antibody-dependent cell-mediated reactions damage the cuticle of newborn larvae of Trichinella spiralis and the microfilariae of Dipetalonema viteae and Litomosoides carinii. We report here that the surface of the cuticle of the parasitic nematode Trichinella spiralis expresses protein molecules which change qualitatively following the moulting process, and quantitatively during growth of the worms within one stage. Also, surface proteins are released in vitro at a rate which depends on the conditions of culture of the worms.
beta-Lactamase and penicillin-binding protein 2a mediate staphylococcal resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics, which are otherwise highly clinically effective. Production of these inducible proteins is regulated by a signal-transducing integral membrane protein and a transcriptional repressor. The signal transducer is a fusion protein with penicillin-binding and zinc metalloprotease domains. The signal for protein expression is transmitted by site-specific proteolytic cleavage of both the transducer, which autoactivates, and the repressor, which is inactivated, unblocking gene transcription. Compounds that disrupt this regulatory pathway could restore the activity of beta-lactam antibiotics against drug-resistant strains of staphylococci.
The 1.75-A crystal structure of the uracil-DNA glycosylase from herpes simplex virus type-1 reveals a new fold, distantly related to dinucleotide-binding proteins. Complexes with a trideoxynucleotide, and with uracil, define the DNA-binding site and allow a detailed understanding of the exquisitely specific recognition of uracil in DNA. The overall structure suggests binding models for elongated single- and double-stranded DNA substrates. Conserved residues close to the uracil-binding site suggest a catalytic mechanism for hydrolytic base excision.
The crystal structure of the tungsten-containing aldehyde ferredoxin oxidoreductase (AOR) from Pyrococcus furiosus, a hyperthermophilic archaeon (formerly archaebacterium) that grows optimally at 100 degrees C, has been determined at 2.3 angstrom resolution by means of multiple isomorphous replacement and multiple crystal form averaging. AOR consists of two identical subunits, each containing an Fe4S4 cluster and a molybdopterin-based tungsten cofactor that is analogous to the molybdenum cofactor found in a large class of oxotransferases. Whereas the general features of the tungsten coordination in this cofactor were consistent with a previously proposed structure, each AOR subunit unexpectedly contained two molybdopterin molecules that coordinate a tungsten by a total of four sulfur ligands, and the pterin system was modified by an intramolecular cyclization that generated a three-ringed structure. In comparison to other proteins, the hyperthermophilic enzyme AOR has a relatively small solvent-exposed surface area, and a relatively large number of both ion pairs and buried atoms. These properties may contribute to the extreme thermostability of this enzyme.
Fat tissue produces a variety of secreted proteins (adipocytokines) with important roles in metabolism. We isolated a newly identified adipocytokine, visfatin, that is highly enriched in the visceral fat of both humans and mice and whose expression level in plasma increases during the development of obesity. Visfatin corresponds to a protein identified previously as pre-B cell colony-enhancing factor (PBEF), a 52-kilodalton cytokine expressed in lymphocytes. Visfatin exerted insulin-mimetic effects in cultured cells and lowered plasma glucose levels in mice. Mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in the visfatin gene had modestly higher levels of plasma glucose relative to wild-type littermates. Surprisingly, visfatin binds to and activates the insulin receptor. Further study of visfatin's physiological role may lead to new insights into glucose homeostasis and/or new therapies for metabolic disorders such as diabetes.
Protein-protein interactions between two proteins have generally been studied using biochemical techniques such as crosslinking, co-immunoprecipitation and co-fractionation by chromatography. We have generated a novel genetic system to study these interactions by taking advantage of the properties of the GAL4 protein of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This protein is a transcriptional activator required for the expression of genes encoding enzymes of galactose utilization. It consists of two separable and functionally essential domains: an N-terminal domain which binds to specific DNA sequences (UASG); and a C-terminal domain containing acidic regions, which is necessary to activate transcription. We have generated a system of two hybrid proteins containing parts of GAL4: the GAL4 DNA-binding domain fused to a protein 'X' and a GAL4 activating region fused to a protein 'Y'. If X and Y can form a protein-protein complex and reconstitute proximity of the GAL4 domains, transcription of a gene regulated by UASG occurs. We have tested this system using two yeast proteins that are known to interact--SNF1 and SNF4. High transcriptional activity is obtained only when both hybrids are present in a cell. This system may be applicable as a general method to identify proteins that interact with a known protein by the use of a simple galactose selection.
Our aim was to improve techniques for drug development by facilitating the identification of small molecules that bind with high affinity to acceptor molecules (for example, cell-surface receptors, enzymes, antibodies) and so to mimic or block their interaction with the natural ligand. Previously such small molecules have been characterized individually on a serial basis. The systematic synthesis and screening of peptide libraries of defined structure represents a new approach. For relatively small libraries, predetermined sequence variations on solid-phase supports have been used, and large libraries have been produced using a bacteriophage vector into which random oligodeoxynucleotide sequences have been introduced, but these techniques have severe limitations. Here we investigate an alternative approach to synthesis and screening of peptide libraries. Our simple methodology greatly enhances the production and rapid evaluation of random libraries of millions of peptides so that acceptor-binding ligands of high affinity can be rapidly identified and sequenced, on the basis of a 'one-bead, one-peptide' approach.
Microbial gene expression in the environment has recently been assessed via pyrosequencing of total RNA extracted directly from natural microbial assemblages. Several such 'metatranscriptomic' studies have reported that many complementary DNA sequences shared no significant homology with known peptide sequences, and so might represent transcripts from uncharacterized proteins. Here we report that a large fraction of cDNA sequences detected in microbial metatranscriptomic data sets are comprised of well-known small RNAs (sRNAs), as well as new groups of previously unrecognized putative sRNAs (psRNAs). These psRNAs mapped specifically to intergenic regions of microbial genomes recovered from similar habitats, displayed characteristic conserved secondary structures and were frequently flanked by genes that indicated potential regulatory functions. Depth-dependent variation of psRNAs generally reflected known depth distributions of broad taxonomic groups, but fine-scale differences in the psRNAs within closely related populations indicated potential roles in niche adaptation. Genome-specific mapping of a subset of psRNAs derived from predominant planktonic species such as Pelagibacter revealed recently discovered as well as potentially new regulatory elements. Our analyses show that metatranscriptomic data sets can reveal new information about the diversity, taxonomic distribution and abundance of sRNAs in naturally occurring microbial communities, and indicate their involvement in environmentally relevant processes including carbon metabolism and nutrient acquisition.
Release of intracellular Ca2+ by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3) occurs through specific receptor proteins which are ligand-activated Ca2+ channels. Changes in intracellular Ca2+ regulate many cellular functions. This Ca2+ release is a discontinuous quantal process in which successive increments of InsP3 transiently release precise amounts of Ca2+ (refs 4-6). Possible explanations of quantal Ca2+ release have included rapid degradation of InsP3, reciprocity of Ca2+ release and sequestration, desensitization of InsP3 receptors, or actions of InsP3 on discrete compartments of Ca2+ with variable sensitivity to InsP3 (ref. 4). We successfully reconstituted InsP3-induced Ca2+ flux in vesicles containing only purified InsP3 receptor protein. The reconstituted vesicles retain the regulatory features of the InsP3 receptor, including phosphorylation sites and modulation of Ca2+ release by adenine nucleotides. Using these reconstituted vesicles, we show here that quantal flux of Ca2+ elicited by InsP3 is a fundamental property of its receptor.
Apolipoprotein B (apo B) is crucial for the transport of cholesterol in humans. It is a large secretory protein that mediates the uptake of low-density lipoproteins and renders several forms of lipid droplets soluble in the blood. The binding of lipid by apo B also prevents this hydrophobic protein from precipitating in aqueous solution. In the endoplasmic reticulum, nascent secretory proteins must be translocated through an aqueous channel in the membrane into the aqueous lumen, so some novel form of processing may be necessary to maintain the solubility of apo B during its translocation. We have discovered that the biogenesis of apo B in cell-free systems does indeed involve a new variation on protein translocation: unlike typical secretory proteins, apo B is synthesized as a series of transmembrane chains with large cytoplasmic domains and progressively longer amino-terminal regions that are protected against added proteases during the translocation process. In contrast to typical transmembrane proteins, these transmembrane chains are not integrated into the bilayer. Moreover, the transmembrane chains with the shortest protected domains are precursors of forms whose protection is progressively extended to cover the length of the protein. This stepwise conversion occurs post-translationally for the most part. We propose a model on the basis of these findings for the biogenesis of apo B.
Members of the ras gene family encode proteins that when overproduced or mutated can transform immortalized mammalian cells. It is therefore important to understand the mechanisms by which the ras genes are regulated. The promoter region of the human Harvey ras proto-oncogene c-Ha-ras1 initiates RNA transcription at multiple sites and contains repeated copies of the hexanucleotide GGGCGG and its inverted complement CCGCCC, referred to as GC boxes. These GC boxes consist of sequences identical to those found in the SV40 early promoter, where the human cellular transcriptional factor Sp1 binds. Footprinting analysis with deoxyribonuclease I was used to show that Sp1 binds to six GC box sequences within the c-Ha-ras1 promoter. An in vivo transfection assay showed competition between the 21-base pair repeats of the SV40 promoter and the c-Ha-ras1 promoter for common regulatory factors. In this system the presence of Sp1 is apparently required for c-Ha-ras1 transcription. Analysis of deletions of the c-Ha-ras1 promoter region by means of a transient expression assay revealed that the three Sp1 binding sites closest to the RNA start sites were sufficient for full transcriptional activity.
Protein kinase C, the major phorbol ester receptor, was purified from bovine brain and through the use of oligonucleotide probes based on partial amino acid sequence, complementary DNA clones were derived from bovine brain complementary DNA libraries. Thus, the complete amino acid sequence of bovine protein kinase C was determined, revealing a domain structure. At the amino terminal is a cysteine-rich domain with an internal duplication; a putative calcium-binding domain follows, and there is at the carboxyl terminal a domain that shows substantial homology, but not identity, to sequences of other protein kinase.
mu-Opioid receptor (MOR) agonists represent the gold standard for the treatment of severe pain but may paradoxically also enhance pain sensitivity, that is, lead to opioid-induced hyperalgesia (OIH). We show that abrupt withdrawal from MOR agonists induces long-term potentiation (LTP) at the first synapse in pain pathways. Induction of opioid withdrawal LTP requires postsynaptic activation of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins and N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors and a rise of postsynaptic calcium concentrations. In contrast, the acute depression by opioids is induced presynaptically at these synapses. Withdrawal LTP can be prevented by tapered withdrawal and shares pharmacology and signal transduction pathways with OIH. These findings provide a previously unrecognized target to selectively combat pro-nociceptive effects of opioids without compromising opioid analgesia.
Sporulation of Bacillus subtilis involves sequential morphological and biochemical changes and is regulated by specific genes (spo genes) estimated to occupy more than 30 loci. A mutation in any one of these genes blocks the sporulation process at the corresponding developmental stage. Despite intensive genetic studies, the nature and function of the spo gene products remain unknown. Vegetative B. subtilis RNA polymerase core enzyme may interact with several sigma factors and discriminate among different classes of promoters. During sporulation, new polypeptides are associated with the core enzyme which may have a central role in modifying its promoter recognition specificity. As a first step to understanding their function in the switch from vegetative to sporulation mode, several early sporulation genes have been cloned and analysed. Here we report the cloning and nucleotide sequence of the spoIIG gene of B. subtilis. This gene encodes a polypeptide with a predicted relative molecular mass of 27,652 which contains a 65-amino acid region highly homologous to an internal part of the Escherichia coli sigma factor.
The essential Cdc13 protein in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a single-stranded telomeric DNA binding protein required for chromosome end protection and telomere replication. Here we report the solution structure of the Cdc13 DNA binding domain in complex with telomeric DNA. The structure reveals the use of a single OB (oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide binding) fold augmented by an unusually large loop for DNA recognition. This OB fold is structurally similar to OB folds found in the ciliated protozoan telomere end-binding protein, although no sequence similarity is apparent between them. The common usage of an OB fold for telomeric DNA interaction demonstrates conservation of end-protection mechanisms among eukaryotes.
The alpha-helix in proteins has a dipole moment resulting from the alignment of dipoles of the peptide bond which can perturb the pKas of ionizing groups. One of the two histidine residues (His18) in barnase, the small ribonuclease from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, is located at the negatively charged end (C-terminal) of an alpha-helix. From NMR titrations of wild-type and engineered mutants we find that the pKa of His18 is 7.9 in wild-type enzyme, 1.6 units above the value in the urea-denatured enzyme and in model peptides. This implies that there is a favourable interaction between the protonated form of His18 and the alpha-helix that should stabilize the native structure at neutral pH by 2.1 kcal mol-1. Denaturation at various values of pH of wild-type and muant enzymes engineered at position 18 shows that this is so. The increase in stability of the enzyme as the pH changes from 8.5 to 6.3 is attributable to this interaction, and the pH-stability curve fits pKa values for His18 in native and urea-denatured enzymes that are consistent with the NMR data.
When an enzyme-containing complex from yeast was incubated in a buffered solution at room temperature, the valyl-transfer RNA synthetase activity and total protein oscillated synchronously between two physical states. This observation suggests a regulatory process that controls a number of enzymes as a group, an integrated function of a kind not heretofore recognized. The two forms of the complex were separated by ammonium sulfate precipitation of one of them in samples withdrawn from the incubated solution every 30 seconds. Glutathione and dithiothreitol in high concentrations (50 mM) enhance formation of the 50% saturated ammonium sulfate-soluble form. Oxidized glutathione, diphosphopyridine nucleotide, triphosphopyridine nucleotide, and a mercurial thiol binding agent in moderate concentrations (0.1 to 1.0 mM) shift the distribution toward the precipitable form. It is suggested that the two forms represent functional and nonfunctional complex-bound enzymes which are interconverted in response to oxidoreductive signals.
In the nucleus of the cell, core RNA polymerase II (pol II) is associated with a large complex called the pol II holoenzyme (holo-pol). Transcription by core pol II in vitro on nucleosomal templates is repressed compared with that on templates of histone-free naked DNA. We found that the transcriptional activity of holo-pol, in contrast to that of core pol II, is not markedly repressed on chromatin templates. We refer to this property of holo-pol as chromatin-dependent coactivation (CDC). Here we show that DNA topoisomerase IIalpha is associated with the holo-pol and is a required component of CDC. Etoposide and ICRF-193, specific inhibitors of topoisomerase II, blocked transcription on chromatin templates, but did not affect transcription on naked templates. Addition of purified topoisomerase IIalpha reconstituted CDC activity in reactions with core pol II. These findings suggest that transcription on chromatin templates results in the accumulation of superhelical tension, making the relaxation activity of topoisomerase II essential for productive RNA synthesis on nucleosomal DNA.
Eukaryotic DNA is organized into structurally distinct domains that regulate gene expression and chromosome behavior. Epigenetically heritable domains of heterochromatin control the structure and expression of large chromosome domains and are required for proper chromosome segregation. Recent studies have identified many of the enzymes and structural proteins that work together to assemble heterochromatin. The assembly process appears to occur in a stepwise manner involving sequential rounds of histone modification by silencing complexes that spread along the chromatin fiber by self-oligomerization, as well as by association with specifically modified histone amino-terminal tails. Finally, an unexpected role for noncoding RNAs and RNA interference in the formation of epigenetic chromatin domains has been uncovered.
When platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) binds to its receptor on a quiescent fibroblast or smooth muscle cell, it stimulates a remarkably diverse group of biochemical responses, including changes in ion fluxes, activation of several kinases, alterations in cell shape, increased transcription of a number of genes, and stimulation of enzymes that regulate phospholipid metabolism. These and other reactions culminate, hours later, in DNA replication and cell division. How does the receptor for PDGF recognize and bind its specific ligand and then transduce this signal across the cell membrane via a single membrane-spanning region? Which of the immediate cellular responses are directly involved in the biochemical pathways that lead to DNA synthesis? How does the PDGF receptor trigger a diverse group of responses? Recent studies of the PDGF receptor have provided insight into these issues.
Soil is the most complicated biomaterial on the planet. As with any material, the physical habitat is of prime importance in determining and regulating biological activity. However, until recently the opaque nature of soil has meant that any interrogation of its interior architecture has been relatively rudimentary, restricted to simple qualitative expressions of the physical heterogeneity that fail to relate to any specific function. However, new techniques and insights into the biophysical and biochemical processes of this inner space are leading to the developments of theoretical frameworks and experimental approaches that will allow us to sustainably manage Earth's most important resource. We introduce the concept that the soil-microbe system is self-organized and suggest new priorities for research based on an integrative approach that combines biochemistry and biophysics.
'Identifier' or ID sequences are present in 62% of the RNA polymerase II and III transcripts made in vitro from brain nuclei but in fewer than 4% of the transcripts made from the nuclei of other tissues. An homologous 160-nucleotide cytoplasmic poly(A)+ RNA species, BC1, and a smaller species, BC2, are located in vivo exclusively in neural tissues. Cloned ID sequences are polymerase III templates in vitro. Our data suggest a model in which brain-specific polymerase III transcription of ID sequences located in introns of brain genes activates those genes in a primary manner for polymerase III transcription.
Residents of the Tibetan Plateau show heritable adaptations to extreme altitude. We sequenced 50 exomes of ethnic Tibetans, encompassing coding sequences of 92% of human genes, with an average coverage of 18x per individual. Genes showing population-specific allele frequency changes, which represent strong candidates for altitude adaptation, were identified. The strongest signal of natural selection came from endothelial Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a transcription factor involved in response to hypoxia. One single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at EPAS1 shows a 78% frequency difference between Tibetan and Han samples, representing the fastest allele frequency change observed at any human gene to date. This SNP's association with erythrocyte abundance supports the role of EPAS1 in adaptation to hypoxia. Thus, a population genomic survey has revealed a functionally important locus in genetic adaptation to high altitude.
Osteocalcin is the most abundant noncollagenous protein in bone, and its concentration in serum is closely linked to bone metabolism and serves as a biological marker for the clinical assessment of bone disease. Although its precise mechanism of action is unclear, osteocalcin influences bone mineralization, in part through its ability to bind with high affinity to the mineral component of bone, hydroxyapatite. In addition to binding to hydroxyapatite, osteocalcin functions in cell signalling and the recruitment of osteoclasts and osteoblasts, which have active roles in bone resorption and deposition, respectively. Here we present the X-ray crystal structure of porcine osteocalcin at 2.0 A resolution, which reveals a negatively charged protein surface that coordinates five calcium ions in a spatial orientation that is complementary to calcium ions in a hydroxyapatite crystal lattice. On the basis of our findings, we propose a model of osteocalcin binding to hydroxyapatite and draw parallels with other proteins that engage crystal lattices.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a central regulator of energy homeostasis in mammals and is an attractive target for drug discovery against diabetes, obesity and other diseases. The AMPK homologue in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, known as SNF1, is essential for responses to glucose starvation as well as for other cellular processes, although SNF1 seems to be activated by a ligand other than AMP. Here we report the crystal structure at 2.6 A resolution of the heterotrimer core of SNF1. The ligand-binding site in the gamma-subunit (Snf4) has clear structural differences from that of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe enzyme, although our crystallographic data indicate that AMP can also bind to Snf4. The glycogen-binding domain in the beta-subunit (Sip2) interacts with Snf4 in the heterotrimer but should still be able to bind carbohydrates. Our structure is supported by a large body of biochemical and genetic data on this complex. Most significantly, the structure reveals that part of the regulatory sequence in the alpha-subunit (Snf1) is sequestered by Snf4, demonstrating a direct interaction between the alpha- and gamma-subunits and indicating that our structure may represent the heterotrimer core of SNF1 in its activated state.
Acetylation is a well-known regulatory post-translational modification, but a biological function for acetylation in regulating basal transcription factors has not been reported. Here we show that the general transcription factor TFIIB, which is required for the initiation of eukaryotic polymerase II transcription, is acetylated. TFIIB is also an autoacetyltransferase, although it shares no sequence homology with any known acetyltransferases. In the absence of other enzymes, it binds acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA), and catalyses the transfer of the acetyl group onto a specific lysine residue (K238). Both recombinant and cellular TFIIB can autoacetylate, markedly stabilizing the interaction between TFIIB and transcription factor TFIIF and activating transcription in vitro and in cells. A K238A mutant, which cannot be autoacetylated, does not show this activation of transcription. Our findings suggest that there is a regulatory pathway controlling acetylation of TFIIB, and they link acetyl-CoA with basal gene transcription.
The general transcription initiation factor TFIID plays a primary part in the activation of eukaryotic genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II. Binding of TFIID to the TATA box initiates the assembly of other general transcription factors as well as RNA polymerase II at the promoter resulting in a preinitiation complex capable of accurate transcription initiation in vitro. Human TFIID has been shown to interact with various regulatory factors. The observation that stimulation of transcription by different trans-acting factors is mediated through distinct TATA elements led to the suggestion that different types of TFIID may exist in yeast, humans and plants. Here we report the cloning and characterization of two distinct TFIID complementary DNA clones from Arabidopsis thaliana. Furthermore, we have found that TFIID from Arabidopsis and other organisms shows homology to helix-loop-helix proteins.
Several observations suggest that iron is essential for the development of malaria parasites but there is evidence that the parasites in erythrocytes do not obtain iron from haemoglobin. The total haemin level in parasitized erythrocytes does not vary during parasite development, indicating that the iron-containing moiety of haemoglobin is not detectably metabolized. Although parasite proteases can degrade the protein part of haemoglobin in red cells, no parasite enzymes that degrade haemin have been identified. In mammalian cells, haemin is degraded to carbon monoxide and bilirubin by the enzyme haeme oxygenase. This enzyme has not been found in malaria parasites. In fact haemin has been found to be toxic to parasite carbohydrate metabolism. Thus, iron apparently cannot be liberated from haemin and instead is sequestered in infected red cells as haemozoin, the characteristic pigment associated with malarial infection. If iron bound to transferrin is the source of ferric ions for malaria parasites within mature erythrocytes, then the parasite must synthesize its own transferrin receptor and localize it on the surface of the infected cell, because the receptors for transferrin are lost during erythrocyte maturation. Our results here suggest that Plasmodium falciparum synthesizes its own transferrin receptors enabling it to take up iron from transferrin by receptor-mediated endocytosis.
The calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II is a major component of brain synaptic junctions and has been proposed to play a variety of important roles in brain function. A complementary DNA representing a portion of the smaller 50-kilodalton subunit of the rat brain enzyme has been cloned and sequenced. The calmodulin-binding region has been identified and a synthetic analog prepared that binds calmodulin with high affinity in the presence of calcium. Like the 50-kilodalton kinase polypeptide, the concentration of the messenger RNA varies both neuroanatomically and during postnatal development of the brain. The broad tissue and species cross-reactivity of the complementary DNA suggests that the 50-kilodalton subunit found in rat brain is evolutionarily conserved and is the product of a single gene.
A cartilage fraction isolated by guanidine extraction and purified by affinity chromatography inhibits tumor-induced vascular proliferation and consequently restricts tumor growth. This fraction contains several different proteins; the major one has a molecular weight of about 16,000. The fraction strongly inhibits protease activity.
The RNA polymerase II general transcription factor TFIIH is composed of several polypeptides. The observation that the largest subunit of TFIIH is the excision-repair protein XPB/ERCC3 (ref. 1), a helicase implicated in the human DNA-repair disorders xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and Cockayne's syndrome, suggests a functional link between transcription and DNA repair. To understand the connection between these two cellular processes, we have extensively purified and functionally analysed TFIIH. We find that TFIIH has a dual role, being required for basal transcription of class II genes and for participation in DNA-excision repair. TFIIH is shown to complement three different cell extracts deficient in excision repair: XPB/ERCC3, XPC and XPD/ERCC2. The complementation of XPB and XPD is a consequence of ERCC3 and ERCC2 being integral subunits of TFIIH, whereas complementation of XPC is due to an association of this polypeptide with TFIIH. We found that the general transcription factor IIE negatively modulates the helicase activity of TFIIH through a direct interaction between TFIIE and the ERCC3 subunit of TFIIH.
The ubiquitin pathway in the cell is an elegant system for targeting unwanted proteins for degradation. Three enzymes, E1, E2, and E3, are responsible for attaching the ubiquitin tag to proteins destined to be chopped up. In their Perspective, Joazeiro and Hunter discuss new structural findings that reveal the part played by an E3 called c-Cbl in this ubiquitinating process.
A DNA copy of the gene coding for the influenza A/Aichi/2/68 haemagglutinin protein was cloned in the plasmid pBR322 and the complete nucleotide sequence determined. Comparison of this primary structure and the deduced amino acid sequence with the haemagglutinin gene and protein of strains belonging to the same (H3) subtype and to different subtypes, of both human (H2) and avian (Hav1) origin, documents further at the molecular level the two independent modes of antigenic variation of the virus--drift and shift.
The Sex-lethal (Sxl) protein of Drosophila melanogaster regulates alternative splicing of the transformer (tra) messenger RNA precursor by binding to the tra polypyrimidine tract during the sex-determination process. The crystal structure has now been determined at 2.6 A resolution of the complex formed between two tandemly arranged RNA-binding domains of the Sxl protein and a 12-nucleotide, single-stranded RNA derived from the tra polypyrimidine tract. The two RNA-binding domains have their beta-sheet platforms facing each other to form a V-shaped cleft. The RNA is characteristically extended and bound in this cleft, where the UGUUUUUUU sequence is specifically recognized by the protein. This structure offers the first insight, to our knowledge, into how a protein binds specifically to a cognate RNA without any intramolecular base-pairing.
Protein ubiquitination is a common form of post-translational modification that regulates a broad spectrum of protein substrates in diverse cellular pathways. Through a three-enzyme (E1-E2-E3) cascade, the attachment of ubiquitin to proteins is catalysed by the E3 ubiquitin ligase, which is best represented by the superfamily of the cullin-RING complexes. Conserved from yeast to human, the DDB1-CUL4-ROC1 complex is a recently identified cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase, which regulates DNA repair, DNA replication and transcription, and can also be subverted by pathogenic viruses to benefit viral infection. Lacking a canonical SKP1-like cullin adaptor and a defined substrate recruitment module, how the DDB1-CUL4-ROC1 E3 apparatus is assembled for ubiquitinating various substrates remains unclear. Here we present crystallographic analyses of the virally hijacked form of the human DDB1-CUL4A-ROC1 machinery, which show that DDB1 uses one beta-propeller domain for cullin scaffold binding and a variably attached separate double-beta-propeller fold for substrate presentation. Through tandem-affinity purification of human DDB1 and CUL4A complexes followed by mass spectrometry analysis, we then identify a novel family of WD40-repeat proteins, which directly bind to the double-propeller fold of DDB1 and serve as the substrate-recruiting module of the E3. Together, our structural and proteomic results reveal the structural mechanisms and molecular logic underlying the assembly and versatility of a new family of cullin-RING E3 complexes.
The humoral immune system antigen-binding proteins (immunoglobulins) are disulphide-linked heterodimers of light and heavy chains. The gene for the variable region which determines antigen specificity is assembled when one member from each of the dispersed clusters of variable (V) gene segments, diversity (D) elements (for the heavy chains only) and joining (J) segments rearrange and fuse during B-cell development (reviewed in ref. 1). Short recognition sequences adjacent to these elements appear to be involved in the recombination process. The cellular immune system antigen recognition proteins are receptors on the surface of T cells, which are composed of disulphide-linked alpha-chains and beta-chains, each of which has a variable and constant region. Recently, cDNA clones of the beta-chain mRNA have been isolated; the genomic arrangement is very similar to immunoglobulin genes with multiple V beta genes, and two clusters of J beta segments, each of which is upstream from a constant-region gene segment. The V beta and J beta segments have adjacent recombinational recognition sequences like the immunoglobulin elements. However, approximately 10 nucleotides of the cDNA clones between the V beta and J beta regions were not present in the corresponding genomic elements and may have been due to intervening D beta segments. Here we describe a diversity element (D beta 1.1) in a region of high human-mouse homology about 650 bases 5' to the first J beta cluster. Two transcripts which include sequences upstream of D beta 1.1 are found in the human thymus. This region may have some other function besides providing the beta-chain with a diversity segment.
Degradation of invariant chain (Ii) is a critical step in major histocompatibility complex class II-restricted antigen presentation. Cathepsin L was found to be necessary for Ii degradation in cortical thymic epithelial cells (cTECs), but not in bone marrow (BM)-derived antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Consequently, positive selection of CD4+ T cells was reduced. Because different cysteine proteinases are responsible for specific Ii degradation steps in cTECs and BM-derived APCs, the proteolytic environment in cells mediating positive and negative selection may be distinct. The identification of a protease involved in class II presentation in a tissue-specific manner suggests a potential means of manipulating CD4+ T cell responsiveness in vivo.
Understanding cellular response to environmental stress has broad implications for human disease. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) orchestrates the regulation of energy-generating and -consuming pathways, and protects the heart against ischaemic injury and apoptosis. A role for circulating hormones such as adiponectin and leptin in the activation of AMPK has received recent attention. Whether local autocrine and paracrine factors within target organs such as the heart modulate AMPK is unknown. Here we show that macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), an upstream regulator of inflammation, is released in the ischaemic heart, where it stimulates AMPK activation through CD74, promotes glucose uptake and protects the heart during ischaemia-reperfusion injury. Germline deletion of the Mif gene impairs ischaemic AMPK signalling in the mouse heart. Human fibroblasts with a low-activity MIF promoter polymorphism have diminished MIF release and AMPK activation during hypoxia. Thus, MIF modulates the activation of the cardioprotective AMPK pathway during ischaemia, functionally linking inflammation and metabolism in the heart. We anticipate that genetic variation in MIF expression may impact on the response of the human heart to ischaemia by the AMPK pathway, and that diagnostic MIF genotyping might predict risk in patients with coronary artery disease.
A facile method for isolating genes that encode interacting proteins has been developed with a polypeptide probe that contains an amino-terminal extension with recognition sites for a monoclonal antibody, a specific endopeptidase, and a site-specific protein kinase. This probe, containing the basic region-leucine zipper dimerization motif of c-Fos, was used to screen a complementary DNA library. A complementary DNA that encoded a member of the basic-helix-loop-helix-zipper (bHLH-Zip) family of proteins was isolated. The complementary DNA-encoded polypeptide FIP (Fos interacting protein) bound to oligonucleotide probes that contained DNA binding motifs for other HLH proteins. When cotransfected with c-Fos, FIP stimulated transcription of an AP-1-responsive promoter.
Recent studies indicate that, similar to other covalent modifications, histone lysine methylation is subject to enzyme-catalysed reversion. So far, LSD1 (also known as AOF2) and the jumonji C (JmjC)-domain-containing proteins have been shown to possess histone demethylase activity. LSD1 catalyses removal of H3K4me2/H3K4me1 through a flavin-adenine-dinucleotide-dependent oxidation reaction. In contrast, JmjC-domain-containing proteins remove methyl groups from histones through a hydroxylation reaction that requires alpha-ketoglutarate and Fe(II) as cofactors. Although an increasing number of histone demethylases have been identified and biochemically characterized, their biological functions, particularly in the context of an animal model, are poorly characterized. Here we use a loss-of-function approach to demonstrate that the mouse H3K9me2/1-specific demethylase JHDM2A (JmjC-domain-containing histone demethylase 2A, also known as JMJD1A) is essential for spermatogenesis. We show that Jhdm2a-deficient mice exhibit post-meiotic chromatin condensation defects, and that JHDM2A directly binds to and controls the expression of transition nuclear protein 1 (Tnp1) and protamine 1 (Prm1) genes, the products of which are required for packaging and condensation of sperm chromatin. Thus, our work uncovers a role for JHDM2A in spermatogenesis and reveals transition nuclear protein and protamine genes as direct targets of JHDM2A.
The X-ray structure of the heterodimeric Ni-Fe hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio gigas, the enzyme responsible for the metabolism of molecular hydrogen, has been solved at 2.85 A resolution. The active site, which appears to contain, besides nickel, a second metal ion, is buried in the 60K subunit. The 28K subunit, which coordinates one [3Fe-4S] and two [4Fe-4S] clusters, contains an amino-terminal domain with similarities to the redox protein flavodoxin. The structure suggests plausible electron and proton transfer pathways.
A cotton leaf microsomal oxidase system that N-demethylates 3-(4'-chlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (monuron) to 3-(4'-chlorophenyl)-1-methylurea has been partially characterized. The enzyme system is associated with a microsomal fraction separated by differential centrifugation and requires molecular oxygen as well as either the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate or the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide as cofactors.
Cysteinyl leukotrienes are key mediators in inflammation and have an important role in acute and chronic inflammatory diseases of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, in particular bronchial asthma. In the biosynthesis of cysteinyl leukotrienes, conversion of arachidonic acid forms the unstable epoxide leukotriene A4 (LTA4). This intermediate is conjugated with glutathione (GSH) to produce leukotriene C4 (LTC4) in a reaction catalysed by LTC4 synthase: this reaction is the key step in cysteinyl leukotriene formation. Here we present the crystal structure of the human LTC4 synthase in its apo and GSH-complexed forms to 2.00 and 2.15 A resolution, respectively. The structure reveals a homotrimer, where each monomer is composed of four transmembrane segments. The structure of the enzyme in complex with substrate reveals that the active site enforces a horseshoe-shaped conformation on GSH, and effectively positions the thiol group for activation by a nearby arginine at the membrane-enzyme interface. In addition, the structure provides a model for how the omega-end of the lipophilic co-substrate is pinned at one end of a hydrophobic cleft, providing a molecular 'ruler' to align the reactive epoxide at the thiol of glutathione. This provides new structural insights into the mechanism of LTC4 formation, and also suggests that the observed binding and activation of GSH might be common for a family of homologous proteins important for inflammatory and detoxification responses.
Cellular metabolism, the integrated interconversion of thousands of metabolic substrates through enzyme-catalysed biochemical reactions, is the most investigated complex intracellular web of molecular interactions. Although the topological organization of individual reactions into metabolic networks is well understood, the principles that govern their global functional use under different growth conditions raise many unanswered questions. By implementing a flux balance analysis of the metabolism of Escherichia coli strain MG1655, here we show that network use is highly uneven. Whereas most metabolic reactions have low fluxes, the overall activity of the metabolism is dominated by several reactions with very high fluxes. E. coli responds to changes in growth conditions by reorganizing the rates of selected fluxes predominantly within this high-flux backbone. This behaviour probably represents a universal feature of metabolic activity in all cells, with potential implications for metabolic engineering.
Low-molecular-weight GTP-binding proteins (small G proteins) of the Rab family have been proposed to act as central regulators of vesicular traffic, and proteins of the Rab3 subfamily (Rab3A, B, C and D) are thought to be associated with membrane vesicles or granules undergoing exocytotic fusion with the plasma membrane. Rab3A is highly expressed in brain, whereas Rab3B is the major form found in rat anterior pituitary gland. We report here that antisense oligonucleotides against Rab3B, introduced into pituitary cells using the whole-cell patch clamp technique, specifically and reversibly block expression of Rab3B. We find that calcium-dependent exocytosis is inhibited without affecting endocytosis. Antisense oligonucleotides directed against Rab3A have no effect. Our results indicate that Rab3B is likely to be a key intracellular signalling molecule which can control exocytosis downstream of other calcium-dependent processes in anterior pituitary cells.
Feeding a diet deficient in nicotinamide, nicotinic acid, and tryptophan to pregnant rats causes death and resorption of all fetuses. This effect can be prevented by administration of either chlorpromazine or imipramine. Analysis of maternal liver at the time of fetal resorption indicates that the observed effects may be mediated through modification of the concentration of the pyridine nucleotide coenzymes.
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies are associated with accumulation of PrP(Sc), a conformer of a cellular protein called PrP(C). PrP(Sc) is thought to replicate by imparting its conformation onto PrP(C) (ref. 1), yet conformational discrimination between PrP(C) and PrP(Sc) has remained elusive. Because deposition of PrP(Sc) alone is not enough to cause neuropathology, PrP(Sc) probably damages the brain by interacting with other cellular constituents. Here we find activities in human and mouse blood which bind PrP(Sc) and prion infectivity, but not PrP(C). We identify plasminogen, a pro-protease implicated in neuronal excitotoxicity, as a PrP(Sc)-binding protein. Binding is abolished if the conformation of PrP(Sc) is disrupted by 6M urea or guanidine. The isolated lysine binding site 1 of plasminogen (kringles I-III) retains this binding activity, and binding can be competed for with lysine. Therefore, plasminogen represents the first endogenous factor discriminating between normal and pathological prion protein. This unexpected property may be exploited for diagnostic purposes.
Group II chaperonins are essential mediators of cellular protein folding in eukaryotes and archaea. These oligomeric protein machines, approximately 1 megadalton, consist of two back-to-back rings encompassing a central cavity that accommodates polypeptide substrates. Chaperonin-mediated protein folding is critically dependent on the closure of a built-in lid, which is triggered by ATP hydrolysis. The structural rearrangements and molecular events leading to lid closure are still unknown. Here we report four single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of Mm-cpn, an archaeal group II chaperonin, in the nucleotide-free (open) and nucleotide-induced (closed) states. The 4.3 A resolution of the closed conformation allowed building of the first ever atomic model directly from the single particle cryo-EM density map, in which we were able to visualize the nucleotide and more than 70% of the side chains. The model of the open conformation was obtained by using the deformable elastic network modelling with the 8 A resolution open-state cryo-EM density restraints. Together, the open and closed structures show how local conformational changes triggered by ATP hydrolysis lead to an alteration of intersubunit contacts within and across the rings, ultimately causing a rocking motion that closes the ring. Our analyses show that there is an intricate and unforeseen set of interactions controlling allosteric communication and inter-ring signalling, driving the conformational cycle of group II chaperonins. Beyond this, we anticipate that our methodology of combining single particle cryo-EM and computational modelling will become a powerful tool in the determination of atomic details involved in the dynamic processes of macromolecular machines in solution.
Genes that are expressed exclusively in cytotoxic T cells should encode proteins that are essential for target cell lysis in cell-mediated immune responses. The sequences of two cytotoxic T lymphocyte-specific complementary DNA's (cDNA's) suggest that the two genes encode serine proteases. A full-length cDNA corresponding to one of the genes was isolated and sequenced. The predicted protein resembles serine proteases in that it includes all the residues that form the catalytic triad of the active site of serine proteases. Moreover, it has sequence characteristics thought to occur only in rat mast cell protease type II. These results are in accord with the view that a protease cascade plays a key role in cytotoxic T-cell activation.
Basal transcription by human RNA polymerase II requires the coordinate action of several ancillary factors (TFIIA-J) and can be regulated by various promoter-specific DNA binding proteins. An additional class of factors, called coactivators, are dispensable for basal transcription but are indispensable for regulation by transcriptional activators. Biochemical studies established that some coactivators are associated with the TATA-binding protein (TBP) to form the TFIID complex. We therefore set out to define the relationship between TBP and these TBP-associated factors (TAFs). Here we describe the cloning, expression and properties of the first human TAF, hTAFII250. The hTAFII250 gene is identical to a gene, CCG1, (ref 7,8), implicated in cell-cycle progression. Recombinant hTAFII250 binds directly to TBP both in vitro and in yeast, and participates in the formation of the TFIID complex. This largest TAF may therefore play a central role in TFIID assembly by interacting with both TBP and other TAFs, as well as serving to link the control of transcription to the cell cycle.
Only two avian oncogenic viruses specifically cause acute leukaemias yet do not transform chicken fibroblasts in culture: E26, which causes erythroblastosis and a low level of concomitant myeloblastosis in chickens, and avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV), which causes myeloblastosis exclusively. Both viruses are replication-defective and share a sequence termed myb (also known as amv) which is unrelated to essential virion genes and is therefore thought to be part of the transforming onc genes of these viruses. However, the genetic structure of the two viruses differs. E26 has a genomic RNA of 5.7 kilobases (kb) and encodes a 135,000 molecular weight gag-related protein (p135) with probable transforming function. We show here by in vitro translation that the 5.7-kb E26 RNA directs the synthesis of p135. Oligonucleotide analysis indicates that E26 RNA contains an internal 0.8-kb subset of the 1.2-kb AMV-related sequence (mybA), termed mybE. A 2.46-kb molecular clone prepared from cDNA transcribed in vitro from E26 RNA contained an E26 transformation-specific (ets) sequence flanked by mybE and an env-related sequence. A complete DNA sequence of this clone indicates that the 1.5-kb ets sequence extends the open reading frame of mybE for 491 amino acids. Thus, the p135 gene of E26 is a genetic hybrid of three distinct elements, approximately 1.2 kb derived from the 5' region of the retroviral gag gene, mybE and the ets sequence, linked in the order 5'-delta gag-mybE-ets-3'. The myeloid leukaemogenicity shared by E26 and AMV correlates with the common myb sequence, while the distinct erythroid leukaemogenicity of E26 correlates with ets and the E26-specific linkage of myb to delta gag.
Eukaryotic cells have evolved a variety of mechanisms for dampening their responsiveness to hormonal stimulation in the face of sustained activation. The mechanisms for such processes, collectively referred to as desensitization, often involve alterations in the properties and number of cell-surface hormone receptors. It has been speculated that phosphorylation-dephosphorylation reactions, which are known to regulate the catalytic activities of enzymes, also regulate the function of receptors. Highly specific receptor kinases, such as rhodopsin kinase and beta-adrenergic receptor kinase, which show stimulus-dependent phosphorylation of receptors have been described. Direct evidence for a causal relationship between receptor phosphorylation and desensitization has been lacking however. Here we report that prevention of agonist-stimulated beta 2-adrenergic receptor (beta 2AR) phosphorylation by truncation of its serine and threonine-rich phosphate acceptor segment delays the onset of desensitization. We also show that selective replacement of these serine and threonine residues by alanine and glycine delays desensitization even further. These data provide the first direct evidence that one molecular mechanism of desensitization of G-protein-coupled receptors involves their agonist-induced phosphorylation.
The mechanism whereby eukaryotic pre-messenger RNAs are polyadenylated is unknown. Most models for polyadenylation invoke cleavage of precursor transcripts at the site of poly(A) addition followed by polymerization of A residues by poly(A) polymerase. Analysis of the sequences surrounding poly(A) addition sites has identified the consensus recognition sequence element AAUAAA as necessary but not sufficient for polyadenylation. A second recognition sequence element CACUG , was observed by Benoit et al. to be adjacent to the site of poly(A) addition in several sequenced RNAs. Here, we analyse 61 vertebrate poly(A) addition sequences, define a more extensive recognition sequence for polyadenylation than previously recognized and suggest how the site of poly(A) addition may be chosen. Furthermore, we find that the defined recognition sequence has elements which are complementary to regions within the small nuclear RNA U4, suggesting that U4 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) may mediate polyadenylation in a fashion similar to the role of U1 snRNPs in splicing. The model invokes hybridization of U4 RNA to AAUAAA recognition elements as related to primary site selection, and hybridization to CAYUG recognition elements as related to cleavage site selection.
Nitric oxide (.NO) plays a central role in the pathogenesis of diverse inflammatory and infectious disorders. The toxicity of .NO is thought to be engendered, in part, by its reaction with superoxide (O2.-), yielding the potent oxidant peroxynitrite (ONOO-). However, evidence for a role of ONOO- in vivo is based largely upon detection of 3-nitrotyrosine in injured tissues. We have recently demonstrated that nitrite (NO2-), a major end-product of .NO metabolism, readily promotes tyrosine nitration through formation of nitryl chloride (NO2Cl) and nitrogen dioxide (.NO2) by reaction with the inflammatory mediators hypochlorous acid (HOCl) or myeloperoxidase. We now show that activated human polymorphonuclear neutrophils convert NO2- into NO2Cl and .NO2 through myeloperoxidase-dependent pathways. Polymorphonuclear neutrophil-mediated nitration and chlorination of tyrosine residues or 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid is enhanced by addition of NO2- or by fluxes of .NO. Addition of 15NO2- led to 15N enrichment of nitrated phenolic substrates, confirming its role in polymorphonuclear neutrophil-mediated nitration reactions. Polymorphonuclear neutrophil-mediated inactivation of endothelial cell angiotensin-converting enzyme was exacerbated by NO2-, illustrating the physiological significance of these reaction pathways to cellular dysfunction. Our data reveal that NO2- may regulate inflammatory processes through oxidative mechanisms, perhaps by contributing to the tyrosine nitration and chlorination observed in vivo.
A major factor in the folding of proteins is the burying of hydrophobic side chains. A specific example is the packing of alpha-helices on beta-sheets by interdigitation of nonpolar side chains. The contributions of these interactions to the energetics of protein stability may be measured by simple protein engineering experiments. We have used site-directed mutagenesis to truncate hydrophobic side chains at an alpha-helix/beta-sheet interface in the small ribonuclease from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens (barnase). The decreases in stability of the mutant proteins were measured by their susceptibility to urea denaturation. Creation of a cavity the size of a -CH2-group destabilizes the enzyme by 1.1 kcal mol-1, and a cavity the size of three such groups by 4.0 kcal mol-1.
Double-stranded RNA induces potent and specific gene silencing through a process referred to as RNA interference (RNAi) or posttranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS). RNAi is mediated by RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), a sequence-specific, multicomponent nuclease that destroys messenger RNAs homologous to the silencing trigger. RISC is known to contain short RNAs ( approximately 22 nucleotides) derived from the double-stranded RNA trigger, but the protein components of this activity are unknown. Here, we report the biochemical purification of the RNAi effector nuclease from cultured Drosophila cells. The active fraction contains a ribonucleoprotein complex of approximately 500 kilodaltons. Protein microsequencing reveals that one constituent of this complex is a member of the Argonaute family of proteins, which are essential for gene silencing in Caenorhabditis elegans, Neurospora, and Arabidopsis. This observation begins the process of forging links between genetic analysis of RNAi from diverse organisms and the biochemical model of RNAi that is emerging from Drosophila in vitro systems.
Ubiquitination of histones has been linked to the complex processes that regulate the activation of eukaryotic transcription. However, the cellular factors that interpose this histone modification during the processes of transcriptional activation are not well characterized. A biochemical approach identified the Drosophila coactivator TAFII250, the central subunit within the general transcription factor TFIID, as a histone-specific ubiquitin-activating/conjugating enzyme (ubac). TAFII250 mediates monoubiquitination of histone H1 in vitro. Point mutations within the putative ubac domain of TAFII250 abolished H1-specific ubiquitination in vitro. In the Drosophila embryo, inactivation of the TAFII250 ubac activity reduces the cellular level of monoubiquitinated histone H1 and the expression of genes targeted by the maternal activator Dorsal. Thus, coactivator-mediated ubiquitination of proteins within the transactivation pathway may contribute to the processes directing activation of eukaryotic transcription.
Molecules in nature are often brought to a bioactive conformation by ring formation (macrocyclization). A recurrent theme in the enzymatic synthesis of macrocyclic compounds by non-ribosomal and polyketide synthetases is the tethering of activated linear intermediates through thioester linkages to carrier proteins, in a natural analogy to solid-phase synthesis. A terminal thioesterase domain of the synthetase catalyses release from the tether and cyclization. Here we show that an isolated thioesterase can catalyse the cyclization of linear peptides immobilized on a solid-phase support modified with a biomimetic linker, offering the possibility of merging natural-product biosynthesis with combinatorial solid-phase chemistry. Starting from the cyclic decapeptide antibiotic tyrocidine A, this chemoenzymatic approach allows us to diversify the linear peptide both to probe the enzymology of the macrocyclizing enzyme, TycC thioesterase, and to create a library of cyclic peptide antibiotic products. We have used this method to reveal natural-product analogues of potential therapeutic utility; these compounds have an increased preference for bacterial over eukaryotic membranes and an improved spectrum of activity against some common bacterial pathogens.
A common inherited disorder of steroidogenesis in man, 21-hydroxylase (21-OH) deficiency, is linked to the HLA major histocompatibility complex (MHC), and is associated in particular with certain allotypes of the HLA-linked complement proteins. Recently, this disorder was demonstrated to result from a defective structural gene for the 21-OH enzyme, also termed cytochrome P-450C21. The human (HLA) and murine (H-2) MHCs are homologous in overall organization and in the structures of their component genes. To determine whether 21-OH genes are located in the H-2 complex, we have now used a bovine adrenal complementary DNA clone encoding part of 21-OH to examine a cluster of overlapping cosmid clones derived from the S region of the BALB/c mouse. We found that there are two 21-OH genes in this region, located immediately 3' to the C4 and Slp genes.
Many hormones interact with receptors which stimulate the enzyme adenylate cyclase. Less well characterized ar those receptors which mediate an inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity. However, guanine nucleotides are clearly important in the regulation of both stimulatory and inhibitory receptors. Monovalent cations, notably Na+, regulate many inhibitory receptor systems but apparently not stimulatory receptors. We investigate here the effects of Na+ and guanine nucleotides on the adenylate cyclase-coupled inhibitory alpha 2-adrenergic receptor of the rabbit platelet. Computer modelling of adrenaline competition curves with 3H-dihydroergocryptine (3H-DHE) indicates that adrenaline induces two distinct affinity states of the alpha 2 receptor--one of higher (alpha 2H) and the other of lower (alpha 2L) affinity. Guanyl-5'-yl-imidodiphosphate (Gpp(NH)p) seems to reduce adrenaline affinity to converting the high-affinity state into the low-affinity form of the receptor. In contrast, Na+ reduces adrenaline affinity at both the high- and low-affinity states of the alpha 2 receptor while preserving receptor heterogeneity. Thus, guanine nucleotides and Na+ differ in the manner by which each reduces agonist affinity for the alpha 2-adrenergic receptor.
Interferon-treated cells show an increase in two double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-dependent enzymatic activities involving an oligoadenylate polymerase and a protein kinase (ref. 1 and refs therein). The polymerase converts ATP into a series of oligonucleotides characterized by 2'5'-phosphodiester bonds, designated 2'5'-oligo(A) or 2-5A (ref. 1). These oligonucleotides activate an endoribonuclease that degrades RNA in extracts of control and interferon-treated cells. These observations have been made in tissue culture cells and no informatin is yet available on these enzymatic activities in animals with elevated interferon levels. We report here on 2-5A synthesis in tissue homogenates and serum of mice infected with encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV); this virus induces interferon synthesis when injected intraperitoneally into mice. Significant synthesis of 2-5A was detected in extracts of spleen and lungs, but also, surprisingly, in the serum of these mice. Subsequent experiments showed synthesis of 2-5A in serum of mice treated with the interferon inducer poly(I) x poly(C) (ref. 3) or with mouse fibroblast interferon.
A central hub of carbon metabolism is the tricarboxylic acid cycle, which serves to connect the processes of glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, respiration, amino acid synthesis and other biosynthetic pathways. The protozoan intracellular malaria parasites (Plasmodium spp.), however, have long been suspected of possessing a significantly streamlined carbon metabolic network in which tricarboxylic acid metabolism plays a minor role. Blood-stage Plasmodium parasites rely almost entirely on glucose fermentation for energy and consume minimal amounts of oxygen, yet the parasite genome encodes all of the enzymes necessary for a complete tricarboxylic acid cycle. Here, by tracing (13)C-labelled compounds using mass spectrometry we show that tricarboxylic acid metabolism in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is largely disconnected from glycolysis and is organized along a fundamentally different architecture from the canonical textbook pathway. We find that this pathway is not cyclic, but rather is a branched structure in which the major carbon sources are the amino acids glutamate and glutamine. As a consequence of this branched architecture, several reactions must run in the reverse of the standard direction, thereby generating two-carbon units in the form of acetyl-coenzyme A. We further show that glutamine-derived acetyl-coenzyme A is used for histone acetylation, whereas glucose-derived acetyl-coenzyme A is used to acetylate amino sugars. Thus, the parasite has evolved two independent production mechanisms for acetyl-coenzyme A with different biological functions. These results significantly clarify our understanding of the Plasmodium metabolic network and highlight the ability of altered variants of central carbon metabolism to arise in response to unique environments.
The promoters of eukaryotic genes are being increasingly defined through the identification of consensus DNA sequences, by mutational analysis, and by in vitro and in vivo studies of transcription. Whereas the TATA sequence (Goldberg-Hogness box) has been largely conserved among protein encoding genes (transcribed by RNA polymerase II) of eukaryotes, there is some evidence that other structural and functional determinants of mRNA transcription are not conserved between species. I report there an in vivo comparative analysis of the transcription initiation systems of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the fission yeast Schizosaccharmyces pombe (which can both be transformed by identical plasmids). I have found no instance in which a gene is transcribed in the same fashion in both yeasts. Instead, I have found that the in vivo transcription starting points for many different yeast genes are determined by the cell in which it is transcribed rather than its gene structure alone. The evidence also suggests that the divergence of the transcription initiation system may partly involve the mechanism or structure which determines the distance from the TATA consensus sequence to the site of transcription initiation.
Human DNA polymerase eta (Pol eta) modulates susceptibility to skin cancer by promoting DNA synthesis past sunlight-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers that escape nucleotide excision repair (NER). Here we have determined the efficiency and fidelity of dimer bypass. We show that Pol eta copies thymine dimers and the flanking bases with higher processivity than it copies undamaged DNA, and then switches to less processive synthesis. This ability of Pol eta to sense the dimer location as synthesis proceeds may facilitate polymerase switching before and after lesion bypass. Pol eta bypasses a dimer with low fidelity and with higher error rates at the 3' thymine than at the 5' thymine. A similar bias is seen with Sulfolobus solfataricus DNA polymerase 4, which forms a Watson-Crick base pair at the 3' thymine of a dimer but a Hoogsteen base pair at the 5' thymine (ref. 3). Ultraviolet-induced mutagenesis is also higher at the 3' base of dipyrimidine sequences. Thus, in normal people and particularly in individuals with NER-defective xeroderma pigmentosum who accumulate dimers, errors made by Pol eta during dimer bypass could contribute to mutagenesis and skin cancer.
Large macromolecular assemblies have evolved as a means of compartmentalizing reactions in organisms lacking membrane-bounded compartments. A tricorn-shaped protease was isolated from the archaeon Thermoplasma and was shown to form a multisubunit proteolytic complex. The 120-kilodalton monomer assembled to form a hexameric toroid that could assemble further into a capsid structure. Tricorn protease appeared to act as the core of a proteolytic system; when it interacted with several smaller proteins, it displayed multicatalytic activities.
Double-stranded DNA copies of the RNA gene coding for the haemagglutinin glycoproteins from human H2 and H3 pandemic strains of influenza virus have been cloned. DNA sequence analysis provides the first reported complete nucleotide sequence of an H2 haemagglutinin gene and a partial sequence (45%) of the H3 gene. The H2 haemagglutinin gene consists of 1,773 nucleotides containing an uninterrupted coding sequence of 1,686 nucleotides specifying a protein of 562 amino acids. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of these haemagglutinins with those of other H3 and avian strains reveals the extent of sequence changes in antigenic shifts and drifts.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system in which a restricted cellular immune response has been observed. In order to establish whether such T cell responses are likely to be antigen-specific particularly with regard to myelin basic protein (MBP), we analysed T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangements directly from MS brain plaques, using the polymerase chain reaction on reverse transcribed messenger RNA, and compared these with TCR of previously described MBP-specific T cell clones from MS and the rat model experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. Rearranged V beta 5.2 genes were detected in the brains of all patients who were HLA DRB1*1501, DQA1*0102, DQB1*0602, DPB1*0401. The V beta 5.2-D beta-J beta sequences in these MS brain plaques revealed five motifs. One of the common motifs was identical to that described for the VDJ region of a V beta 5.2 T-cell clone. This clone was from an MS patient who was HLA DRB1*1501, DQB1*0602, DPB1*0401, and it was cytotoxic towards targets containing the MBP peptide 89-106 (ref. 1). The deduced amino-acid sequence of this VDJ rearrangement, Leu-Arg-Gly, has also been described in rat T cells cloned from experimental allergic encephalomyelitis lesions, which are specific for MBP peptide 87-99 (ref. 2). VDJ sequences with specificity for this MBP epitope constitute a large fraction (40%) of the TCR V beta 5.2 N(D)N rearrangements in MS lesions. The capacity of rat T cells with these VDJ sequences to cause experimental allergic encephalomyelitis and the prevalence of such sequences in demyelinated human lesions indicate that T cells with this rearranged TCR may be critical in MS.
The TATA-binding protein TBP is necessary for the transcription of eukaryotic genes. Multi-protein complexes formed by TBP and different TBP-associated factors are involved in the initiation of transcription by polymerases I and II, and probably III as well. During the formation of an active initiation complex, TBP makes specific contacts with other proteins, for example TFIIB and RNA polymerase II (refs 2-4). Here we describe the cloning and characterization of a Drosophila gene product with considerable sequence similarity to TBP and a highly restricted expression pattern in the embryo. This TBP-related factor is a DNA-binding protein but is not likely to be a basal transcription factor. Our results suggest that TBP-related factor is a sequence-specific transcription factor that shares the DNA-binding properties of TBP.
DNA glycosylases that remove alkylated and deaminated purine nucleobases are essential DNA repair enzymes that protect the genome, and at the same time confound cancer alkylation therapy, by excising cytotoxic N3-methyladenine bases formed by DNA-targeting anticancer compounds. The basis for glycosylase specificity towards N3- and N7-alkylpurines is believed to result from intrinsic instability of the modified bases and not from direct enzyme functional group chemistry. Here we present crystal structures of the recently discovered Bacillus cereus AlkD glycosylase in complex with DNAs containing alkylated, mismatched and abasic nucleotides. Unlike other glycosylases, AlkD captures the extrahelical lesion in a solvent-exposed orientation, providing an illustration for how hydrolysis of N3- and N7-alkylated bases may be facilitated by increased lifetime out of the DNA helix. The structures and supporting biochemical analysis of base flipping and catalysis reveal how the HEAT repeats of AlkD distort the DNA backbone to detect non-Watson-Crick base pairs without duplex intercalation.
The tyrosine kinase pp60v-src, encoded by the v-src oncogene, seems to regulate phosphatidylinositol metabolism. The effect of pp60v-src on control points in inositol phosphate production was examined by measuring the amounts of inositol polyphosphates in Rat-1 cells expressing wild-type or mutant forms of the protein. Expression of v-src-resulted in a five- to sevenfold elevation in the steady-state amount of an isomer of inositol tetrakisphosphate, whereas the concentrations of inositol trisphosphates or other inositol tetrakisphosphates were not affected. The activity of a key enzyme in the formation of inositol tetrakisphosphates, inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate 3-kinase, was increased six- to eightfold in cytosolic extracts prepared from the v-src-transformed cells, suggesting that this enzyme may be one target for the pp60v-src kinase and that it may participate in the synthesis of novel, higher order inositol phosphates.
Isoenzymes of alcohol dehydrogenase extracted from Drosophila melanogaster are interconvertible and can be distinguished by electrophoretic mobility. When adsorbed on diethylaminoethyl cellulose, the faster-moving forms are converted to the slowest-moving form; the latter is converted to the former in the presence of 0.05 molar nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide, and the conversion is accompanied by the binding of 3.5 moles of the dinucleotide per mole of enzyme. A change in heat stability accompanies the conversion of the slowest form of alcohol dehydrogenase to the fastest form; the latter becomes stable at 45 degrees C. The increased heat stability may indicate that a conformational change in the alcohol dehydrogenase occurs along with the binding of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide.
The tumour microenvironment can be a potent carcinogen, not only by facilitating cancer progression and activating dormant cancer cells, but also by stimulating tumour formation. We have previously investigated stromelysin-1/matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3), a stromal enzyme upregulated in many breast tumours, and found that MMP-3 can cause epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and malignant transformation in cultured cells, and genomically unstable mammary carcinomas in transgenic mice. Here we explain the molecular pathways by which MMP-3 exerts these effects: exposure of mouse mammary epithelial cells to MMP-3 induces the expression of an alternatively spliced form of Rac1, which causes an increase in cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS). The ROS stimulate the expression of the transcription factor Snail and EMT, and cause oxidative damage to DNA and genomic instability. These findings identify a previously undescribed pathway in which a component of the breast tumour microenvironment alters cellular structure in culture and tissue structure in vivo, leading to malignant transformation.
Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding protein (G protein)-linked receptors of the chemoattractant subfamily can trigger adhesion through leukocyte integrins, and in this role they are thought to regulate immune cell-cell interactions and trafficking. In lymphoid cells transfected with formyl peptide or interleukin-8 receptors, agonist stimulation activated nucleotide exchange on the small guanosine triphosphate-binding protein RhoA in seconds. Inactivation of Rho by C3 transferase exoenzyme blocked agonist-induced lymphocyte alpha4beta1 adhesion to vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and neutrophil beta2 integrin adhesion to fibrinogen. These findings suggest that Rho participates in signaling from chemoattractant receptors to trigger rapid adhesion in leukocytes.
The Src family of protein tyrosine kinases (Src-PTKs) is important in the regulation of growth and differentiation of eukaryotic cells. The activity of Src-PTKs in cells of different types is negatively controlled by Csk, which specifically phosphorylates a conserved regulatory tyrosine residue at the carboxy-terminal tail of the Src-PTKs. Csk is mainly cytoplasmic and Src-PTKs are predominantly membrane-associated. This raises a question about the mechanism of interaction between these enzymes. Here we present Cbp--a transmembrane phosphoprotein that is ubiquitously expressed and binds specifically to the SH2 domain of Csk. Cbp is involved in the membrane localization of Csk and in the Csk-mediated inhibition of c-Src. In the plasma membrane Cbp is exclusively localized in the GM1 ganglioside-enriched detergent-insoluble membrane domain, which is important in receptor-mediated signalling. These findings reveal Cbp as a new component of the regulatory mechanism controlling the activity of membrane-associated Src-PTKs.
Haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) can convert between growth states that have marked differences in bioenergetic needs. Although often quiescent in adults, these cells become proliferative upon physiological demand. Balancing HSC energetics in response to nutrient availability and growth state is poorly understood, yet essential for the dynamism of the haematopoietic system. Here we show that the Lkb1 tumour suppressor is critical for the maintenance of energy homeostasis in haematopoietic cells. Lkb1 inactivation in adult mice causes loss of HSC quiescence followed by rapid depletion of all haematopoietic subpopulations. Lkb1-deficient bone marrow cells exhibit mitochondrial defects, alterations in lipid and nucleotide metabolism, and depletion of cellular ATP. The haematopoietic effects are largely independent of Lkb1 regulation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling. Instead, these data define a central role for Lkb1 in restricting HSC entry into cell cycle and in broadly maintaining energy homeostasis in haematopoietic cells through a novel metabolic checkpoint.
Fusion of the DNA-binding domain of yeast GAL4 protein to the amino terminus of bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase yields a chimera that retains the characteristics of its components. The presence of the GAL4 peptide allows the chimeric enzyme to anchor itself on the DNA template, and this anchoring in turn drives the formation of a supercoiled DNA loop, in linear or circular templates, when RNA synthesis at the polymerase site forces a translocation of the DNA relative to the site. Nonspecific interaction between the chimeric enzyme and DNA appears to be sufficient to effect supercoiling during transcription. Transcription by the chimeric polymerase is strictly dependent on the presence of a T7 promoter; thus it provides a tool in vitro and in vivo for specifically supercoiling DNA segments containing T7 promoter sequences.
Entamoeba histolytica was found to grow normally without producing glutathione and the main enzymes of glutathione metabolism, indicating that glutathione is not essential for many eukaryotic processes. This parasitic amoeba is an unusual eukaryote whose special features may help define the crucial functions of glutathione in those eukaryotes that do use it. Since Entamoeba histolytica lacks mitochondria and the usual aerobic respiratory pathways, the finding that it grows without glutathione and other evidence support the hypothesis that a primary function of glutathione in eukaryotes involves protection against oxygen toxicity associated with mitochondria and suggest that eukaryotes may have acquired glutathione metabolism at the time that they acquired mitochondria.
The primary structure of the poliovirus genome has been determined. The RNA molecule is 7,433 nucleotides long, polyadenylated at the 3' terminus, and covalently linked to a small protein (VPg) at the 5' terminus. An open reading frame of 2,207 consecutive triplets spans over 89% of the nucleotide sequence and codes for the viral polyprotein NCVPOO. Twelve viral polypeptides have been mapped by amino acid sequence analysis and were found to be proteolytic cleavage products of the polyprotein, cleavages occurring predominantly at Gln-Gly pairs.
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP kinases) are common components of signaling pathways induced by diverse growth stimuli. Although the guanidine nucleotide-binding Ras proteins are known to be upstream activators of MAP kinases, the extent to which MAP kinases directly contribute to the mitogenic effect of Ras is as yet undefined. In this study, inhibition of MAP kinases by the MAP kinase phosphatase MKP-1 blocked the induction of DNA synthesis in quiescent rat embryonic fibroblast REF-52 cells by an activated mutant of Ras, V12Ras. These results suggest an essential role for activation of MAP kinases in the transition from the quiescent to the DNA replication phase of the eukaryotic cell cycle.
Gangliosides are unique acidic glycolipids that are selectively concentrated in the plasma membrane of cells. Surface labeling studies have demonstrated that at least a portion of the oligosaccharde chain of gangliosides extends beyond the hydrophe) is imbedded in the membrane bilayer. It is becoming increasingly apparent that gangliosides participate in the internalization of environmental signals elicited by cholera toxin and glycoprotein hormones such as thyrotropic hormone and chorionic gonadotropin as well as other substances such as interferon and possibly serotonin. The mechanism by which cholera toxin binds to a specific ganglioside receptor on the celraction of trophic agents with gangliosides. We would predict that analyogous phenomena involving gangliosides will be discovered in brain. The biosynthesis of gangliosides proceeds by the ordered sequential addition of sugars to the lipid moiety. These reactions are catalyzed by a cluster of membrane-bound glycosyltransferases. Any alteration in the activity or specificity of one of these enzymes will result in a dramatic change in the ganglioside pattern of an afflicted cell or organ. The drastic consequences that accompany abnormalities of ganglioside synthesis have been documented in a heritable metabolic disorder in vivo and in tumorigenic transformation of cells in vitro. In this article, we have attempted to unify these observations and to provide a reasonable interpretation of the role of gangliosides in mediating cell surface phenomena.
Like other transforming genes of retroviruses, the v-myc gene of the avian virus, MC29, has a homologue in the genome of normal eukaryotic cells. The human cellular homologue, c-myc, located on human chromosome 8, region q24 leads to qter (refs 1, 2), is translocated into the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus on human chromosome 14 (ref. 3) in Burkitt's lymphoma, suggesting that c-myc has a primary role in transformation of some human haematopoietic cells. In addition, c-myc is amplified in the human promyelocytic leukaemia cell line, HL60 (refs 6, 7) which also contains high levels of c-myc mRNA. Recently, Colby et al. reported the nucleotide sequence of the human c-myc DNA isolated from a genomic recombinant DNA library derived from human fetal liver. This 4,053-base pair (bp) sequence includes two exons and one intron of the myc gene, and the authors have suggested the existence of a human c-myc mRNA of 2,291 nucleotides that has a coding capacity for a protein of molecular weight (Mr) 48,812. We have approached the problem of accurately defining the characteristics of the human c-myc mRNA and c-myc protein by determining the sequence of the c-myc cDNA isolated from a cDNA library prepared from mRNA of a clone of the K562 human leukaemic cell line. K562 cells are known to contain c-myc mRNA which is similar in size to the c-myc mRNA of other human cell types. We report here the sequence of 2,121 nucleotides of a human c-myc mRNA and demonstrate that its 5' noncoding sequence does not correspond to the sequence of the reported genomic human sequence. However, our data confirm that the intact human c-myc mRNA can encode a 48,812-Mr protein with a sequence identical to that reported by Colby et al.
One of the striking features of the proteolytic enzymes as a group is the immense variety of biological functions served by enzymes employing one of a few basic mechanisms. For example, in the higher animals, enzymes for activation of zymogens (trypsin), for digestion of dietary proteins (trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase), for blood clotting (thrombin), for clot lysis (plasmin), and for sensing pain (kallikrein) all appear to use the same mechanism and to have evolved from the same ancestral gene by the process of gene duplication and subsequent divergent evolution. Equally striking is the variety of chemical solutions of the same functional problem, such as the peptide-bond cleavage by sulfhydryl proteases on the one hand and serine proteases on the other.
Recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified a locus on chromosome 1p13 strongly associated with both plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and myocardial infarction (MI) in humans. Here we show through a series of studies in human cohorts and human-derived hepatocytes that a common noncoding polymorphism at the 1p13 locus, rs12740374, creates a C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein) transcription factor binding site and alters the hepatic expression of the SORT1 gene. With small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown and viral overexpression in mouse liver, we demonstrate that Sort1 alters plasma LDL-C and very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) particle levels by modulating hepatic VLDL secretion. Thus, we provide functional evidence for a novel regulatory pathway for lipoprotein metabolism and suggest that modulation of this pathway may alter risk for MI in humans. We also demonstrate that common noncoding DNA variants identified by GWASs can directly contribute to clinical phenotypes.
In higher eukaryotes, steroid receptors are general modulators of gene activity which bind to DNA hormone response elements (HREs) in the vicinity of regulated promoters. Analysis of mutant and chimaeric receptor proteins in gene transfer experiments has identified the domains responsible for hormone binding, interaction with the HREs and transactivation, but the transactivating function of hormone receptors has proved difficult to reproduce in cell-free assays. Here we describe a crude in vitro system in which transcription from the mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) promoter is increased up to 10-fold by native progesterone receptor from rabbit uterus. The stimulatory effect must depend on receptor binding to the MMTV-HRE as it is abolished by deletion or mutation of the HRE and by HRE-oligonucleotide competition. The nuclear factor-I binding site immediately downstream of the HRE, however, does not appear to be essential to progesterone receptor-mediated in vitro stimulation of MMTV transcription. The transactivation activity of the progesterone receptor depends on binding of a functional ligand and so this assay should be useful for dissection of the mechanism of transcription activation by steroid hormones.
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) detoxifies cells by exporting hundreds of chemically unrelated toxins but has been implicated in multidrug resistance (MDR) in the treatment of cancers. Substrate promiscuity is a hallmark of P-gp activity, thus a structural description of poly-specific drug-binding is important for the rational design of anticancer drugs and MDR inhibitors. The x-ray structure of apo P-gp at 3.8 angstroms reveals an internal cavity of approximately 6000 angstroms cubed with a 30 angstrom separation of the two nucleotide-binding domains. Two additional P-gp structures with cyclic peptide inhibitors demonstrate distinct drug-binding sites in the internal cavity capable of stereoselectivity that is based on hydrophobic and aromatic interactions. Apo and drug-bound P-gp structures have portals open to the cytoplasm and the inner leaflet of the lipid bilayer for drug entry. The inward-facing conformation represents an initial stage of the transport cycle that is competent for drug binding.
Interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme (ICE) processes an inactive precursor to the proinflammatory cytokine, interleukin-1 beta, and may regulate programmed cell death in neuronal cells. The high-resolution structure of human ICE in complex with an inhibitor has been determined by X-ray diffraction. The structure confirms the relationship between human ICE and cell-death proteins in other organisms. The active site spans both the 10 and 20K subunits, which associate to form a tetramer, suggesting a mechanism for ICE autoactivation.
The RAD3 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is required for excision repair of ultraviolet-damaged DNA and is essential for cell viability. The RAD3-encoded protein shares a high degree of homology with the human ERCC2(XPD) gene product. Mutations in XPD, besides causing the cancer-prone syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum, can also result in Cockayne's syndrome and trichothiodystrophy. To investigate the role of RAD3 in viability, we examined here the effect of a recessive, temperature-sensitive (ts) conditional lethal mutation of the gene on transcription by RNA polymerase II. Upon transfer to the restrictive temperature, the rad3-ts mutant rapidly ceases growth and poly(A)+ RNA synthesis is inhibited drastically. Messenger RNA levels of all the genes examined, HIS3, TRP3, STE2, MET19, RAD23, CDC7, CDC9 and ACT1, decline rapidly upon loss of RAD3 activity. The synthesis of heat-shock-inducible HSP26 mRNA and galactose-inducible GAL7 and GAL10 mRNAs is also drastically inhibited in the rad3-ts mutant at the restrictive temperature. The RNA polymerase II transcriptional activity in extract from the rad3-ts14 strain is thermolabile, and this in vitro transcriptional defect can be fully corrected by the addition of homogeneous RAD3 protein. These findings indicate that RAD3 protein has a direct and essential role in RNA polymerase II transcription.
The RNA polymerase elongation complex (EC) is both highly stable and processive, rapidly extending RNA chains for thousands of nucleotides. Understanding the mechanisms of elongation and its regulation requires detailed information about the structural organization of the EC. Here we report the 2.5-A resolution structure of the Thermus thermophilus EC; the structure reveals the post-translocated intermediate with the DNA template in the active site available for pairing with the substrate. DNA strand separation occurs one position downstream of the active site, implying that only one substrate at a time can specifically bind to the EC. The upstream edge of the RNA/DNA hybrid stacks on the beta'-subunit 'lid' loop, whereas the first displaced RNA base is trapped within a protein pocket, suggesting a mechanism for RNA displacement. The RNA is threaded through the RNA exit channel, where it adopts a conformation mimicking that of a single strand within a double helix, providing insight into a mechanism for hairpin-dependent pausing and termination.
Protein dephosphorylation by phosphatase PP1 plays a central role in mediating the effects of insulin on glucose and lipid metabolism. A PP1C-targeting protein expressed in 3T3-L1 adipocytes (called PTG, for protein targeting to glycogen) was cloned and characterized. PTG was expressed predominantly in insulin-sensitive tissues. In addition to binding and localizing PP1C to glycogen, PTG formed complexes with phosphorylase kinase, phosphorylase a, and glycogen synthase, the primary enzymes involved in the hormonal regulation of glycogen metabolism. Overexpression of PTG markedly increased basal and insulin-stimulated glycogen synthesis in Chinese hamster ovary cells overexpressing the insulin receptor, which do not express endogenous PTG. These results suggest that PTG is critical for glycogen metabolism, possibly functioning as a molecular scaffold.
gamma-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurotransmission is widespread in vertebrate and invertebrate nervous systems. Here we use a genetic approach to identify molecules specific to GABA function. On the basis of the known in vivo roles of GABAergic neurons in controlling behaviour of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, we identified mutants defective in GABA-mediated behaviours. Five genes are necessary either for GABAergic neuronal differentiation or for pre- or postsynaptic GABAergic function. The gene unc-30 is required for the differentiation of a specific type of GABAergic neuron, the type-D inhibitory motor neuron. The gene unc-25 is necessary for GABA expression and probably encodes the GABA biosynthetic enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase. The genes unc-46 and unc-47 seem to be required for normal GABA release. Finally, the gene unc-49 is apparently necessary postsynaptically for the inhibitory effect of GABA on the body muscles and might encode a protein needed for the function of a GABAA-like receptor. Some of these genes are likely to encode previously unidentified proteins required for GABA function.
Citrullinaemia is a human inborn error of metabolism resulting from the deficiency of argininosuccinate synthetase. In a previous study of cultured skin fibroblasts from citrullinaemia patients, we showed that the presumed defects in DNA were not detectable by Southern blotting analysis, and that only 2 of 11 cell lines contained detectable enzyme antigen. All citrullinaemia cell lines contained hybridizable mRNA but slight size heterogeneity was noted. Here we report the extension of the analysis of the RNA using S1 nuclease mapping techniques. Among six cell lines examined, five showed an abnormality of mRNA detectable by S1 nuclease analysis. The data indicate that a minimum of three out of five non-consanguineous patients represent compound heterozygotes. The S1 nuclease detectable defects may represent deletions or rearrangements in the genomic DNA, or more probably represent examples of abnormal RNA splicing. The approach used here is useful for molecular analysis of genetic defects, for prenatal diagnosis, and for study of genetic variation.
An antigen detection system, termed immuno-polymerase chain reaction (immuno-PCR), was developed in which a specific DNA molecule is used as the marker. A streptavidin-protein A chimera that possesses tight and specific binding affinity both for biotin and immunoglobulin G was used to attach a biotinylated DNA specifically to antigen-monoclonal antibody complexes that had been immobilized on microtiter plate wells. Then, a segment of the attached DNA was amplified by PCR. Analysis of the PCR products by agarose gel electrophoresis after staining with ethidium bromide allowed as few as 580 antigen molecules (9.6 x 10(-22) moles) to be readily and reproducibly detected. Direct comparison with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with the use of a chimera-alkaline phosphatase conjugate demonstrates that enhancement (approximately x 10(5)) in detection sensitivity was obtained with the use of immuno-PCR. Given the enormous amplification capability and specificity of PCR, this immuno-PCR technology has a sensitivity greater than any existing antigen detection system and, in principle, could be applied to the detection of single antigen molecules.
Holliday proposed a four-way DNA junction as an intermediate in homologous recombination, and such Holliday junctions have since been identified as a central component in DNA recombination and repair. Phage T4 endonuclease VII (endo VII) was the first enzyme shown to resolve Holliday junctions into duplex DNAs by introducing symmetrical nicks in equivalent strands. Several Holliday junction resolvases have since been characterized, but an atomic structure of a resolvase complex with a Holliday junction remained elusive. Here we report the crystal structure of an inactive T4 endo VII(N62D) complexed with an immobile four-way junction with alternating arm lengths of 10 and 14 base pairs. The junction is a hybrid of the conventional square-planar and stacked-X conformation. Endo VII protrudes into the junction point from the minor groove side, opening it to a 14 A x 32 A parallelogram. This interaction interrupts the coaxial stacking, yet every base pair surrounding the junction remains intact. Additional interactions involve the positively charged protein and DNA phosphate backbones. Each scissile phosphate that is two base pairs from the crossover interacts with a Mg2+ ion in the active site. The similar overall shape and surface charge potential of the Holliday junction resolvases endo VII, RuvC, Ydc2, Hjc and RecU, despite having different folds, active site composition and DNA sequence preference, suggest a conserved binding mode for Holliday junctions.
Phosphorylation of the human histone variant H2A.X and H2Av, its homolog in Drosophila melanogaster, occurs rapidly at sites of DNA double-strand breaks. Little is known about the function of this phosphorylation or its removal during DNA repair. Here, we demonstrate that the Drosophila Tip60 (dTip60) chromatin-remodeling complex acetylates nucleosomal phospho-H2Av and exchanges it with an unmodified H2Av. Both the histone acetyltransferase dTip60 as well as the adenosine triphosphatase Domino/p400 catalyze the exchange of phospho-H2Av. Thus, these data reveal a previously unknown mechanism for selective histone exchange that uses the concerted action of two distinct chromatin-remodeling enzymes within the same multiprotein complex.
Kinetic data on a number of protein-protein associations have provided evidence for the initial formation of a pre-equilibrium encounter complex that subsequently relaxes to the final stereospecific complex. Site-directed mutagenesis and brownian dynamics simulations have suggested that the rate of association can be modulated by perturbations in charge distribution outside the direct interaction surfaces. Furthermore, rate enhancement through non-specific binding may occur by either a reduction in dimensionality or the presence of a short-range, non-specific attractive potential. Here, using paramagnetic relaxation enhancement, we directly demonstrate the existence and visualize the distribution of an ensemble of transient, non-specific encounter complexes under equilibrium conditions for a relatively weak protein-protein complex between the amino-terminal domain of enzyme I and the phosphocarrier protein HPr. Neither the stereospecific complex alone nor any single alternative conformation can account fully for the intermolecular paramagnetic relaxation enhancement data. Restrained rigid-body simulated annealing refinement against the paramagnetic relaxation enhancement data enables us to obtain an atomic probability distribution map of the non-specific encounter complex ensemble that qualitatively correlates with the electrostatic surface potentials on the interacting proteins. Qualitatively similar results are presented for two other protein-protein complexes.
The evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis and ensuing oxygenation of Earth's atmosphere represent a major transition in the history of life. Although many organisms retreated to anoxic environments, others evolved to use oxygen as a high-potential redox couple while concomitantly mitigating its toxicity. To understand the changes in biochemistry and enzymology that accompanied adaptation to O2, we integrated network analysis with information on enzyme evolution to infer how oxygen availability changed the architecture of metabolic networks. Our analysis revealed the existence of four discrete groups of networks of increasing complexity, with transitions between groups being contingent on the presence of key metabolites, including molecular oxygen, which was required for transition into the largest networks.
The intervening sequence (IVS) of the Tetrahymena ribosomal RNA precursor is excised as a linear RNA molecule which subsequently cyclizes itself in a protein-independent reaction. Cyclization involves cleavage of the linear IVS RNA 15 nucleotides from its 5' end and formation of a phosphodiester bond between the new 5' phosphate and the original 3'-hydroxyl terminus of the IVS. This recombination mechanism is analogous to that by which splicing of the precursor RNA is achieved. The circular molecules appear to have no direct function in RNA splicing, and we propose the cyclization serves to prevent unwanted RNA from driving the splicing reactions backwards.
The 'pleckstrin homology' or PH domain is a 100-residue protein module. It is present in many kinases, different isoforms of phospholipase C, GTPase-activating proteins and nucleotide-exchange factors. Its function is not known, but many proteins that contain a PH domain interact with GTP-binding proteins. The PH domain in beta-adrenergic receptor kinase may be involved in binding to the beta gamma subunits of a trimeric G-protein. We report here the three-dimensional structure of the PH domain of the cytoskeletal protein spectrin using homonuclear nuclear magnetic resonance. The core of the molecule is an antiparallel beta-sheet consisting of seven strands. The C terminus is folded into a long alpha-helix, and another helix is present in one of the surface loops. The molecule is electrostatically polarized and contains a pocket which may be involved in the binding of a ligand. There is a distant relationship to the peptidyl-prolyl-cis-trans-isomerase FKBP in which this pocket is involved in the binding of the macrocyclic compound FK506 (refs 8-11).
Alkyltransferase-like proteins (ATLs) share functional motifs with the cancer chemotherapy target O(6)-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase (AGT) and paradoxically protect cells from the biological effects of DNA alkylation damage, despite lacking the reactive cysteine and alkyltransferase activity of AGT. Here we determine Schizosaccharomyces pombe ATL structures without and with damaged DNA containing the endogenous lesion O(6)-methylguanine or cigarette-smoke-derived O(6)-4-(3-pyridyl)-4-oxobutylguanine. These results reveal non-enzymatic DNA nucleotide flipping plus increased DNA distortion and binding pocket size compared to AGT. Our analysis of lesion-binding site conservation identifies new ATLs in sea anemone and ancestral archaea, indicating that ATL interactions are ancestral to present-day repair pathways in all domains of life. Genetic connections to mammalian XPG (also known as ERCC5) and ERCC1 in S. pombe homologues Rad13 and Swi10 and biochemical interactions with Escherichia coli UvrA and UvrC combined with structural results reveal that ATLs sculpt alkylated DNA to create a genetic and structural intersection of base damage processing with nucleotide excision repair.
Retrovirus protease is an enzyme that cleaves gag and gag-pol precursor polyproteins into the functional proteins of mature virus particles. The correct processing of precursor polyproteins is necessary for the infectivity of virus particles: in vitro mutagenesis which introduces deletions into the murine leukaemia virus genome produces a protease-defective virus of immature core form and lacking infectivity. A therapeutic drug effective against disease caused by retrovirus proliferation could likewise interfere with virus maturation. The primary structure has so far been determined for the protease of avian myeloblastosis virus, and of murine, feline and bovine leukaemia viruses. Amino acid sequencing of the retrovirus proteases, either after their purification or from prediction from the nucleotide sequence, shows that they possess the Asp-Thr-Gly sequence characteristic of the aspartyl proteinases. In this report we show that retrovirus proteases belong to the aspartyl proteinase group and demonstrate an inhibition by the aspartyl proteinase-specific inhibitor, pepstatin A, on the activity of bovine leukaemia, Moloney murine leukaemia and human T-cell leukaemia virus proteases.
Gradients of chemoattractants elicit signaling events at the leading edge of a cell even though chemoattractant receptors are uniformly distributed on the cell surface. In highly polarized Dictyostelium discoideum amoebas, membrane-associated betagamma subunits of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) were localized in a shallow anterior-posterior gradient. A uniformly applied chemoattractant generated binding sites for pleckstrin homology (PH) domains on the inner surface of the membrane in a pattern similar to that of the Gbetagamma subunits. Loss of cell polarity resulted in uniform distribution of both the Gbetagamma subunits and the sensitivity of PH domain recruitment. These observations indicate that Gbetagamma subunits are not sufficiently localized to restrict signaling events to the leading edge but that their distribution may determine the relative chemotactic sensitivity of polarized cells.
Within the field of DNA replication, considerable interest has focused in recent years on the mechanism of initiation of synthesis of DNA molecules. In vitro replication systems from Escherichia coli have been instrumental in uncovering a priming function fo9r ribonucleotides on the earliest intermediates of DNA polymerisation in vitro and in identifying the proteins involved. In vitro replication systems from mammalian cells that permit the use of the phosphate-transfer method for detection of RNA-DNA junctions as well as direct labelling of the RNA moiety of the molecules have suggested a similar role for ribonucleotides in DNA synthesis in eukaryotes. However, the existence of this mechanism in mammalian cells in vivo has not been established. Here we report the first evidence that a significant proportion of the earliest intermediates in mammalian DNA polymerisation in vivo do, in fact, possess ribonucleotides, presumably because their synthesis was initiated with one or more ribonucleotides.
Proteins are not the only catalysts of cellular reactions; there is a growing list of RNA molecules that catalyze RNA cleavage and joining reactions. The chemical mechanisms of RNA-catalyzed reactions are discussed with emphasis on the self-splicing ribosomal RNA precursor of Tetrahymena and the enzymatic activities of its intervening sequence RNA. Wherever appropriate, catalysis by RNA is compared to catalysis by protein enzymes.
Eukaryotic flagella and cilia are built on a 9 + 2 array of microtubules plus >250 accessory proteins, forming a biological machine called the axoneme. Here we describe the three-dimensional structure of rapidly frozen axonemes from Chlamydomonas and sea urchin sperm, using cryoelectron tomography and image processing to focus on the motor enzyme dynein. Our images suggest a model for the way dynein generates force to slide microtubules. They also reveal two dynein linkers that may provide "hard-wiring" to coordinate motor enzyme action, both circumferentially and along the axoneme. Periodic densities were also observed inside doublet microtubules; these may contribute to doublet stability.
The biological function of biomacromolecules such as DNA and enzymes depends on their ability to perform and control molecular association, catalysis, self-replication or other chemical processes. In the case of proteins in particular, the dependence of these functions on the three-dimensional protein conformation is long known and has inspired the development of synthetic oligomers and polymers with the capacity to fold in a controlled manner, but it remains challenging to design these so-called 'foldamers' so that they are capable of inducing or controlling chemical processes and interactions. Here we show that the stability gained from folding can be used to control the synthesis of oligomers from short chain segments reversibly ligated through an imine metathesis reaction. That is, folding shifts the ligation equilibrium in favour of conformationally ordered sequences, so that oligomers having the most stable solution structures form preferentially. Crystallization has previously been used to shift an equilibrium in order to indirectly influence the synthesis of small molecules, but the present approach to selectively prepare macromolecules with stable conformations directly connects folding and synthesis, emphasizing molecular function rather than structure in polymer synthesis.
Site-directed mutagenesis is a very powerful approach to altering the biological functions of proteins, the structural stability of proteins and the interactions of proteins with other molecules. Several experimental studies in recent years have been directed at estimating the changes in catalytic properties, (rates of binding and catalysis) in site-directed mutants of enzymes compared to the native enzymes. Simulation approaches to the study of complex molecules have also become more powerful, in no small measure owing to the increase in computer power. These simulations have often allowed results of experiments to be rationalized and understood mechanistically. A new approach called the free-energy pertubation method, which uses statistical mechanics and molecular dynamics can often be used for quantitative calculation of free energy differences. We have applied such a technique to calculate the differential free energy of binding and free energy of activation for catalysis of a tripeptide substrate by native subtilisin and a subtilisin mutant (Asn 155----Ala 155). Our studies lead to a calculated difference in free energy of binding which is relatively small, but a calculated change in free energy of catalysis which is substantial. These energies are very close to those determined experimentally (J. A. Wells and D. A. Estell, personal communication), which were not known to us until the simulations were completed. This demonstrates the predictive power and utility of theoretical simulation methods in studies of the effects of site-specific mutagenesis on both enzyme binding and catalysis.
The unrelenting emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacterial pathogens demands the investigation of antibiotics with new modes of action. The pseudopeptide antibiotic andrimid is a nanomolar inhibitor of the bacterial acetyl-CoA carboxylase that catalyses the first committed step in prokaryotic fatty acid biosynthesis. Recently, the andrimid (adm) biosynthetic gene cluster was isolated and heterologously expressed in Escherichia coli. This establishes a heterologous biological host in which to rapidly probe features of andrimid formation and to use biosynthetic engineering to make unnatural variants of this important and promising new class of antibiotics. Bioinformatic analysis of the adm cluster revealed a dissociated biosynthetic assembly system lacking canonical amide synthases between the first three carrier protein domains. Here we report that AdmF, a transglutaminase (TGase) homologue, catalyses the formation of the first amide bond, an N-acyl-beta-peptide link, in andrimid biosynthesis. Hence, AdmF is a newly discovered biosynthetic enzyme that acts as a stand-alone amide synthase between protein-bound, thiotemplated substrates in an antibiotic enzymatic assembly line. TGases (enzyme class (EC) 2.3.2.13) normally catalyse the cross-linking of (poly)peptides by creating isopeptidic bonds between the gamma-carboxamide group of a glutamine side chain of one protein and various amine donors, including lysine side chains. To the best of our knowledge, the present study constitutes the first report of a TGase-like enzyme recruited for the assembly of an antibiotic. Moreover, genome mining using the AdmF sequence yielded additional TGases in unassigned natural product biosynthetic pathways. With many more microbial genomes being sequenced, such a strategy could potentially unearth biosynthetic pathways producing new classes of antibiotics.
A gene for ribonuclease S protein, has been chemically synthesized and cloned. The gene is designed to have 25 specific restriction endonuclease sites spaced at short intervals, permitting its structure to be rapidly modified. This flexibility facilitates tests of hypotheses relating the primary structure of the enzyme to its physical and catalytic behavior.
The recent development of techniques for recording currents through single ionic channels has led to the identification of a K+-specific channel that is activated by cytoplasmic Ca2+. The channel has complex properties, being activated by depolarizing voltages and having a voltage-sensitivity that is modulated by cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels. The conduction behaviour of the channel is also unusual, its high ionic selectivity being displayed simultaneously with a very high unitary conductance. Very little is known about the biochemistry of this channel, largely due to the lack of a suitable ligand for use as a biochemical probe for the channel. We describe here a protein inhibitor of single Ca2+-activated K+ channels of mammalian skeletal muscle. This inhibitor, a minor component of the venom of the Israeli scorpion, Leiurus quinquestriatus, reversibly blocks the large Ca2+-activated K+ channel in a simple biomolecular reaction. We have partially purified the active component, a basic protein of relative molecular mass (Mr) approximately 7,000.
A model is proposed to explain the presence of the e antigen (HBeAg) of hepatitis B virus (HBV) in the serum of individuals infected with this virus. The e antigen, which has only recently been characterized, is a fragment of the virus core, or nucleocapsid, protein. Serum HBeAg is a valuable clinical marker for active HBV infection because its appearance correlates both with virus replication in the liver and with the presence of circulating virions. In this study a protease-like amino acid sequence was identified at the amino terminus of the core protein sequence. Experimental evidence indicates that HBeAg may be produced by proteolytic self-cleavage of the core protein.
The chicken adult beta-globin gene is one of the more intensively investigated developmentally regulated loci in higher eukaryotes. Detailed molecular analysis of the locus allows precise examination of the chromosomal changes that occur on activation of the gene during erythroid maturation. The best studied of these changes are the acquisition of DNase I hypersensitivity, developmentally correlated alteration of CpG-specific cytosine methylation patterns and in vitro assembly of erythroid-specific protein complexes 5' to the gene that mimics in vivo creation of the 5' DNase I hypersensitive 'region' lying 60 to 260 nucleotides 5' to the beta-globin cap site in red blood cell chromatin. Here we demonstrate that proximal beta-globin DNA sequences lying greater than 112 base pairs (bp) 5' to the cap site are not involved in determining the erythroid-specific induction characteristics of this gene in transient expression assays, whereas an enhancer sequence within a 300-bp PvuII fragment lying approximately 400 nucleotides 3' to the polyadenylation signal is intimately involved in determining the erythroid cell specificity and correct time of induction of beta-globin transcription during red cell maturation.
The genome of the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi B31, the aetiologic agent of Lyme disease, contains a linear chromosome of 910,725 base pairs and at least 17 linear and circular plasmids with a combined size of more than 533,000 base pairs. The chromosome contains 853 genes encoding a basic set of proteins for DNA replication, transcription, translation, solute transport and energy metabolism, but, like Mycoplasma genitalium, it contains no genes for cellular biosynthetic reactions. Because B. burgdorferi and M. genitalium are distantly related eubacteria, we suggest that their limited metabolic capacities reflect convergent evolution by gene loss from more metabolically competent progenitors. Of 430 genes on 11 plasmids, most have no known biological function; 39% of plasmid genes are paralogues that form 47 gene families. The biological significance of the multiple plasmid-encoded genes is not clear, although they may be involved in antigenic variation or immune evasion.
Immune responses have been described for many different insect species. However, it is generally acknowledged that immune systems must therefore differ from those of vertebrates. An effective humoral immune response has been found in pupae of the cecropia moth, Hyalophora cecropia. The expression of this multicomponent system requires de novo synthesis of RNA and proteins and its broad antibacterial activity is due to at least three independent mechanisms, the most well known of which is the insect lysozyme. However, this enzyme is bactericidal for only a limited number of Gram-positive bacteria. WE recently purified and characterized P9A and P9B, which are two small, basic proteins with potent antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli and several other Gram-negative bacteria. We believe that P9A and P9B plays an important part in the humoral immune responses described previously and that the P9 proteins represent a new class of antibacterial agents for which we propose the name cecropins. We describe here the primary structures of cecropins A and B. We also show that cecropin A is specific for bacteria in contrast to melittin, the main lytic component in bee venom which lyses both bacteria and eukaryotic cells.
Magnesium is abundant in the mammalian body and the second most abundant cation in cells. Because the concentration of intracellular free Mg2+ is relatively high (0.2-1 mM), Mg2+ is unlikely to act as a second messenger, like Ca2+, by rapidly changing its cytosolic concentration. But changes in Mg2+ do have profound effects on cellular metabolism, structure and bioenergetics. Key enzymes or metabolic pathways, mitochondrial ion transport, Ca2+ channel activities in the plasma membrane and intracellular organelles, ATP-requiring reactions, and structural properties of cells and nucleic acids are modified by changes in Mg2+ concentration. Yet, although some information is available from giant cells and bacteria, little is known about the regulation of intracellular Mg2+ in mammalian cells. Here we report a new transport mechanism for Mg2+ across the sarcolemma of cardiac cells in both intact hearts and dissociated myocytes. We show that noradrenaline, through beta-adrenergic stimulation and increase of cyclic AMP, stimulates a large efflux of Mg2+ from cardiac cells. This transport is of major dimensions and can move up to 20% of total cellular Mg2+ within a few minutes.
Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) are characterized by abnormal protein deposits, often with large amyloid fibrils. However, questions have arisen as to whether such fibrils or smaller subfibrillar oligomers are the prime causes of disease. Abnormal deposits in TSEs are rich in PrP(res), a protease-resistant form of the PrP protein with the ability to convert the normal, protease-sensitive form of the protein (PrP(sen)) into PrP(res) (ref. 3). TSEs can be transmitted between organisms by an enigmatic agent (prion) that contains PrP(res) (refs 4 and 5). To evaluate systematically the relationship between infectivity, converting activity and the size of various PrP(res)-containing aggregates, PrP(res) was partially disaggregated, fractionated by size and analysed by light scattering and non-denaturing gel electrophoresis. Our analyses revealed that with respect to PrP content, infectivity and converting activity peaked markedly in 17-27-nm (300-600 kDa) particles, whereas these activities were substantially lower in large fibrils and virtually absent in oligomers of < or =5 PrP molecules. These results suggest that non-fibrillar particles, with masses equivalent to 14-28 PrP molecules, are the most efficient initiators of TSE disease.
Laboratory evolution has generated many biomolecules with desired properties, but a single round of mutation, gene expression, screening or selection, and replication typically requires days or longer with frequent human intervention. Because evolutionary success is dependent on the total number of rounds performed, a means of performing laboratory evolution continuously and rapidly could dramatically enhance its effectiveness. Although researchers have accelerated individual steps in the evolutionary cycle, the only previous example of continuous directed evolution was the landmark study of Wright and Joyce, who continuously evolved RNA ligase ribozymes with an in vitro replication cycle that unfortunately cannot be easily adapted to other biomolecules. Here we describe a system that enables the continuous directed evolution of gene-encoded molecules that can be linked to protein production in Escherichia coli. During phage-assisted continuous evolution (PACE), evolving genes are transferred from host cell to host cell through a modified bacteriophage life cycle in a manner that is dependent on the activity of interest. Dozens of rounds of evolution can occur in a single day of PACE without human intervention. Using PACE, we evolved T7 RNA polymerase (RNAP) variants that recognize a distinct promoter, initiate transcripts with ATP instead of GTP, and initiate transcripts with CTP. In one example, PACE executed 200 rounds of protein evolution over the course of 8 days. Starting from undetectable activity levels in two of these cases, enzymes with each of the three target activities emerged in less than 1 week of PACE. In all three cases, PACE-evolved polymerase activities exceeded or were comparable to that of the wild-type T7 RNAP on its wild-type promoter, representing improvements of up to several hundred-fold. By greatly accelerating laboratory evolution, PACE may provide solutions to otherwise intractable directed evolution problems and address novel questions about molecular evolution.
A technique was developed for studying protein-DNA recognition that can be applied to any purified protein, partially purified protein, or cloned gene. From oligonucleotides in which particular positions are of random sequence, that subset to which a given protein binds is amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and sequenced as a pool. These selected and amplified binding site (SAAB) "imprints" provide a characteristic set of preferred sequences for protein binding. With this technique, it was shown that homo- and heterooligomers of the helix-loop-helix proteins MyoD and E2A recognize a common consensus sequence, CA--TG, but otherwise bind to flanking and internal positions with different sequence preferences that suggest half-site recognition. These findings suggest that different combinations of dimeric proteins can have different binding sequence preferences.
The catalytic mechanism of the 20S proteasome from the archaebacterium Thermoplasma acidophilum has been analyzed by site-directed mutagenesis of the beta subunit and by inhibitor studies. Deletion of the amino-terminal threonine or its mutation to alanine led to inactivation of the enzyme. Mutation of the residue to serine led to a fully active enzyme, which was over ten times more sensitive to the serine protease inhibitor 3,4-dichloroisocoumarin. In combination with the crystal structure of a proteasome-inhibitor complex, the data show that the nucleophilic attack is mediated by the amino-terminal threonine of processed beta subunits. The conservation pattern of this residue in eukaryotic sequences suggests that at least three of the seven eukaryotic beta-type subunit branches should be proteolytically inactive.
The GTPase cycle is a versatile regulatory mechanism directing many cell functions, and Rab family members use it to regulate intracellular transport. Current models propose that GTP hydrolysis by Rab proteins is either required for membrane fusion or occurs afterwards to allow recycling of the protein. To measure the GTPase activity of Rab5 in endocytic membrane fusion, we engineered a mutant that preferentially binds xanthosine 5'-triphosphate (XTP),Rab5(D136N) and monitored the kinetics of [alpha(32)P]-XTP hydrolysis in situ during endosome fusion in vitro. Surprisingly, nucleotide hydrolysis occurred even in the absence of membrane fusion, indicating that membrane-bound Rab5 undergoes futile cycles of GTP(XTP) binding and hydrolysis. Nucleotide triphosphate hydrolysis by Rab5 is not conditional on membrane fusion and is reduced by its effector Rabaptin-5. Our data reveal that the GTP cycle of Rab proteins differs from that of other GTPases (for example, EF-Tu) and indicate that GTP hydrolysis acts as a timer that determines the frequency of membrane docking/fusion events.
We characterized an activation mechanism of the human LTRPC2 protein, a member of the transient receptor potential family of ion channels, and demonstrated that LTRPC2 mediates Ca2+ influx into immunocytes. Intracellular pyrimidine nucleotides, adenosine 5'-diphosphoribose (ADPR), and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), directly activated LTRPC2, which functioned as a Ca2+-permeable nonselective cation channel and enabled Ca2+ influx into cells. This activation was suppressed by intracellular adenosine triphosphate. These results reveal that ADPR and NAD act as intracellular messengers and may have an important role in Ca2+ influx by activating LTRPC2 in immunocytes.
Drosophila endogenous small RNAs are categorized according to their mechanisms of biogenesis and the Argonaute protein to which they bind. MicroRNAs are a class of ubiquitously expressed RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotides in length, which arise from structured precursors through the action of Drosha-Pasha and Dicer-1-Loquacious complexes. These join Argonaute-1 to regulate gene expression. A second endogenous small RNA class, the Piwi-interacting RNAs, bind Piwi proteins and suppress transposons. Piwi-interacting RNAs are restricted to the gonad, and at least a subset of these arises by Piwi-catalysed cleavage of single-stranded RNAs. Here we show that Drosophila generates a third small RNA class, endogenous small interfering RNAs, in both gonadal and somatic tissues. Production of these RNAs requires Dicer-2, but a subset depends preferentially on Loquacious rather than the canonical Dicer-2 partner, R2D2 (ref. 14). Endogenous small interfering RNAs arise both from convergent transcription units and from structured genomic loci in a tissue-specific fashion. They predominantly join Argonaute-2 and have the capacity, as a class, to target both protein-coding genes and mobile elements. These observations expand the repertoire of small RNAs in Drosophila, adding a class that blurs distinctions based on known biogenesis mechanisms and functional roles.
Bacterial NusG is a highly conserved transcription factor that is required for most Rho activity in vivo. We show by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy that Escherichia coli NusG carboxyl-terminal domain forms a complex alternatively with Rho or with transcription factor NusE, a protein identical to 30S ribosomal protein S10. Because NusG amino-terminal domain contacts RNA polymerase and the NusG carboxy-terminal domain interaction site of NusE is accessible in the ribosomal 30S subunit, NusG may act as a link between transcription and translation. Uncoupling of transcription and translation at the ends of bacterial operons enables transcription termination by Rho factor, and competition between ribosomal NusE and Rho for NusG helps to explain why Rho cannot terminate translated transcripts.
The three mammalian lipoxygenases are named according to the carbon position (5, 12 or 15) at which they catalyse the oxygenation of arachidonic acid; they are implicated in inflammatory disorders, for example 15-lipoxygenase is induced in atherosclerosis and can oxidize low-density lipoprotein to its atherogenic form. To identify what determines this positional specificity, we have exchanged conserved differences in the isoforms of 12- and 15-lipoxygenases. Substitution of methionine with valine at position 418 of human 15-lipoxygenase results in an enzyme that performs 12- and 15-lipoxygenation equally. This effect can be mimicked by incubating wild-type 15-lipoxygenase with a synthetically altered substrate which has its doubly allylic methylene carbons shifted by one carbon relative to arachidonic acid. Other mutations at the neighbouring amino acids 416 and 417 give an enzyme which performs 12- and 15-lipoxygenation in a ratio of 15:1. These results indicate that this region might position the substrate in the active site.
Restriction of sodium, potassium adenosine triphosphatase (Na+,K(+)-ATPase) to either the apical or basal-lateral membrane domain of polarized epithelial cells is fundamental to vectorial ion and solute transport in many tissues and organs. A restricted membrane distribution of Na+,K(+)-ATPase in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) epithelial cells was found experimentally to be generated by preferential retention of active enzyme in the basal-lateral membrane domain and selective inactivation and loss from the apical membrane domain, rather than by vectorial targeting of newly synthesized protein from the Golgi complex to the basal-lateral membrane domain. These results show how different distributions of the same subunits of Na+,K(+)-ATPase may be generated in normal polarized epithelial and in disease states.
The ability of morphine to alleviate pain is mediated through a heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding protein (G protein)-coupled heptahelical receptor (GPCR), the mu opioid receptor (muOR). The efficiency of GPCR signaling is tightly regulated and ultimately limited by the coordinated phosphorylation of the receptors by specific GPCR kinases and the subsequent interaction of the phosphorylated receptors with beta-arrestin 1 and beta-arrestin 2. Functional deletion of the beta-arrestin 2 gene in mice resulted in remarkable potentiation and prolongation of the analgesic effect of morphine, suggesting that muOR desensitization was impaired. These results provide evidence in vivo for the physiological importance of beta-arrestin 2 in regulating the function of a specific GPCR, the muOR. Moreover, they suggest that inhibition of beta-arrestin 2 function might lead to enhanced analgesic effectiveness of morphine and provide potential new avenues for the study and treatment of pain, narcotic tolerance, and dependence.
The protease inhibitor alpha 1-antichymotrypsin and the lipid transport protein apolipoprotein E (apoE) are intimately associated with the 42-amino-acid beta-peptide (A beta) in the filamentous amyloid deposits of Alzheimer's disease. We report here that these two amyloid-associated proteins serve a strong stimulatory role in the polymerization of A beta into amyloid filaments. Addition of either alpha 1-anti-chymotrypsin or apoE to the A beta peptide promoted a 10- to 20-fold increase in filament formation, with apoE-4, the isoform recently linked to the development of late-onset Alzheimer's disease, showing the highest catalytic activity. These and other experiments suggest that Alzheimer amyloid deposits arise when A beta is induced to form filaments by amyloid-promoting factors (pathological chaperones) expressed in certain brain regions.
The GGAs are a multidomain protein family implicated in protein trafficking between the Golgi and endosomes. Here, the VHS domain of GGA2 was shown to bind to the acidic cluster-dileucine motif in the cytoplasmic tail of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR). Receptors with mutations in this motif were defective in lysosomal enzyme sorting. The hinge domain of GGA2 bound clathrin, suggesting that GGA2 could be a link between cargo molecules and clathrin-coated vesicle assembly. Thus, GGA2 binding to the CI-MPR is important for lysosomal enzyme targeting.
We report here the isolation of a human RNA polymerase II complex containing a subset of the basal transcription factors and the human homologues of the yeast SRB (for suppressors of RNA polymerase B) proteins. The complex contains transcriptional coactivators and increases the activation of transcription. In addition, some components of the RNA polymerase II complex participate in DNA repair.
The role of complementary hydrogen bonding as a determinant of biological specificity has been examined by protein engineering of the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase. Deletion of a side chain between enzyme and substrate to leave an unpaired, uncharged hydrogen-bond donor or acceptor weakens binding energy by only 0.5-1.5 kcal mol-1. But the presence of an unpaired and charged donor or acceptor weakens binding by a further approximately 3 kcal mol-1.
The three-domain structure of porphobilinogen deaminase, a key enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway of tetrapyrroles, has been defined by X-ray analysis at 1.9 A resolution. Two of the domains structurally resemble the transferrins and periplasmic binding proteins. The dipyrromethane cofactor is covalently linked to domain 3 but is bound by extensive salt-bridges and hydrogen-bonds within the cleft between domains 1 and 2, at a position corresponding to the binding sites for small-molecule ligands in the analogous proteins. The X-ray structure and results from site-directed mutagenesis provide evidence for a single catalytic site. Interdomain flexibility may aid elongation of the polypyrrole product in the active-site cleft of the enzyme.
Fidelity of template-dependent nucleic acid synthesis is the main determinant of stable heredity and error-free gene expression. The mechanism (or mechanisms) ensuring fidelity of transcription by DNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RNAPs) is not fully understood. Here, we show that the 3' end-proximal nucleotide of the nascent transcript stimulates hydrolysis of the penultimate phosphodiester bond by providing active groups and coordination bonds to the RNAP active center. This stimulation is much higher in the case of misincorporated nucleotide. We show that during transcription elongation, the hydrolytic reaction stimulated by misincorporated nucleotides proofreads most of the misincorporation events and thus serves as an intrinsic mechanism of transcription fidelity.
Increased expression of P-glycoprotein, a plasma membrane glycoprotein of relative molecular mass (Mr) 170,000 (170K), occurs in a wide variety of cell lines that exhibit pleiotropic resistance to unrelated drugs. The presence of P-glycoprotein in human cancers refractory to chemotherapy suggests that tumour cells with multidrug resistance can arise during malignant progression. We have discovered striking homology between P-glycoprotein and the HlyB protein, a 66K Escherichia coli membrane protein required for the export of haemolysin (protein of Mr 107K). P-glycoprotein can be viewed as a tandem duplication of the HlyB protein. The hydropathy profiles of the two proteins are similar and reveal an extensive transmembrane region resembling those found in pore-forming plasma membrane proteins. The C-terminal region of P-glycoprotein and the HlyB protein contain sequences homologous to the nucleotide-binding domains of a group of closely related bacterial ATP-binding proteins. We propose a model for multidrug resistance in which P-glycoprotein functions as an energy-dependent export pump to reduce intracellular levels of anticancer drugs.
Glutamate is important in several forms of synaptic plasticity such as long-term potentiation, and in neuronal cell degeneration. Glutamate activates several types of receptors, including a metabotropic receptor that is sensitive to trans-1-amino-cyclopenthyl-1,3-dicarboxylate, coupled to G protein(s) and linked to inositol phospholipid metabolism. The activation of the metabotropic receptor in neurons generates inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, which causes the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores and diacylglycerol, which activates protein kinase C. In nerve terminals, the activation of presynaptic protein kinase C with phorbol esters enhances glutamate release. But the presynaptic receptor involved in this protein kinase C-mediated increase in the release of glutamate has not yet been identified. Here we demonstrate the presence of a presynaptic glutamate receptor of the metabotropic type that mediates an enhancement of glutamate exocytosis in cerebrocortical nerve terminals. Interestingly, this potentiation of glutamate release is observed only in the presence of arachidonic acid, which may reflect that this positive feedback control of glutamate exocytosis operates in concert with other pre- or post-synaptic events of the glutamatergic neurotransmission that generate arachidonic acid. This presynaptic glutamate receptor may have a physiological role in the maintenance of long-term potentiation where there is an increase in glutamate release mediated by postsynaptically generated arachidonic acid.
The transcription factor TFIID, a central component of the eukaryotic RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription apparatus, comprises the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and approximately ten TBP-associated factors (TAFs). Although the essential role of TBP in all eukaryotic transcription has been extensively analysed in vivo and in vitro, the function of the TAFs is less clear. In vitro, TAFs are dispensable for basal transcription but are required for the response to activators. In addition, specific TAFs may act as molecular bridges between particular activators and the general transcription machinery. In vivo, TAFS are required for yeast and mammalian cell growth, but little is known about their specific transcriptional functions. Using conditional alleles created by a new double-shutoff method, we show here that TAF depletion in yeast cells can reduce transcription from some promoters lacking conventional TATA elements. However, TAF depletion has surprisingly little effect on transcriptional enhancement by several activators, indicating that TAFs are not generally required for transcriptional activation in yeast.
The ADP-ribosylation factor ARF is a small GTP-binding protein that is involved in the transport of vesicles between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi complex and within the Golgi complex itself. ARF cycles between inactive and membrane-associated active forms as a result of exchange of bound GDP for GTP; the GTP-bound form is an essential participant in the formation of transport vesicles. This nucleotide exchange is inhibited by the fungal metabolite brefeldin A (BFA). Here we identify a protein (Gea1) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae that is a component of a complex possessing guanine-nucleotide-exchange activity for ARF. We show that the activity of the complex is sensitive to brefeldin A and that Gea1 function is necessary for ER-Golgi transport in vivo. Gea1 contains a domain that is similar to a domain of Sec7, a protein necessary for intra-Golgi transport. We propose that Gea1 and ARNO, a human protein with a homologous Sec7 domain, are members of a new family of ARF guanine-nucleotide exchange factors.
At least six chromatographically resolvable general transcription factors may participate in accurate initiation by RNA polymerase II in HeLa cell-derived systems. TFIIF (also termed FC, RAP30/74 and beta/gamma) can bind directly to RNA polymerase II in solution and decrease the affinity of RNA polymerase II for nonspecific DNA. From studies on the kinetics of transcription initiation, on the composition of transcription initiation complexes fractionated by acrylamide gel electrophoresis, and on template competition experiments, TFIIF is known to act at an intermediate stage in initiation complex formation. It acts after TFIID firmly associates with DNA, but coincidentally with or immediately after RNA polymerase II binding to DNA, and before the recruitment of factor TFIIE. TFIIF may or may not have DNA helicase activity. The small subunit (RAP30) of TFIIF has been cloned and shows some amino-acid sequence homology to bacterial sigma factors. We have partially sequenced the RAP74 protein from purified HeLa cells, cloned its complementary DNA and shown that its translation product can interact with RAP30 in vitro as well as in vivo. The cDNA predicts an amino-acid sequence that lacks obvious DNA or RNA helicase motifs. It has regions rich in charged amino acids, including segments containing a higher content of acidic amino acids than are found in strong transcriptional activators such as VP16.
Fibrinogen is a soluble plasma protein which, after cleavage by the specific proteolytic enzyme thrombin, polymerizes to form the filamentous fibrin network during blood clotting (see refs 1 and 2 for reviews). Fibrinogen has a molecular weight of 340,000 and is composed of two identical halves, each containing three peptide chains designated A alpha, B beta and gamma. Fibrin monomers are produced by thrombin which releases the small negatively charged fibrinopeptides A and B. The overall shape of the fibrinogen molecule has not been unequivocally established. The trinodular, elongated (approximately 450 A long) structure proposed by Hall and Slayter is the most widely accepted model and it has obtained additional support from recent work. Fibrin monomers are also about 450 A long and in fibres they probably have a half-staggered arrangement along the axis. The fibres are an assembly of protofibrils whose structure and packing are not reliably known. We report here that highly oriented fibrin gels are formed when polymerization takes place slowly in a strong magnetic field. It is shown that the protofibrils pack into a three-dimensional crystalline lattice. We introduce magnetically induced birefringence as a potential tool for studying polymerization and briefly speculate on the applications of strong magnetic fields.
Programmed cell death (apoptosis) is a tightly regulated process of cell disassembly in which dying cells and their nuclei shrink and fragment and the chromosomal DNA is degraded into internucleosomal repeats. Here we report the characterization of the cps-6 gene, which appears to function downstream of, or in parallel to, the cell-death protease CED-3 of Caenorhabditis elegans in the DNA degradation process during apoptosis. cps-6 encodes a homologue of human mitochondrial endonuclease G, and its protein product similarly localizes to mitochondria in C. elegans. Reduction of cps-6 activity caused by a genetic mutation or RNA-mediated interference (RNAi) affects normal DNA degradation, as revealed by increased staining in a TUNEL assay, and results in delayed appearance of cell corpses during development in C. elegans. This observation provides in vivo evidence that the DNA degradation process is important for proper progression of apoptosis. CPS-6 is the first mitochondrial protein identified to be involved in programmed cell death in C. elegans, underscoring the conserved and important role of mitochondria in the execution of apoptosis.
In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the process of conjugation of haploid cells of genotype MATa and MAT alpha to form MATa/alpha diploids is triggered by pheromones produced by each mating type. These pheromones stimulate a cellular response by interaction with receptors linked to a heterotrimeric G protein. Although genetic analysis indicates that the pheromone signal is transmitted through the G beta gamma dimer, the initial target(s) of G protein activation remain to be determined. Temperature-sensitive cells with mutations of the CDC24 and CDC42 genes, which are incapable of budding and of generating cell polarity at the restrictive temperature, are also unable to mate. Cdc24 acts as a guanylyl-nucleotide-exchange factor for the Rho-type GTPase Cdc42, which has been shown to be a fundamental component of the molecular machinery controlling morphogenesis in eukaryotic cells. Therefore, the inability of cdc24 and cdc42 mutants to mate has been presumed to be due to a requirement for generation of cell polarity and related morphogenetic events during conjugation. But here we show that Cdc42 has a direct signalling role in the mating-pheromone response between the G protein and the downstream protein kinase cascade.
Selective autophagy involves the recognition and targeting of specific cargo, such as damaged organelles, misfolded proteins, or invading pathogens for lysosomal destruction. Yeast genetic screens have identified proteins required for different forms of selective autophagy, including cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting, pexophagy and mitophagy, and mammalian genetic screens have identified proteins required for autophagy regulation. However, there have been no systematic approaches to identify molecular determinants of selective autophagy in mammalian cells. Here, to identify mammalian genes required for selective autophagy, we performed a high-content, image-based, genome-wide small interfering RNA screen to detect genes required for the colocalization of Sindbis virus capsid protein with autophagolysosomes. We identified 141 candidate genes required for viral autophagy, which were enriched for cellular pathways related to messenger RNA processing, interferon signalling, vesicle trafficking, cytoskeletal motor function and metabolism. Ninety-six of these genes were also required for Parkin-mediated mitophagy, indicating that common molecular determinants may be involved in autophagic targeting of viral nucleocapsids and autophagic targeting of damaged mitochondria. Murine embryonic fibroblasts lacking one of these gene products, the C2-domain containing protein, SMURF1, are deficient in the autophagosomal targeting of Sindbis and herpes simplex viruses and in the clearance of damaged mitochondria. Moreover, SMURF1-deficient mice accumulate damaged mitochondria in the heart, brain and liver. Thus, our study identifies candidate determinants of selective autophagy, and defines SMURF1 as a newly recognized mediator of both viral autophagy and mitophagy.
Substance P is a member of the tachykinin peptide family and participates in the regulation of diverse biological processes. The polymerase chain reaction and conventional library screening were used to isolate a complementary DNA (cDNA) encoding the rat substance P receptor from brain and submandibular gland. By homology analysis, this receptor belongs to the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. The receptor cDNA was expressed in a mammalian cell line and the ligand binding properties of the encoded receptor were pharmacologically defined by Scatchard analysis and tachykinin peptide displacement as those of a substance P receptor. The distribution of the messenger RNA for this receptor is highest in urinary bladder, submandibular gland, striatum, and spinal cord, which is consistent with the known distribution of substance P receptor binding sites. Thus, this receptor appears to mediate the primary actions of substance P in various brain regions and peripheral tissues.
The mouse albumin gene promoter has six closely spaced binding sites for nuclear proteins that are located between the TATA motif and nucleotide position -170. In vitro transcription with liver or spleen nuclear extracts of templates containing either mutated or polymerized albumin promoter elements establishes a hierarchy of the different protein binding sites for tissue-specific albumin gene transcription. The HNF-1 and C/EBP binding sites strongly activate transcription in a tissue-specific manner. The NF-Y binding site has a lower activation potential and is less specific, being equally efficient in liver and spleen nuclear extracts. The remaining elements are relatively weak activator sites.
Autophagy is a dynamic membrane phenomenon for bulk protein degradation in the lysosome/vacuole. Apg8/Aut7 is an essential factor for autophagy in yeast. We previously found that the carboxy-terminal arginine of nascent Apg8 is removed by Apg4/Aut2 protease, leaving a glycine residue at the C terminus. Apg8 is then converted to a form (Apg8-X) that is tightly bound to the membrane. Here we report a new mode of protein lipidation. Apg8 is covalently conjugated to phosphatidylethanolamine through an amide bond between the C-terminal glycine and the amino group of phosphatidylethanolamine. This lipidation is mediated by a ubiquitination-like system. Apg8 is a ubiquitin-like protein that is activated by an E1 protein, Apg7 (refs 7, 8), and is transferred subsequently to the E2 enzymes Apg3/Aut1 (ref. 9). Apg7 activates two different ubiquitin-like proteins, Apg12 (ref. 10) and Apg8, and assigns them to specific E2 enzymes, Apg10 (ref. 11) and Apg3, respectively. These reactions are necessary for the formation of Apg8-phosphatidylethanolamine. This lipidation has an essential role in membrane dynamics during autophagy.
Escherichia coli RecA is essential for the repair of DNA double-strand breaks by homologous recombination. Repair requires the formation of a RecA nucleoprotein filament. Previous studies have indicated a mechanism of filament assembly whereby slow nucleation of RecA protein on DNA is followed by rapid growth. However, many aspects of this process remain unclear, including the rates of nucleation and growth and the involvement of ATP hydrolysis, largely because visualization at the single-filament level is lacking. Here we report the direct observation of filament assembly on individual double-stranded DNA molecules using fluorescently modified RecA. The nucleoprotein filaments saturate the DNA and extend it approximately 1.6-fold. At early time points, discrete RecA clusters are seen, permitting analysis of single-filament growth from individual nuclei. Formation of nascent RecA filaments is independent of ATP hydrolysis but is dependent on the type of nucleotide cofactor and the RecA concentration, suggesting that nucleation involves binding of approximately 4-5 ATP-RecA monomers to DNA. Individual RecA filaments grow at rates of 3-10 nm s(-1). Growth is bidirectional and, in contrast to nucleation, independent of nucleotide cofactor, suggesting addition of approximately 2-7 monomers s(-1). These results are in accord with extensive genetic and biochemical studies, and indicate that assembly in vivo is controlled at the nucleation step. We anticipate that our approach and conclusions can be extended to the related eukaryotic counterpart, Rad51 (see ref.), and to regulation by assembly mediators.
We sequenced the 29,751-base genome of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-associated coronavirus known as the Tor2 isolate. The genome sequence reveals that this coronavirus is only moderately related to other known coronaviruses, including two human coronaviruses, HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-229E. Phylogenetic analysis of the predicted viral proteins indicates that the virus does not closely resemble any of the three previously known groups of coronaviruses. The genome sequence will aid in the diagnosis of SARS virus infection in humans and potential animal hosts (using polymerase chain reaction and immunological tests), in the development of antivirals (including neutralizing antibodies), and in the identification of putative epitopes for vaccine development.
The spindle checkpoint prevents chromosome mis-segregation by delaying sister chromatid separation until all chromosomes have achieved bipolar attachment to the mitotic spindle. Its operation is essential for accurate chromosome segregation, whereas its dysregulation can contribute to birth defects and tumorigenesis. The target of the spindle checkpoint is the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), a ubiquitin ligase that promotes sister chromatid separation and progression to anaphase. Using a short hairpin RNA screen targeting components of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in human cells, we identified the deubiquitinating enzyme USP44 (ubiquitin-specific protease 44) as a critical regulator of the spindle checkpoint. USP44 is not required for the initial recognition of unattached kinetochores and the subsequent recruitment of checkpoint components. Instead, it prevents the premature activation of the APC by stabilizing the APC-inhibitory Mad2-Cdc20 complex. USP44 deubiquitinates the APC coactivator Cdc20 both in vitro and in vivo, and thereby directly counteracts the APC-driven disassembly of Mad2-Cdc20 complexes (discussed in an accompanying paper). Our findings suggest that a dynamic balance of ubiquitination by the APC and deubiquitination by USP44 contributes to the generation of the switch-like transition controlling anaphase entry, analogous to the way that phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of Cdk1 by Wee1 and Cdc25 controls entry into mitosis.
Hereditary non-neuropathic systemic amyloidosis (Ostertag-type) is a rare autosomal dominant disease in which amyloid deposition in the viscera is usually fatal by the fifth decade. In some families it is caused by mutations in the apolipoprotein AI gene but in two unrelated English families under our care the amyloid deposits did not contain apoAI, despite a report that this may have been the case in one of them. Lysozyme is a ubiquitous bacteriolytic enzyme present in external secretions and in polymorphs and macrophages, but its physiological role is not always clear. Here we report that in these two families, lysozyme is the amyloid fibril protein. Affected individuals are heterozygous for point mutations in the lysozyme gene that cause substitution of highly conserved residues, namely threonine for isoleucine at position 56 in one family, and histidine for aspartic acid at residue 67 in the other. Amyloid fibrils from one individual were composed of the full-length Thr-56 variant lysozyme molecule. To our knowledge, this is the first report of naturally occurring variants of human lysozyme and of lysozyme-associated disease. As the structures of human and hen egg-white lysozyme are known to atomic resolution and their folding and structure-function relationships have been exhaustively analysed, our observations should provide a powerful model for understanding amyloidogenesis.
An RNA molecule consisting of an asymmetric internal loop of six nucleotides can be rapidly and specifically cleaved by Pb2+ in the presence of Mg2+. The 5' cleavage product terminates with a 3' phosphomonoester generated from a 2',3'-cyclic phosphodiester reaction intermediate. This two-step reaction mechanism resembles that of many protein ribonucleases but has not previously been observed for reactions catalysed by RNA.
The RNA polymerase binding site from the lambda PR promoter was isolated and sequenced. This DNA fragment contains the transcription initiation site and shares 25 nucleotides with OR. The sequence preceding the initiation site suggests that the promoter recognition site is not identical with the tight binding and initiation site.
The cytochrome P450-containing mixed function oxidases metabolize a variety of endogenous and exogenous compounds including drugs, carcinogens, fatty acids and steroids. Mixed function oxidases have been detected in several tissues, including brain. The enzyme system consists of a lipid fraction (phosphatidylcholine), cytochrome P450 and NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase. NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase has been purified to apparent homogeneity and demonstrated to supply reducing equivalents from NADPH to cytochrome P450 (refs 5-7). Detection of NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase thus represents an indirect means of demonstrating the presence of cytochrome P450. Although the role of cytochrome P450 in the central nervous system (CNS) is not known, it may include such different functions as metabolism of xenobiotics, aromatization of androgens to oestrogens and the formation of catecholoestrogens. Despite the potentially very important role(s) of cytochrome P450 in brain function, its exact regional distribution remains essentially unknown. Using a specific antibody against rat liver NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase in combination with immunohistochemical techniques, we have now localized this enzyme to define catecholamine (CA)-containing structures of the rat and monkey brain.
Modular polyketide synthases (PKSs) are complex multi-enzyme proteins that catalyse the bacterial biosynthesis of many pharmaceutically useful polyketides. The PKSs are organized into a series of modules, each containing the active catalytic sites required for one step in the synthesis process. Here we report a method for cell-free enzymatic synthesis of 6-deoxyerythronolide B (6-dEB), the parent molecule of the antibiotic erythromycin A, using recombinant 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase (DEBS), a modular PKS with at least 28 distinct active sites. We have also synthesized in vitro a triketide lactone by using a truncated mutant of DEBS. The availability of such cell-free synthetic routes will allow direct investigation of the structural and mechanistic basis for the unusual combination of high substrate specificity and tolerance to genetic reprogramming found in this enzyme family.
The bioreactor provides a central link between the starting feedstock and the product. The reaction yield and selectivity are determined by the biocatalyst, but productivity is often determined by the process technology; as a consequence, biochemical reaction engineering becomes the interface for the biologist and engineer. Developments in bioreactor design, including whole cell immobilization, immobilized enzymes, continuous reaction, and process control, will increasingly reflect the need for cross-disciplinary interaction in the biochemical process industry.
Phosphotyrosine-containing proteins are minor components of normal cells which appear to be associated primarily with the regulation of cellular metabolism and growth. The insulin receptor is a tyrosine-specific protein kinase, and one of the earliest detectable responses to insulin binding is activation of this kinase and autophosphorylation of its beta-subunit. Tyrosine autophosphorylation activates the phosphotransferase in the beta-subunit and increases its reactivity toward tyrosine phosphorylation of other substrates. When incubated in vitro with [gamma-32P]ATP and insulin, the purified insulin receptor phosphorylates various proteins on their tyrosine residues. However, so far no proteins other than the insulin receptor have been identified as undergoing tyrosine phosphorylation in response to insulin in an intact cell. Here, using anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies, we have identified a novel phosphotyrosine-containing protein of relative molecular mass (Mr) 185,000 (pp185) which appears during the initial response of hepatoma cells to insulin binding. In contrast to the insulin receptor, pp185 does not adhere to wheat-germ agglutininagarose or bind to anti-insulin receptor antibodies. Phosphorylation of pp185 is maximal within seconds after exposure of the cells to insulin and exhibits a dose-response curve similar to that of receptor autophosphorylation, suggesting that this protein represents the endogenous substrate for the insulin receptor kinase.
Liver damage induced by the antiepileptic drug valproic acid (VPA) is believed to be mediated by an unsaturated metabolite of the drug, delta 4-VPA. In studies of the biological origin of this hepatotoxic compound, it was found that liver microsomes from phenobarbital-treated rats catalyzed the desaturation of VPA to delta 4-VPA. Indirect evidence suggested that cytochrome P-450 was the responsible enzyme, a conclusion that was verified by studies with a purified and reconstituted form of the hemoprotein, which catalyzed the oxidation of VPA to 4- and 5-hydroxyvalproic acid and to delta 4-VPA. Desaturation of a nonactivated alkyl substituent represents a novel metabolic function of cytochrome P-450 and probably proceeds via the conversion of substrate to a transient free radical intermediate, which partitions between recombination (alcohol formation) and elimination (olefin production) pathways. These findings have broad implications with respect to the metabolic generation of olefins and may explain the increased hepatotoxic potential of VPA when it is administered in combination with potent enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants such as phenobarbital.
The class I glycoproteins of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are products of closely linked genes on the 17th chromosome of the mouse. Four highly homologous cell surface proteins, K, D, L, and Qa-2 (refs 1-4), belonging to this multigene family have been analysed. Several additional members, M, R, TL, and indicated by biochemical data and recent serological data suggest the family is larger. Recent reports using recombinant DNA technology suggest that the class I system is an extensive multigene family. In this report we describe results of experiments using restriction enzyme digestion of DNA from a group of standard, congeneic and MHC recombinant mouse strains followed by hybridization to H-2 cDNA probes. Particular bands of hybridization can be assigned to specific H-2 haplotypes and, therefore, to the MHC regions of the 17th chromosome. A number of the MHC polymorphic bands have been assigned to genetic map positions in the K and D-L regions of the H-2 complex. Additional class I gene sequences map outside the boundaries of the traditional H-2 complex (K, I, S, D), into the Qa-T1a region. At least one sequence is centromeric to the K locus. Further, amino terminal and carboxy terminal probes show different restriction patterns, suggesting that the exons corresponding to the different domains of the class I glycoproteins may have different evolutionary histories.
The Ser-His-Asp triad is a well known structural feature of the serine proteases. It has also been directly observed in the catalytic sites of two lipases, whose high-resolution three-dimensional structures have been determined 1,2. Lipases show a wide variety of sizes, substrate and positional specificities, and catalytic rates 3. They achieve maximal catalytic rates at oil-water interfaces. The fungus Geotrichum candidum produces several different forms of lipases, two of which have been purified to homogeneity 4,5. Two lipase genes have been identified, cloned and sequenced 6,7. Both code for proteins of 544 amino acids with a total relative molecular mass of about 60,000 (Mr 60K). The two forms are 86% identical. Their isoelectric points differ slightly, being between 4.3 and 4.6. About 7% of the total Mr is carbohydrate. Until now, only a low resolution structure of GCL has been reported 8, but no high resolution structure has followed. We now report the three-dimensional structure of a lipase from G. candidum (GCL) at 2.2 A resolution. Unlike the other lipases and serine proteases, the catalytic triad of GCL is Ser-His-Glu, with glutamic acid replacing the usual aspartate. Although the sequence similarity with the other two lipases is limited to the region near the active-site serine, there is some similarity in their three-dimensional structures. The GCL is also an alpha/beta protein with a central mixed beta sheet whose topology is similar to that of the N-terminal domain of human pancreatic lipase. As in the other lipases 1,2, the catalytic site is buried under surface loops. Sequence comparisons with proteins from the cholinesterase family suggest that they also contain the Ser-His-Glu triad.
Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive, degenerative disease that involves the central and peripheral nervous systems and the heart. A gene, X25, was identified in the critical region for the FRDA locus on chromosome 9q13. This gene encodes a 210-amino acid protein, frataxin, that has homologs in distant species such as Caenorhabditis elegans and yeast. A few FRDA patients were found to have point mutations in X25, but the majority were homozygous for an unstable GAA trinucleotide expansion in the first X25 intron.
Among mobile genetic elements, self-splicing introns are of particular interest. They belong to either group I or group II depending on their three-dimensional structure. Homing, the systematic intron invasion of an intronless gene when it encounters its homologous intron-bearing allele, is the only means for intron mobility so far demonstrated. It depends on the activity of the intron-encoded protein and is very specific for the acceptor site. Intron transposition, the transfer of an intron to a novel site, predicted on the basis of phylogenetic studies and in vitro reverse-splicing experiments, has been proposed to be responsible for evolutionary intron spreading. Here we present results from polymerase chain reaction experiments consistent with transposition of a group II intron. This event is proposed to account for the site-specific deletion in the mitochondrial chromosome of the fungus Podospora anserina that is associated with the premature death syndrome and might also be involved in the senescence process affecting this species.
Hormone-sensitive lipase, a key enzyme in fatty acid mobilization, overall energy homeostasis, and possibly steroidogenesis, is acutely controlled through reversible phosphorylation by catecholamines and insulin. The 757-amino acid sequence predicted from a cloned rat adipocyte complementary DNA showed no homology with any other known lipase or protein. The activity-controlling phosphorylation site was localized to Ser563 in a markedly hydrophilic domain, and a lipid-binding consensus site was tentatively identified. One or several messenger RNA species (3.3, 3.5, or 3.9 kilobases) were expressed in adipose and steroidogenic tissues and heart and skeletal muscle. The human hormone-sensitive lipase gene mapped to chromosome 19 cent-q13.3.
Eukaryotic transcriptional activators may stimulate RNA polymerase II activity by promoting assembly of preinitiation complexes on promoters through their interactions with one or more components of the basal machinery. On the basis of its central role in initiating transcription-complex formation upon binding to the TATA box, the general transcription factor TFIID, which includes the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and several TBP-associated factors, has been implicated as a target for activators. Consistent with this idea, an increasing number of activators have been reported to bind directly to TBP. To assess the functional importance of these in vitro interactions for transcriptional regulation in vivo, we made use of a novel strategy in yeast to show that a physical interaction with TBP is sufficient for a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein to increase initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II. These results imply that binding of TFIID to promoter elements is a limiting step in transcription complex assembly in vivo.
The three-dimensional structure of a catalytic antibody (1F7) with chorismate mutase activity has been determined to 3.0 A resolution as a complex with a transition state analog. The structural data suggest that the antibody stabilizes the same conformationally restricted pericyclic transition state as occurs in the uncatalyzed reaction. Overall shape and charge complementarity between the combining site and the transition state analog dictate preferential binding of the correct substrate enantiomer in a conformation appropriate for reaction. Comparison with the structure of a chorismate mutase enzyme indicates an overall similarity between the catalytic mechanism employed by the two proteins. Differences in the number of specific interactions available for restricting the rotational degrees of freedom in the transition state, and the lack of multiple electrostatic interactions that might stabilize charge separation in this highly polarized metastable species, are likely to account for the observed 10(4) times lower activity of the antibody relative to that of the natural enzymes that catalyze this reaction. The structure of the 1F7 Fab'-hapten complex provides confirmation that the properties of an antibody catalyst faithfully reflect the design of the transition state analog.
A new gene, termed klotho, has been identified that is involved in the suppression of several ageing phenotypes. A defect in klotho gene expression in the mouse results in a syndrome that resembles human ageing, including a short lifespan, infertility, arteriosclerosis, skin atrophy, osteoporosis and emphysema. The gene encodes a membrane protein that shares sequence similarity with the beta-glucosidase enzymes. The klotho gene product may function as part of a signalling pathway that regulates ageing in vivo and morbidity in age-related diseases.
The AAA domain, a conserved Walker-type ATPase module, is a feature of members of the AAA family of proteins, which are involved in many cellular processes, including vesicular transport, organelle biogenesis, microtubule rearrangement and protein degradation. The function of the AAA domain, however, has not been explained. Membrane-anchored AAA proteases of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells comprise a subfamily of AAA proteins that have metal-dependent peptidase activity and mediate the degradation of non-assembled membrane proteins. Inactivation of an orthologue of this protease family in humans causes neurodegeneration in hereditary spastic paraplegia. Here we investigate the AAA domain of the yeast protein Yme1, a subunit of the iota-AAA protease located in the inner membrane of mitochondria. We show that Yme1 senses the folding state of solvent-exposed domains and specifically degrades unfolded membrane proteins. Substrate recognition and binding are mediated by the amino-terminal region of the AAA domain. The purified AAA domain of Yme1 binds unfolded polypeptides and suppresses their aggregation. Our results indicate that the AAA domain of Ymel has a chaperone-like activity and suggest that the AAA domains of other AAA proteins may have a similar function.
Regulation of gene expression by mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) is essential for proper cell adaptation to extracellular stimuli. Exposure of yeast cells to high osmolarity results in rapid activation of the MAPK Hog1, which coordinates the transcriptional programme required for cell survival on osmostress. The mechanisms by which Hog1 and MAPKs in general regulate gene expression are not completely understood, although Hog1 can modify some transcription factors. Here we propose that Hog1 induces gene expression by a mechanism that involves recruiting a specific histone deacetylase complex to the promoters of genes regulated by osmostress. Cells lacking the Rpd3-Sin3 histone deacetylase complex are sensitive to high osmolarity and show compromised expression of osmostress genes. Hog1 interacts physically with Rpd3 in vivo and in vitro and, on stress, targets the deacetylase to specific osmostress-responsive genes. Binding of the Rpd3-Sin3 complex to specific promoters leads to histone deacetylation, entry of RNA polymerase II and induction of gene expression. Together, our data indicate that targeting of the Rpd3 histone deacetylase to osmoresponsive promoters by the MAPK Hog1 is required to induce gene expression on stress.
An infectious virus which causes persistent lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy, lesions in the central nervous system (CNS), progressive weakness and emaciation was previously isolated from the leukocytes of cattle. Our present studies show that this virus encodes a reverse transcriptase (RT) with Mg2+ cation preference, replicates and induces syncytia in a variety of embryonic bovine tissues in vitro, and has a morphology most similar to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Moreover, serologic analyses have demonstrated a conservation of epitopes between the major core protein of this bovine retrovirus and HIV. Shared antigenic determinants were also observed with other pathogenic retroviruses of the lentivirus subfamily. To resolve the phylogenetic relationship of this virus, proviral molecular clones were derived and used to determine the nucleotide sequence of the highly conserved RT domain. The sequence data and serologic analyses together show that this bovine retrovirus is a novel lentivirus related to HIV and other lentiviruses. We propose that this virus be tentatively named bovine immunodeficiency-like virus (BIV) to reflect its genetic relationship and biological similarity to HIV.
As a step toward developing poliovirus as a vaccine vector, poliovirus recombinants were constructed by fusing exogenous peptides (up to 400 amino acids) and an artificial cleavage site for viral protease 3Cpro to the amino terminus of the viral polyprotein. Viral replication proceeded normally. An extended polyprotein was produced in infected cells and proteolytically processed into the complete array of viral proteins plus the foreign peptide, which was excluded from mature virions. The recombinants retained exogenous sequences through successive rounds of replication in culture and in vivo. Infection of animals with recombinants elicited a humoral immune response to the foreign peptides.
Cells communicate with their external environment through physical and chemical processes that take place in the cell-surrounding membrane. The membrane serves as a barrier as well as a special environment in which membrane proteins are able to carry out important processes. Certain membrane proteins have the ability to detect the membrane voltage and regulate ion conduction or enzyme activity. Such voltage-dependent processes rely on the action of protein domains known as voltage sensors, which are embedded inside the cell membrane and contain an excess of positively charged amino acids, which react to an electric field. How does the membrane create an environment suitable for voltage sensors? Here we show under a variety of conditions that the function of a voltage-dependent K+ channel is dependent on the negatively charged phosphodiester of phospholipid molecules. A non-voltage-dependent K+ channel does not exhibit the same dependence. The data lead us to propose that the phospholipid membrane, by providing stabilizing interactions between positively charged voltage-sensor arginine residues and negatively charged lipid phosphodiester groups, provides an appropriate environment for the energetic stability and operation of the voltage-sensing machinery. We suggest that the usage of arginine residues in voltage sensors is an adaptation to the phospholipid composition of cell membranes.
The yeast transcription factor IIA (TFIIA), a component of the basal transcription machinery of RNA polymerase II and implicated in vitro in regulation of basal transcription, is composed of two subunits of 32 and 13.5 kilodaltons. The genes that encode these subunits, termed TOA1 and TOA2, respectively, were cloned. Neither gene shares obvious sequence similarity with the other or with any other previously identified genes. The recombinant factor bound to a TATA binding protein-DNA complex and complemented yeast and mammalian in vitro transcription systems depleted of TFIIA. Both the TOA1 and TOA2 genes are essential for growth of yeast.
The heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) are activated by sensory or hormone receptors. In turn, the G proteins activate effector proteins such as adenylyl cyclase, cyclic guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate phosphodiesterase (cGMP PDE), phospholipase C, and potassium and calcium ion channels by mechanisms that are poorly understood. A site on the alpha subunit of the G protein transducin (alpha t) has been identified that interacts with and activates cGMP phosphodiesterase, the effector enzyme in rod photoreceptors. A 22-amino acid peptide, corresponding to residues 293 to 314 from the COOH-terminal region of alpha t, fully mimicked alpha t and potently activated PDE. This region is adjacent to the receptor activation domain; thus, the alpha subunit of this G protein has a site for interaction with both its effector and receptor that maps near the COOH-terminus.
Calmodulin (CaM) is a major effector for the intracellular actions of Ca2+ in nearly all cell types. We identified a CaM-binding protein, designated regulator of calmodulin signaling (RCS). G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR)-dependent activation of protein kinase A (PKA) led to phosphorylation of RCS at Ser55 and increased its binding to CaM. Phospho-RCS acted as a competitive inhibitor of CaM-dependent enzymes, including protein phosphatase 2B (PP2B, also called calcineurin). Increasing RCS phosphorylation blocked GPCR- and PP2B-mediated suppression of L-type Ca2+ currents in striatal neurons. Conversely, genetic deletion of RCS significantly increased this modulation. Through a molecular mechanism that amplifies GPCR- and PKA-mediated signaling and attenuates GPCR- and PP2B-mediated signaling, RCS synergistically increases the phosphorylation of key proteins whose phosphorylation is regulated by PKA and PP2B.
The 3 A electron density map of a co-crystalline recognition complex between EcoRI endonuclease and the oligonucleotide TCGCGAATTCGCG reveals that a tight, complementary interface between the enzyme and the major groove of the DNA is the major determinant of sequence specificity. The DNA contains a torsional kink and other departures from the B conformation which unwind the DNA and thereby widen the major groove in the recognition site.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by a genetic deficiency of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). A full-length complementary DNA clone of human PAH was inserted into a eukaryotic expression vector and transferred into mouse NIH3T3 cells which do not normally express PAH. The transformed mouse cells expressed PAH messenger RNA, immunoreactive protein, and enzymatic activity that are characteristic of the normal human liver products, demonstrating that a single gene contains all of the necessary genetic information to code for functional PAH. These results support the use of the human PAH probe in prenatal diagnosis and detection of carriers, to provide new opportunities for the biochemical characterization of normal and mutant enzymes, and in the investigation of alternative genetic therapies for PKU.
Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (RNAP) synthesizes RNA with remarkable fidelity in vivo. Its low error rate may be achieved by means of a 'proofreading' mechanism comprised of two sequential events. The first event (backtracking) involves a transcriptionally upstream motion of RNAP through several base pairs, which carries the 3' end of the nascent RNA transcript away from the enzyme active site. The second event (endonucleolytic cleavage) occurs after a variable delay and results in the scission and release of the most recently incorporated ribonucleotides, freeing up the active site. Here, by combining ultrastable optical trapping apparatus with a novel two-bead assay to monitor transcriptional elongation with near-base-pair precision, we observed backtracking and recovery by single molecules of RNAP. Backtracking events ( approximately 5 bp) occurred infrequently at locations throughout the DNA template and were associated with pauses lasting 20 s to >30 min. Inosine triphosphate increased the frequency of backtracking pauses, whereas the accessory proteins GreA and GreB, which stimulate the cleavage of nascent RNA, decreased the duration of such pauses.
The protein Tat is encoded by the HIV-1 genome and is essential for viral replication because of its activation of viral transcription. Tat enhances the ability of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to move long distances down the DNA through a poorly understood mechanism that involves its binding the to the 5' end of the nascent HIV-1 transcript. It has been suggested that the stimulation of transcript elongation by conventional DNA-binding activators may involve phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of Pol II by the transcription factor TFIIH through the associated CAK kinase. Here we show that Tat-enhanced HIV-1 transcription in vitro requires both TFIIH and the CTD of Pol II. In addition, Tat, through its activation domain, both interacts with a functional TFIIH-containing complex and stimulates phosphorylation of a CTD-containing substrate by the TFIIH kinase. Under conditions that jointly restrict transcriptional elongation and TFIIH-mediated CTD phosphorylation, Tat stimulates both these activities. Furthermore, RNA synthesis is required for Tat to stimulate phosphorylation of the CTD when it is part of an initiation complex, as expected from Tat's interaction with viral transcripts. Thus, stimulation of Pol II elongation by Tat may involve direct effects on TFIIH-mediated CTD phosphorylation.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a growing family of small non-protein-coding regulatory genes that regulate the expression of homologous target-gene transcripts. They have been implicated in the control of cell death and proliferation in flies, haematopoietic lineage differentiation in mammals, neuronal patterning in nematodes and leaf and flower development in plants. miRNAs are processed by the RNA-mediated interference machinery. Drosha is an RNase III enzyme that was recently implicated in miRNA processing. Here we show that human Drosha is a component of two multi-protein complexes. The larger complex contains multiple classes of RNA-associated proteins including RNA helicases, proteins that bind double-stranded RNA, novel heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins and the Ewing's sarcoma family of proteins. The smaller complex is composed of Drosha and the double-stranded-RNA-binding protein, DGCR8, the product of a gene deleted in DiGeorge syndrome. In vivo knock-down and in vitro reconstitution studies revealed that both components of this smaller complex, termed Microprocessor, are necessary and sufficient in mediating the genesis of miRNAs from the primary miRNA transcript.
A protein designated p14 was purified from a simian immunodeficiency virus (SIVMne) and was shown by amino acid sequence analysis to be nearly identical to the predicted translational product of a unique open reading frame (X-ORF) in the nucleotide sequences of SIVmac and human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2). Thus the X-ORF is proven to be a new retroviral gene. The p14 is present in SIVMne in molar amounts equivalent to those of the gag proteins. This is the first example of a retrovirus that contains a substantial quantity of a viral protein that is not a product of the gag, pro, pol, or env genes. SIV p14 and its homolog in HIV-2 may function as nucleic acid binding proteins since purified p14 binds to single-stranded nucleic acids in vitro. Antisera to the purified protein detected p14 in SIVMne, SIVmac, and a homologous protein (16 kilodaltons) in HIV-2 but did not react with HIV-1. Diagnostic procedures based on this novel protein will distinguish between HIV-1 and HIV-2.
Cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of mortality in westernized countries, despite optimum medical therapy to reduce the levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-associated cholesterol. The pursuit of novel therapies to target the residual risk has focused on raising the levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-associated cholesterol in order to exploit its atheroprotective effects. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as important post-transcriptional regulators of lipid metabolism and are thus a new class of target for therapeutic intervention. MicroRNA-33a and microRNA-33b (miR-33a/b) are intronic miRNAs whose encoding regions are embedded in the sterol-response-element-binding protein genes SREBF2 and SREBF1 (refs 3-5), respectively. These miRNAs repress expression of the cholesterol transporter ABCA1, which is a key regulator of HDL biogenesis. Recent studies in mice suggest that antagonizing miR-33a may be an effective strategy for raising plasma HDL levels and providing protection against atherosclerosis; however, extrapolating these findings to humans is complicated by the fact that mice lack miR-33b, which is present only in the SREBF1 gene of medium and large mammals. Here we show in African green monkeys that systemic delivery of an anti-miRNA oligonucleotide that targets both miR-33a and miR-33b increased hepatic expression of ABCA1 and induced a sustained increase in plasma HDL levels over 12 weeks. Notably, miR-33 antagonism in this non-human primate model also increased the expression of miR-33 target genes involved in fatty acid oxidation (CROT, CPT1A, HADHB and PRKAA1) and reduced the expression of genes involved in fatty acid synthesis (SREBF1, FASN, ACLY and ACACA), resulting in a marked suppression of the plasma levels of very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL)-associated triglycerides, a finding that has not previously been observed in mice. These data establish, in a model that is highly relevant to humans, that pharmacological inhibition of miR-33a and miR-33b is a promising therapeutic strategy to raise plasma HDL and lower VLDL triglyceride levels for the treatment of dyslipidaemias that increase cardiovascular disease risk.
A synthetic peptidemimetic substrate of the human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) protease with a nonhydrolyzable pseudodipeptidyl insert at the protease cleavage site was prepared. The peptide U-81749 inhibited recombinant HIV-1 protease in vitro (inhibition constant Ki of 70 nanomolar) and HIV-1 replication in human peripheral blood lymphocytes (inhibitory concentration IC50 of 0.1 to 1 micromolar). Moreover, 10 micromolar concentrations of U-81749 significantly inhibited proteolysis of the HIV-1 gag polyprotein (p55) to the mature viral structural proteins p24 and p17 in cells infected with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing the HIV-1 gag-pol genes. The HIV-1 like particles released from inhibitor-treated cells contained almost exclusively p55 and other gag precursors, but not p24. Incubation of HIV-like particles recovered from drug-treated cultures in drug-free medium indicated that inhibition of p55 proteolysis was at least partially reversible, suggesting that U-81749 was present within the particles.
The McDonough strain of the feline sarcoma virus contains a transforming gene (v-fms) which contains partial nucleotide homology with proto-oncogenes encoding tyrosine kinases. One of the v-fms-encoded products, gp140fms, is a cell surface transmembrane glycoprotein that may function as a growth factor receptor. Although c-fms transcripts have been detected in placental trophoblasts and normal human bone marrow, the role of the c-fms gene product is unknown. We now report that induction of monocytic, but not granulocytic, differentiation of human HL-60 leukaemic cells is associated with expression of c-fms, preceded by that of c-myc and c-fos. Because c-fms transcripts are also detectable in peripheral blood monocytes and in blasts from certain patients with myelomonocytic leukaemia, the c-fms gene product may play a role in monocytic differentiation.
Glycerol is metabolized predominantly in the liver, the first step presumably being phosphorylation to alpha-glycerophosphate. When ethanol is present in the blood the rate of glycerol uptake by the splanchnic organs is reduced to about one-third of the control value. At the same time glycerophosphate accumulates in the liver. Hepatic blood flow and oxygen consumption are not influenced by the combined infusion of glycerol and ethanol. The phenomenon may be connected with the increased concentration of the reduced form of diphosphopyridine nucleotide present in the liver during ethanol metabolism.
Inducible gene expression in eukaryotes is mainly controlled by the activity of transcriptional activator proteins, such as NF-kappa B (refs 1-3), a factor activated upon treatment of cells with phorbol esters, lipopolysaccharide, interleukin-1 and tumour necrosis factor-alpha. Activation of NF-kappa B involves release of the inhibitory subunit I kappa B from a cytoplasmic complex with the DNA-binding subunits Rel-A (formerly p65) and p50 (refs 6, 7). Cell-free experiments have suggested that protein kinase C and other kinases transfer phosphoryl groups onto I kappa B causing release of I kappa B and subsequent activation of NF-kappa B. Here we report that I kappa B-alpha (formerly MAD-3) is degraded in cells after stimulation with phorbol ester, interleukin-1, lipopolysaccharide and tumour necrosis factor-alpha, an event coincident with the appearance of active NF-kappa B. Treatment of cells with various protease inhibitors or an antioxidant completely prevented the inducible decay of I kappa B-alpha as well as the activation of NF-kappa B. Our findings suggest that the activation of NF-kappa B relies on an inducible degradation of I kappa B-alpha through a cytoplasmic, chymotrypsin-like protease. In intact cells, phosphorylation of I kappa B-alpha is apparently not sufficient for activation of NF-kappa B.
The tat gene of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) plays a central role in the activation and life cycle of HIV. The tat protein (Tat) specifically transactivates HIV transcription in vivo and in vitro, exerting its effects at the level of transcriptional initiation and elongation. Here we report that Tat binds directly to the basal transcription factor TFIID. The transcriptional activity of HeLa extracts was depleted after chromatography on a Tat affinity column, which specifically retained the polymerase II-specific factor TFIID. Direct interaction of Tat with holo-TFIID, composed of TATA-binding protein (TBP) and associated factors (TAFs), was observed. Tat binds, through amino acids 36-50, directly to the TBP subunit of TFIID. Our results suggest that Tat may transduce upstream or downstream regulatory signals by direct interaction with the basal transcription factor TFIID.
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT), the acquisition of genetic material from non-parental lineages, is known to be important in bacterial evolution. In particular, HGT provides rapid access to genetic innovations, allowing traits such as virulence, antibiotic resistance and xenobiotic metabolism to spread through the human microbiome. Recent anecdotal studies providing snapshots of active gene flow on the human body have highlighted the need to determine the frequency of such recent transfers and the forces that govern these events. Here we report the discovery and characterization of a vast, human-associated network of gene exchange, large enough to directly compare the principal forces shaping HGT. We show that this network of 10,770 unique, recently transferred (more than 99% nucleotide identity) genes found in 2,235 full bacterial genomes, is shaped principally by ecology rather than geography or phylogeny, with most gene exchange occurring between isolates from ecologically similar, but geographically separated, environments. For example, we observe 25-fold more HGT between human-associated bacteria than among ecologically diverse non-human isolates (P = 3.0 x 10(-270)). We show that within the human microbiome this ecological architecture continues across multiple spatial scales, functional classes and ecological niches with transfer further enriched among bacteria that inhabit the same body site, have the same oxygen tolerance or have the same ability to cause disease. This structure offers a window into the molecular traits that define ecological niches, insight that we use to uncover sources of antibiotic resistance and identify genes associated with the pathology of meningitis and other diseases.
Mammalian cells respond to endotoxic lipopolysaccharide (LPS) by activation of protein kinase cascades that lead to new gene expression. A protein kinase, p38, that was tyrosine phosphorylated in response to LPS, was cloned. The p38 enzyme and the product of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae HOG1 gene, which are both members of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family, have sequences at and adjacent to critical phosphorylation sites that distinguish these proteins from most other MAP kinase family members. Both HOG1 and p38 are tyrosine phosphorylated after extracellular changes in osmolarity. These findings link a signaling pathway in mammalian cells with a pathway in yeast that is responsive to physiological stress.
Eukaryotic protein-encoding genes possess poly(A) signals that define the end of the messenger RNA and mediate downstream transcriptional termination by RNA polymerase II (Pol II). Termination could occur through an 'anti-termination' mechanism whereby elongation factors dissociate when the poly(A) signal is encountered, producing termination-competent Pol II. An alternative 'torpedo' model postulated that poly(A) site cleavage provides an unprotected RNA 5' end that is degraded by 5' --> 3' exonuclease activities (torpedoes) and so induces dissociation of Pol II from the DNA template. This model has been questioned because unprocessed transcripts read all the way to the site of transcriptional termination before upstream polyadenylation. However, nascent transcripts located 1 kilobase downstream of the human beta-globin gene poly(A) signal are associated with a co-transcriptional cleavage (CoTC) activity that acts with the poly(A) signal to elicit efficient transcriptional termination. The CoTC sequence is an autocatalytic RNA structure that undergoes rapid self-cleavage. Here we show that CoTC acts as a precursor to termination by presenting a free RNA 5' end that is recognized by the human 5' --> 3' exonuclease Xrn2. Degradation of the downstream cleavage product by Xrn2 results in transcriptional termination, as envisaged in the torpedo model.
Any uracil bases in DNA, a result of either misincorporation or deamination of cytosine, are removed by uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG), one of the most efficient and specific of the base-excision DNA-repair enzymes. Crystal structures of human and viral UDGs complexed with free uracil have indicated that the enzyme binds an extrahelical uracil. Such binding of undamaged extrahelical bases has been seen in the structures of two bacterial methyltransferases and bacteriophage T4 endonuclease V. Here we characterize the DNA binding and kinetics of several engineered human UDG mutants and present the crystal structure of one of these, which to our knowledge represents the first structure of any eukaryotic DNA repair enzyme in complex with its damaged, target DNA. Electrostatic orientation along the UDG active site, insertion of an amino acid (residue 272) into the DNA through the minor groove, and compression of the DNA backbone flanking the uracil all result in the flipping-out of the damaged base from the DNA major groove, allowing specific recognition of its phosphate, deoxyribose and uracil moieties. Our structure thus provides a view of a productive complex specific for cleavage of uracil from DNA and also reveals the basis for the enzyme-assisted nucleotide flipping by this critical DNA-repair enzyme.
Protein degradation by the ubiquitin system controls the intracellular concentrations of many regulatory proteins. A protein substrate of the ubiquitin system is conjugated to ubiquitin through the action of three enzymes, E1, E2 and E3, with the degradation signal (degron) of the substrate recognized by E3 (refs 1-3). The resulting multi-ubiquitylated substrate is degraded by the 26S proteasome. Here we describe the physiological regulation of a ubiquitin-dependent pathway through allosteric modulation of its E3 activity by small compounds. Ubr1, the E3 enzyme of the N-end rule pathway (a ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic system) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae mediates the degradation of Cup9, a transcriptional repressor of the peptide transporter Ptr2 (ref. 5). Ubr1 also targets proteins that have destabilizing amino-terminal residues. We show that the degradation of Cup9 is allosterically activated by dipeptides with destabilizing N-terminal residues. In the resulting positive feedback circuit, imported dipeptides bind to Ubr1 and accelerate the Ubr1-dependent degradation of Cup9, thereby de-repressing the expression of Ptr2 and increasing the cell's capacity to import peptides. These findings identify the physiological rationale for the targeting of Cup9 by Ubr1, and indicate that small compounds may regulate other ubiquitin-dependent pathways.
The transcription factors TFIID and SAGA are multi-subunit complexes involved in transcription by RNA polymerase II. TFIID and SAGA contain common TATA-binding protein (TBP)-associated factor (TAF(II)) subunits and each complex contains a subunit with histone acetyltransferase activity. These observations have raised questions about whether the functions of the two complexes in vivo are unique or overlapping. Here we use genome-wide expression analysis to investigate how expression of the yeast genome depends on both shared and unique subunits of these two complexes. We find that expression of most genes requires one or more of the common TAF(II) subunits, indicating that the functions of TFIID and SAGA are widely required for gene expression. Among the subunits shared by TFIID and SAGA are three histone-like TAF(II)s, which have been proposed to form a sub-complex and mediate a common function in global transcription. Unexpectedly, we find that the histone-like TAF(II)s have distinct roles in expression of the yeast genome. Most importantly, we show that the histone acetylase components of TFIID and SAGA (TAF(II)145 and Gcn5) are functionally redundant, indicating that expression of a large fraction of yeast genes can be regulated through the action of either complex.
Ataxia oculomotor apraxia-1 (AOA1) is a neurological disorder caused by mutations in the gene (APTX) encoding aprataxin. Aprataxin is a member of the histidine triad (HIT) family of nucleotide hydrolases and transferases, and inactivating mutations are largely confined to this HIT domain. Aprataxin associates with the DNA repair proteins XRCC1 and XRCC4, which are partners of DNA ligase III and ligase IV, respectively, suggestive of a role in DNA repair. Consistent with this, APTX-defective cell lines are sensitive to agents that cause single-strand breaks and exhibit an increased incidence of induced chromosomal aberrations. It is not, however, known whether aprataxin has a direct or indirect role in DNA repair, or what the physiological substrate of aprataxin might be. Here we show, using purified aprataxin protein and extracts derived from either APTX-defective chicken DT40 cells or Aptx-/- mouse primary neural cells, that aprataxin resolves abortive DNA ligation intermediates. Specifically, aprataxin catalyses the nucleophilic release of adenylate groups covalently linked to 5'-phosphate termini at single-strand nicks and gaps, resulting in the production of 5'-phosphate termini that can be efficiently rejoined. These data indicate that neurological disorders associated with APTX mutations may be caused by the gradual accumulation of unrepaired DNA strand breaks resulting from abortive DNA ligation events.
Fully-differentiated mouse 3T3-L1 fibroblasts accumulate large amounts of lipid at 7-10 days after induction by insulin or by dexamethasone and a methyl xanthine. G proteins mediate transmembrane signalling from a diverse group of cell-surface receptors to effector units that include phospholipase C, adenylyl cyclase and ion channels. They are also targets of regulation themselves. 3T3-L1 fibroblasts display marked changes in levels of G protein when induced to differentiate to adipocytes. Here we show that cholera toxin, which ADP-ribosylates and activates the G protein subunit Gs alpha, blocks the induction of differentiation, whereas increasing intracellular cyclic AMP directly with the dibutyryl analogue or indirectly with pertussis toxin or forskolin does not affect differentiation. Oligodeoxynucleotides antisense to the sequence encoding Gs alpha accelerate differentiation markedly. The time course of adipogenesis declined from 7-10 days in controls to roughly 3 days in cultures treated with antisense-Gs alpha oligodeoxynucleotides, whereas oligodeoxynucleotides, antisense to Gi alpha 1, Gi alpha 3, and sense and missense to Gs alpha, had no such effect. Antisense-Gs alpha alone induced differentiation by day 7, indicating that Gs alpha activity modulates differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells, acting in a new role which is independent of increased intracellular cAMP.
The major events of the cell division cycle are triggered by periodic changes in the activity of cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs). In mammals, the members of the CDK family include CDK2 and CDC2, which are thought to be involved in the control of DNA replication and mitosis, respectively. The protein kinase activity of these enzymes is controlled by a complex array of mechanisms. Activation of the CDK catalytic subunit requires association with a positive regulatory subunit (cyclin) and phosphorylation (at Thr 160 in CDK2). This activated complex can be inhibited by additional phosphorylation at Thr 14 and Tyr 15. Here we report the identification of a new mechanism for the regulation of CDK2 activity. We find that CDK2/cyclin complexes in mouse fibroblasts associate tightly with a 20K protein (CAP20). Complexes containing CAP20 were isolated from cell lysates and found to have negligible kinase activity, indicating that CAP20 association in vivo may inhibit CDK2 activity. We purified CAP20 from 3T3 cells and found that low concentrations of the protein completely inhibit the kinase activity of CDK2 in vitro. Thus CAP20 represents a new negative regulatory subunit that inhibits the activity of CDK2/cyclin complexes in mammalian cells.
Alteration of the human mismatch repair gene hMSH2 has been linked to the microsatellite DNA instability found in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer and several sporadic cancers. This microsatellite DNA instability is thought to arise from defective repair of DNA replication errors that create insertion-deletion loop-type (IDL) mismatched nucleotides. Here, it is shown that purified hMSH2 protein efficiently and specifically binds DNA containing IDL mismatches of up to 14 nucleotides. These results support a direct role for hMSH2 in mutation avoidance and microsatellite stability in human cells.
Chromosome condensation requires condensin, which comprises five subunits. Two of these subunits--both being structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) proteins-are coiled-coils with globular terminal domains that interact with ATP and DNA. The remaining three, non-SMC subunits also have essential, albeit undefined, roles in condensation. Here we report that Cnd2 (ref. 6), a non-SMC subunit of fission yeast similar to Drosophila Barren and the budding yeast protein Brn1 (refs 8, 9), is required for both interphase and mitotic condensation. In cnd2-1 mutants, ultraviolet-induced DNA damage is not repaired, and cells arrested by hydroxyurea do not recover. A definitive defect of interphase is abolishment of Cds1 (a checkpoint kinase) activation in the presence of hydroxyurea in both cnd2-1 mutant cells and in cells where other condensin subunits have been genetically disrupted. In the absence of hydroxyurea, a G2 checkpoint delay occurred in cnd2-1 mutants in a manner dependent on Cds1 and ATM-like Rad3, but not Chk1 (refs 10-13), before the mitotic condensation defect. Furthermore, cnd2-1 was synthetic-lethal with mutations of excision repair, RecQ helicase and DNA replication enzymes. These interphase and mitotic defects provide insight into the mechanistic role of non-SMC subunits that interact with the globular SMC domains in the heteropentameric holocomplex.
The crystal structure of the complex between Eco RI endonuclease and the cognate oligonucleotide TCGCGAATTCGCG provides a detailed example of the structural basis of sequence-specific DNA-protein interactions. The structure was determined, to 3 A resolution, by the ISIR (iterative single isomorphous replacement) method with a platinum isomorphous derivative. The complex has twofold symmetry. Each subunit of the endonuclease is organized into an alpha/beta domain consisting a five-stranded beta sheet, alpha helices, and an extension, called the "arm," which wraps around the DNA. The large beta sheet consists of antiparallel and parallel motifs that form the foundations for the loops and alpha helices responsible for DNA strand scission and sequence-specific recognition, respectively. The DNA cleavage site is located in a cleft that binds the DNA backbone in the vicinity of the scissile bond. Sequence specificity is mediated by 12 hydrogen bonds originating from alpha helical recognition modules. Arg200 forms two hydrogen bonds with guanine while Glu144 and Arg145 form four hydrogen bonds to adjacent adenine residues. These interactions discriminate the Eco RI hexanucleotide GAATTC from all other hexanucleotides because any base substitution would require rupture of at least one of these hydrogen bonds.
Many attempts have been made to mimic the catalytic oxidative properties of the enzyme cytochrome P-450. For homogeneous systems the mechanisms of oxidation can be readily determined but proper mimicry of the protein environment is difficult to achieve. Heterogeneous mimics have been designed that use organometallic complexes encapsulated in the supercages of zeolites, which enables control of selectivity and inhibition of auto-oxidation. But these systems do not show any mechanistic analogy with the enzymatic process, and the oxidation rates tend to be low. Here we report a composite catalytic system that achieves realistic mimicry of cytochrome P-450 as well as catalytic turnover rates that make the system industrially viable. Our catalyst incorporates iron phthalocyanine complexes encapsulated in crystals of zeolite Y, which are in turn embedded in a polydimethylsiloxane membrane. The polymer acts as a mimic of the phospholipid membrane in which cytochrome P-450 resides, acting as an interface between two immiscible phases and avoiding the need for solvents or phase-transfer agents. This system oxidizes alkanes at room temperature at rates comparable to those of the enzyme. The observation of a large kinetic isotope effect and the preferential oxidation of tertiary C-H bonds suggest close mechanistic similarities to the enzymatic process.
A psbA gene encoding the target of photosystem II herbicide inhibition, the 32,000-dalton thylakoid membrane protein, has been cloned from a mutant of Anacystis nidulans R2, which is resistant to 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea-(diuron). A cloned DNA fragment from within the coding region of this gene transforms wild-type cells to herbicide resistance, proving that mutation within psbA is responsible for that phenotype. The mutation consists of a single nucleotide change that replaces serine at position 264 of the wild-type protein with alanine in that of the diuron-resistant mutant.
Cobalamin (Cbl, vitamin B(12)) is a bacterial organic compound and an essential coenzyme in mammals, which take it up from the diet. This occurs by the combined action of the gastric intrinsic factor (IF) and the ileal endocytic cubam receptor formed by the 460-kilodalton (kDa) protein cubilin and the 45-kDa transmembrane protein amnionless. Loss of function of any of these proteins ultimately leads to Cbl deficiency in man. Here we present the crystal structure of the complex between IF-Cbl and the cubilin IF-Cbl-binding-region (CUB(5-8)) determined at 3.3 A resolution. The structure provides insight into how several CUB (for 'complement C1r/C1s, Uegf, Bmp1') domains collectively function as modular ligand-binding regions, and how two distant CUB domains embrace the Cbl molecule by binding the two IF domains in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. This dual-point model provides a probable explanation of how Cbl indirectly induces ligand-receptor coupling. Finally, the comparison of Ca(2+)-binding CUB domains and the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor-type A modules suggests that the electrostatic pairing of a basic ligand arginine/lysine residue with Ca(2+)-coordinating acidic aspartates/glutamates is a common theme of Ca(2+)-dependent ligand-receptor interactions.
The difficulty of working with the intact brain in vivo has led to the increasing use of nerve cell cultures in neurobiology. However, dissociated cells cannot be unambiguously identified by morphological criteria before the third week in culture, for it is not until then that the basic morphology and size of neurones become stable so that these and other cell types can be easily distinguished. However, cultured neurones can be identified by various cytochemical techniques based on (1) the detection of neurotransmitters or receptors for transmitters, (2) the presence of the Thy 1 antigen and the receptor for tetanus toxin, which are present on the membrane of most neurones, and (3) the presence in neurones of neurone-specific enolase (NSE), a cytoplasmic enzyme, which can only be identified on fixed specimens. Furthermore, other cell types in culture can also be specifically labelled. For instance, antisera to galactocerebroside bind selectively to oligodendrocytes, and antibodies to a neural tumour bind selectively to Schwann cells. We report here the selective interaction of phosphorylcholine-binding myeloma proteins (PC-BMP) with mouse neurones in culture and  in suspension. Phosphorylcholine (PC) is found as part of lecithin and sphingomyelin molecules in variable amounts in eukaryotic and prokaryotic membranes, including plasma membranes.
Rabbit antibody against lecine-binding protein isolated from Escherichia coli K-12 has been prepared. This antibody has been used in conjunction with enzyme-labeled antibody to allow an immunocytochemical localizati of leucine-binding protein in the Escherichil coli cell. This protein appears to be present only in the envelope and not in the cytoplasm.
Blood platelets limit blood loss at sites of vascular injury by forming a mechanical plug. They are also involved in thrombosis, atherosclerosis, inflammation and metastasis. Platelet activation is essential for these physiological and pathological reactions and depends upon their adhesion to the vessel wall and attachment to each other in the aggregation process. The two known pathways of aggregation are mediated by the release of endoperoxides/thromboxane A2 and ADP which amplify platelet aggregation. Here we report the identification of a new pathway of aggregation which is mediated by the release of a metalloproteinase enzyme, gelatinase A.
A soluble adenylyl cyclase was constructed by linkage of portions of the cytosolic domains of the mammalian type I and type II enzymes. The soluble enzyme was stimulated by both forskolin and the alpha subunit of the heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein) Gs (Gs alpha). Expression of the construct complemented the catabolic defect in a strain of Escherichia coli that is deficient in adenylyl cyclase activity. The active, approximately 60-kilodalton enzyme accumulated in the cytoplasmic fraction of E. coli to yield activities in excess of 1 nanomole per minute per milligram of protein. The two sets of transmembrane helices of mammalian adenylyl cyclases are thus not necessary for the catalytic or the most characteristic regulatory activities of the enzyme. This system may be useful for both genetic and biochemical analysis of G protein-regulated adenylyl cyclases.
The title of the 5 June report on page 1445 by R. C. deL. Milton et al. should have been "Total chemical synthesis of a D-enzyme: The enantiomers of HIV-1 protease show reciprocal chiral substrate specificity." Figure 3 in the same report (p. 1447) was inadvertently printed upside down. The labels "L-HIV protease" and "D-HIV protease" were therefore under the wrong illustrations. The correct figure is printed below. [See figure in the PDF file]
Sirtuins are NAD(+)-dependent protein deacetylases. They mediate adaptive responses to a variety of stresses, including calorie restriction and metabolic stress. Sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) is localized in the mitochondrial matrix, where it regulates the acetylation levels of metabolic enzymes, including acetyl coenzyme A synthetase 2 (refs 1, 2). Mice lacking both Sirt3 alleles appear phenotypically normal under basal conditions, but show marked hyperacetylation of several mitochondrial proteins. Here we report that SIRT3 expression is upregulated during fasting in liver and brown adipose tissues. During fasting, livers from mice lacking SIRT3 had higher levels of fatty-acid oxidation intermediate products and triglycerides, associated with decreased levels of fatty-acid oxidation, compared to livers from wild-type mice. Mass spectrometry of mitochondrial proteins shows that long-chain acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase (LCAD) is hyperacetylated at lysine 42 in the absence of SIRT3. LCAD is deacetylated in wild-type mice under fasted conditions and by SIRT3 in vitro and in vivo; and hyperacetylation of LCAD reduces its enzymatic activity. Mice lacking SIRT3 exhibit hallmarks of fatty-acid oxidation disorders during fasting, including reduced ATP levels and intolerance to cold exposure. These findings identify acetylation as a novel regulatory mechanism for mitochondrial fatty-acid oxidation and demonstrate that SIRT3 modulates mitochondrial intermediary metabolism and fatty-acid use during fasting.
Four-residue beta-turns and larger loop structures represent a significant fraction of globular protein surfaces and play an important role in determining the conformation and specificity of enzyme active sites and antibody-combining sites. Turns are an attractive starting point to develop protein design methods, as they involve a small number of consecutive residues, adopt a limited number of defined conformations and are minimally constrained by packing interactions with the remainder of the protein. The ability to substitute one beta-turn geometry for another will extend protein engineering beyond the redecoration of fixed backbone conformations to include local restructuring and the repositioning of surface side chains. To determine the feasibility and to examine the effect of such a structural modification on the fold and thermodynamic stability of a globular protein, we have substituted a five-residue turn sequence from concanavalin A for a type I' beta-turn in staphylococcal nuclease. The resulting hybrid protein is folded and has full nuclease enzymatic activity but reduced thermodynamic stability. The crystal structure of the hybrid protein reveals that the guest turn sequence retains the conformation of the parent concanavalin A structure when substituted in the nuclease host.
Substantial evidence has implicated Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in the aetiology of two human neoplasms, nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and Burkitt's lymphoma. This is supported by the presence of high antibody titres to EBV early antigen and virus capsid antigen, as well as antibody to two viral-associated enzymes, DNase and DNA polymerase. Patients with NPC, particularly the undifferentiated form, are commonly found to have EBV DNA in the tumour. Ito and others have presented strong epidemiological evidence that phorbol esters are related to the unusual geographic distribution of NPC in southeastern regions of China. There appears to be a close link between the widespread EBV infection of the Asian population and the distinct regional distribution in China of plants that produce diterpene ester. Naturally occurring phorbol esters are produced by plants of the Euphorbiaceae and Thymelaeaceae, which are used as traditional herbal medicines. Although it has been established that EBV can infect epithelial cells isolated from NPC as well as certain normal epithelial cells, there has been no in vitro evidence that EBV induces neoplastic transformation in normal human epithelial cells with or without exposure to phorbol esters. We report here evidence that transformation of normal human epithelial cells results from exposure to infectious EBV and that transformation is dependent on the presence of phorbol esters.
In eukaryotes, U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) forms spliceosomes in equal stoichiometry with U2, U4, U5 and U6 snRNPs; however, its abundance in human far exceeds that of the other snRNPs. Here we used antisense morpholino oligonucleotide to U1 snRNA to achieve functional U1 snRNP knockdown in HeLa cells, and identified accumulated unspliced pre-mRNAs by genomic tiling microarrays. In addition to inhibiting splicing, U1 snRNP knockdown caused premature cleavage and polyadenylation in numerous pre-mRNAs at cryptic polyadenylation signals, frequently in introns near (<5 kilobases) the start of the transcript. This did not occur when splicing was inhibited with U2 snRNA antisense morpholino oligonucleotide or the U2-snRNP-inactivating drug spliceostatin A unless U1 antisense morpholino oligonucleotide was also included. We further show that U1 snRNA-pre-mRNA base pairing was required to suppress premature cleavage and polyadenylation from nearby cryptic polyadenylation signals located in introns. These findings reveal a critical splicing-independent function for U1 snRNP in protecting the transcriptome, which we propose explains its overabundance.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus, a disease with significant effects on the health and economy of Western societies, involves disturbances in both lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. In the insulin-resistant or diabetic state, the liver is unresponsive to the actions of insulin with regard to the suppression of glucose output but continues to produce large amounts of lipid, the latter mimicking the fed, insulin-replete condition. The disordered distribution of lipids contributes to the cardiovascular disease that is the greatest cause of mortality of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Yet the precise signal transduction pathways by which insulin regulates hepatic lipid synthesis and degradation remain largely unknown. Here we describe a mechanism by which insulin, through the intermediary protein kinase Akt2/protein kinase B (PKB)-beta, elicits the phosphorylation and inhibition of the transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha), a global regulator of hepatic metabolism during fasting. Phosphorylation prevents the recruitment of PGC-1alpha to the cognate promoters, impairing its ability to promote gluconeogenesis and fatty acid oxidation. These results define a mechanism by which insulin controls lipid catabolism in the liver and suggest a novel site for therapy in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
A large multisubunit complex containing RNA polymerase II, general transcription factors and SRB regulatory proteins initiates transcription of class II genes in yeast cells. The SRB proteins are a hallmark of this RNA polymerase II holoenzyme as they are found only in this complex, where they contribute to the response to regulators. We have now isolated a human homologue of the yeast SRB7 gene and used antibodies against human SRB7 protein to purify and characterize a mammalian RNA polymerase II holoenzyme containing the general transcription factors TFIIE and TFIIH. This holoenzyme is more responsive to transcriptional activators than core RNA polymerase II when assayed in the presence of coactivators.
mahoganoid is a mouse coat-color mutation whose pigmentary phenotype and genetic interactions resemble those of Attractin (Atrn). Atrn mutations also cause spongiform neurodegeneration. Here, we show that a null mutation for mahoganoid causes a similar age-dependent neuropathology that includes many features of prion diseases but without accumulation of protease-resistant prion protein. The gene mutated in mahoganoid encodes a RING-containing protein with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity in vitro. Similarities in phenotype, expression, and genetic interactions suggest that mahoganoid and Atrn genes are part of a conserved pathway for regulated protein turnover whose function is essential for neuronal viability.
The arabidopsis thaliana HY4 gene encodes CRY1, a 75-kilodalton flavoprotein mediating blue light-dependent regulation of seedling development. CRY1 is demonstrated here to noncovalently bind stoichiometric amounts of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). The redox properties of FAD bound by CRY1 include an unexpected stability of the neutral radical flavosemiquinone (FADH.). The absorption properties of this flavosemiquinone provide a likely explanation for the additional sensitivity exhibited by CRY1-mediated responses in the green region of the visible spectrum. Despite the sequence homology to microbial DNA photolyases, CRY1 was found to have no detectable photolyase activity.
The protein-tyrosine kinase activity of the proto-oncogene product p60c-src is negatively regulated by the phosphorylation of a tyrosine residue close to the C terminus, tyrosine 527. The phosphorylation might be catalysed by a so-far-unidentified tyrosine kinase, distinct from p60c-src. Recently we purified a protein-tyrosine kinase that specifically phosphorylates tyrosine 527 of p60c-src from neonatal rat brain. We have now confirmed the specificity of this enzyme by using a mutant p60c-src that has a phenylalanine instead of tyrosine 527, and cloned a complementary DNA that encodes the enzyme. The enzyme is similar to kinases of the src family in that it has two conserved regions, Src-homology regions 2 and 3, upstream of a tyrosine kinase domain. The amino-acid identity of each region is no more than 47%, however, and the enzyme lacks phosphorylation sites corresponding to tyrosines 416 and 527 of p60c-src and has no myristylation signal. These results suggest that this protein-tyrosine kinase, which might negatively regulate p60c-src, represents a new type of tyrosine kinase.
Immunology has had a major impact on neurobiology, expanding dramatically the number of subjects amenable to investigation. Studies with antibodies to neuropeptides, transmitters, and transmitter enzymes have disclosed a great heterogeneity among neurons and have provided clues for interpreting anatomical connections. Monoclonal antibodies are being used to identify functionally related subpopulations of neurons and cell lineages in development and to study mechanisms by which axons grow along stereotypic pathways to reach their targets. Other antibodies have identified molecules that appear to participate in cell aggregation, cell migration, cell position, and axon growth. Antibodies have revealed that many proteins are concentrated in anatomically distinct regions of the neuron. Moreover, these studies have suggested that individual proteins have different antigenic epitopes shielded or modified in different parts of the same neuron. Antibodies to membrane proteins crucial for neuronal function, such as ion pumps, ion-selective channels, and receptors, have been used to map their distributions and to study their structures at high resolution.
In nature, organisms are exposed to chronic low-dose ultraviolet light (CLUV) as opposed to the acute high doses common to laboratory experiments. Analysis of the cellular response to acute high-dose exposure has delineated the importance of direct DNA repair by the nucleotide excision repair pathway and for checkpoint-induced cell cycle arrest in promoting cell survival. Here we examine the response of yeast cells to CLUV and identify a key role for the RAD6-RAD18-RAD5 error-free postreplication repair (RAD6 error-free PRR) pathway in promoting cell growth and survival. We show that loss of the RAD6 error-free PRR pathway results in DNA-damage-checkpoint-induced G2 arrest in CLUV-exposed cells, whereas wild-type and nucleotide-excision-repair-deficient cells are largely unaffected. Cell cycle arrest in the absence of the RAD6 error-free PRR pathway was not caused by a repair defect or by the accumulation of ultraviolet-induced photoproducts. Notably, we observed increased replication protein A (RPA)- and Rad52-yellow fluorescent protein foci in the CLUV-exposed rad18Delta cells and demonstrated that Rad52-mediated homologous recombination is required for the viability of the rad18Delta cells after release from CLUV-induced G2 arrest. These and other data presented suggest that, in response to environmental levels of ultraviolet exposure, the RAD6 error-free PRR pathway promotes replication of damaged templates without the generation of extensive single-stranded DNA regions. Thus, the error-free PRR pathway is specifically important during chronic low-dose ultraviolet exposure to prevent counter-productive DNA checkpoint activation and allow cells to proliferate normally.
Human cytomegalovirus infection perturbs multiple cellular processes that could promote the release of proapoptotic stimuli. Consequently, it encodes mechanisms to prevent cell death during infection. Using rotenone, a potent inhibitor of the mitochondrial enzyme complex I (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-ubiquinone oxido-reductase), we found that human cytomegalovirus infection protected cells from rotenone-induced apoptosis, a protection mediated by a 2.7-kilobase virally encoded RNA (beta2.7). During infection, beta2.7 RNA interacted with complex I and prevented the relocalization of the essential subunit genes associated with retinoid/interferon-induced mortality-19, in response to apoptotic stimuli. This interaction, which is important for stabilizing the mitochondrial membrane potential, resulted in continued adenosine triphosphate production, which is critical for the successful completion of the virus' life cycle. Complex I targeting by a viral RNA represents a refined strategy to modulate the metabolic viability of the infected host cell.
Electrical coupling and dye coupling between pairs of rat hepatocytes were reversibly reduced by brief exposure to halogenated methanes (CBrCl3, CCl4, and CHCl3). The potency of different halomethanes in uncoupling hepatocytes was comparable to their hepatotoxicity in vivo, and the rank order was the same as that of their tendency to form free radicals. The effect of carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) on hepatocytes was substantially reduced by prior treatment with SKF 525A, an inhibitor of cytochrome P-450, and by exposure to the reducing reagent beta-mercaptoethanol. Halomethane uncoupling occurred with or without extracellular calcium and did not change intracellular concentrations of calcium and hydrogen ions or the phosphorylation state of the main gap-junctional protein. Thus the uncoupling appears to depend on cytochrome P-450 oxidative metabolism in which free radicals are generated and may result from oxidation of the gap-junctional protein or of a regulatory molecule that leads to closure of gap-junctional channels. Decreases in junctional conductance may be a rapid cellular response to injury that protects healthy cells by uncoupling them from unhealthy ones.
Murine neuroblastoma cells have been widely used as a model system for neuronal cells as they can be induced to differentiate in culture by various stimuli, such as dibutyryl cyclic AMP (dbcAMP), prostaglandin, and serum starvation. The cells respond with assembly of microtubules, leading to neurite outgrowth, with increased activity of neuronal-specific enzymes, tyrosine hydroxylase, choline acetyltransferase and acetylcholine-esterase, and synthesis of neurotransmitters. The differentiated cells lose tumorigenicity. Cell-to-substratum adhesion is evidently crucial for neurone extension in vitro. Neurite outgrowth is induced by treatments that increase cell-to-substratum adhesion in some neuronal cell cultures. We have now identified the major high molecular weight proteins synthesized and secreted by murine C1300 neuroblastoma cells as fibronectin, laminin and type IV procollagen, of which the latter two were also found to be deposited in pericellular matrix form.
The use of bacterial membrane vesicles as an experimental system for the study of active transport has been discussed. Vesicles are prepared from osmotically sensitized bacteria, and consist of osmotically intact, membranebound sacs without internal structure. They retain litle or no cytoplasm. Under appropriate conditions, these vesicles catalyze the transport of a variety of solutes at rates which are comparable, in many cases, to those of intact cells. Two general types of transport systems have been elucidated in the vesicle system: (i) group translocation systems which catalyze vectorial covalent reactions; and (ii) respirationlinked transport systems that catalyze the active transport of a whole range of metabolites against an electrochemical or osmotic gradient. In E. coli membrane vesicles, the respiration-linked transport systems are coupled primarily to the oxidation of (D)-lactate to pyruvate, catalyzed by a flavin-linked, membrane-bound (D)-lactate dehydrogenase which has been purified to homogeneity. Electrons derived from (D)-lactate or certain artificial electron donors are transferred to oxygen by means of a membrane-bound respiratory chain, and respiration is coupled to active transport within a segment of the respiratory chain between the primary dehydrogenase and cytochrome. b(l). The great majority of the individual membrane vesicles in the population catalyze active transport, and the generation or hydtolysis of ATP is not involved. Under anaerobic conditions, fumarate or nitrate can be utilized in place of oxygen as terminal electron acceptors. With the exception that (D)-lactate is not always the most effective electron donor for active transport, vesicles prepared from a number of other organisms catalyze transport in a similar manner. Fluorescent dansylgalactosides are useful molecular probes of active transport in the vesicle system. These compounds are competitive inhibitors of beta-galactoside transport, but are not transported themselves. Fluorescence studies indicate that the lac carrier protein constitutes approximately 3 to 6 percent of the total membrane protein, and that it is not accessible to the external medium unless the membrane is "energized." Thus, energy is coupled to one of the initial steps in the transport process. Studies with a photoaffinity-labeled galactoside provide independent support for this conclusion. When membrane vesicles prepared from a (D)-lactate dehydrogenase mutant of E. coli are treated with (D)-lactate dehydrogenase, the enzyme binds to the vesicles and they regain the capacity to catalyze (D)-lactate oxidation and (D)-lactate-dependent active transport. The maximal specific transport activity obtained in the reconstituted system is similar in magnitude to that of wildtype vesicles. Titration studies with dansylgalactoside demonstrate that there is at least a seven- to eightfold excess of lac carrier protein relative to (D)-lactate dehydrogenase. Evidence is presented indicating that the enzyme is bound to the inner surface of native membrane vesicles and to the outer surface of reconstituted vesicles, and that the flavin coenzyme moiety is critically involved in binding. Possible mechanisms of respirationlinked active transport are discussed.
Transformation of cells by herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) can be induced by the BglII C (0.43-0.58 map units) or N (0.58-0.625) fragments of the viral genome. Sequences partially overlapping both fragments (0.566-0.602) encode two 3' coterminal mRNAs; these in turn direct the synthesis of two related polypeptides of molecular weight 140,000 (140K) and 35K (refs 4, 7), which may be involved in transformation. Recently, a temperature-sensitive (ts) mutation affecting HSV-induced ribonucleotide reductase has been mapped within this common region (B.M. Dutia, personal communication). We have partially purified the induced reductase and raised a rabbit antiserum to it which inhibits the enzyme activity and immunoprecipitates from infected cells a 144K polypeptide and minor species including a 38K polypeptide. Here we show that a monoclonal antibody to the putative transforming proteins competes with the rabbit serum for the 144K and 38K antigens and also immunoprecipitates specifically the induced reductase activity. These results suggest a possible role for ribonucleotide reductase in HSV-2-induced transformation.
Mature microRNAs (miRNAs) are generated via a two-step processing pathway to yield approximately 22-nucleotide small RNAs that regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. Initial cleavage is catalysed by Drosha, a nuclease of the RNase III family, which acts on primary miRNA transcripts (pri-miRNAs) in the nucleus. Here we show that Drosha exists in a multiprotein complex, the Microprocessor, and begin the process of deconstructing that complex into its constituent components. Along with Drosha, the Microprocessor also contains Pasha (partner of Drosha), a double-stranded RNA binding protein. Suppression of Pasha expression in Drosophila cells or Caenorhabditis elegans interferes with pri-miRNA processing, leading to an accumulation of pri-miRNAs and a reduction in mature miRNAs. Finally, depletion or mutation of pash-1 in C. elegans causes de-repression of a let-7 reporter and the appearance of phenotypic defects overlapping those observed upon examination of worms with lesions in Dicer (dcr-1) or Drosha (drsh-1). Considered together, these results indicate a role for Pasha in miRNA maturation and miRNA-mediated gene regulation.
Alzheimer's disease is characterized by cerebral deposits of amyloid beta-protein (AP) as senile plaque core and vascular amyloid, and a complementary DNA encoding a precursor of this protein (APP) has been cloned from human brain. From a cDNA library of a human glioblastoma cell line, we have isolated a cDNA identical to that previously reported, together with a new cDNA which contains a 225-nucleotide insert. The sequence of the 56 amino acids at the N-terminal of the protein deduced from this insert is highly homologous to the basic trypsin inhibitor family, and the lysate from COS-1 cells transfected with the longer APP cDNA showed an increased inhibition of trypsin activity. Partial sequencing of the genomic DNA encoding APP showed that the 225 nucleotides are located in two exons. At least three messenger RNA species, apparently transcribed from a single APP gene by alternative splicing, were found in human brain. We suggest that protease inhibition by the longer APP(s) could be related to aberrant APP catabolism.
Regulation of the expression of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) genome is accomplished in large part by controlling transcription elongation. The viral protein Tat hijacks the host cell's RNA polymerase II elongation control machinery through interaction with the positive transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, and directs the factor to promote productive elongation of HIV mRNA. Here we describe the crystal structure of the Tat.P-TEFb complex containing HIV-1 Tat, human Cdk9 (also known as CDK9), and human cyclin T1 (also known as CCNT1). Tat adopts a structure complementary to the surface of P-TEFb and makes extensive contacts, mainly with the cyclin T1 subunit of P-TEFb, but also with the T-loop of the Cdk9 subunit. The structure provides a plausible explanation for the tolerance of Tat to sequence variations at certain sites. Importantly, Tat induces significant conformational changes in P-TEFb. This finding lays a foundation for the design of compounds that would specifically inhibit the Tat.P-TEFb complex and block HIV replication.
Cardiovascular diseases are predicted to be the most common cause of death worldwide by 2020. Here we show that angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) maps to a defined quantitative trait locus (QTL) on the X chromosome in three different rat models of hypertension. In all hypertensive rat strains, ACE2 messenger RNA and protein expression were markedly reduced, suggesting that ace2 is a candidate gene for this QTL. Targeted disruption of ACE2 in mice results in a severe cardiac contractility defect, increased angiotensin II levels, and upregulation of hypoxia-induced genes in the heart. Genetic ablation of ACE on an ACE2 mutant background completely rescues the cardiac phenotype. But disruption of ACER, a Drosophila ACE2 homologue, results in a severe defect of heart morphogenesis. These genetic data for ACE2 show that it is an essential regulator of heart function in vivo.
Transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is negatively regulated by the human factors DRB-sensitivity inducing factor (DSIF) and negative elongation factor (NELF). A 66-kilodalton subunit of NELF (NELF-A) shows limited sequence similarity to hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg), the viral protein required for replication of hepatitis delta virus (HDV). The host RNAPII has been implicated in HDV replication, but the detailed mechanism and the role of HDAg in this process are not understood. We show that HDAg binds RNAPII directly and stimulates transcription by displacing NELF and promoting RNAPII elongation. These results suggest that HDAg may regulate RNAPII elongation during both cellular messenger RNA synthesis and HDV RNA replication.
A number of enzymes recognize and repair DNA lesions. The DNA-mismatch repair system corrects base-base mismatches and small loops, whereas the nucleotide-excision repair system removes pyrimidine dimers and other helix-distorting lesions. DNA molecules with mismatches or loops can arise as a consequence of heteroduplex formation during meiotic recombination. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, repair of mismatches results in gene conversion or restoration, and failure to repair the mismatch results in post-meiotic segregation (PMS). The ratio of gene-conversion to PMS events reflects the efficiency of DNA repair. By examining the PMS patterns in yeast strains heterozygous for a mutant allele with a 26-base-pair insertion, we find that the repair of 26-base loops involves Msh2 (a DNA-mismatch repair protein) and Rad1 (a protein required for nucleotide-excision repair).
In the absence of extraneously added template, standard preparations of Q beta replicase spontaneously synthesize RNA in vitro, possibly as a result of RNA contamination. Using special enzyme purifications, Sumper and Luce presented evidence that self-replicating RNA not present ab initio can grow out of 'template-free' incorporation mixtures. In contrast to DNA polymerase I and RNA polymerase, which also show de novo synthesis, the products synthesized 'de novo' by Q beta replicase are RNA species containing nonrepetitive sequences of defined lengths which differ between experiments, even when synthesized under identical conditions, in fingerprints, chain lengths and kinetic parameters. Kinetic analysis of the de novo processes distinguished it from template-instructed synthesis and excluded an assumption of self-replicating RNA contamination. These conclusions were questioned recently by Hill and Blumenthal, who claimed to show that highly purified Q beta replicase preparations cannot produce RNA de novo. We now present evidence that, under the conditions required for de novo synthesis, Q beta replicase prepared according to their method is also capable of de novo synthesis. Furthermore, we show that Q beta replicase condenses nucleoside triphosphates to more or less random oligonucleotides.
The abundant nuclear enzyme poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase catalyses the synthesis of poly(ADP-ribose) from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+). This protein has an N-terminal DNA-binding domain containing two zinc-fingers, which is linked to the C-terminal NAD(+)-binding domain by a short region containing several glutamic acid residues that are sites of auto-poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. The intracellular production of poly(ADP-ribose) is induced by agents that generate strand interruptions in DNA. The branched homopolymer chains may attain a size of 200-300 residues but are rapidly degraded after synthesis. The function of poly(ADP-ribose) synthesis is not clear, although it seems to be required for DNA repair. Here we describe a human cell-free system that enables the role of poly(ADP-ribose) synthesis in DNA repair to be characterized. The results indicate that unmodified polymerase molecules bind tightly to DNA strand breaks; auto-poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of the protein then effects its release and allows access to lesions for DNA repair enzymes.
Lysine acetylation regulates many eukaryotic cellular processes, but its function in prokaryotes is largely unknown. We demonstrated that central metabolism enzymes in Salmonella were acetylated extensively and differentially in response to different carbon sources, concomitantly with changes in cell growth and metabolic flux. The relative activities of key enzymes controlling the direction of glycolysis versus gluconeogenesis and the branching between citrate cycle and glyoxylate bypass were all regulated by acetylation. This modulation is mainly controlled by a pair of lysine acetyltransferase and deacetylase, whose expressions are coordinated with growth status. Reversible acetylation of metabolic enzymes ensure that cells respond environmental changes via promptly sensing cellular energy status and flexibly altering reaction rates or directions. It represents a metabolic regulatory mechanism conserved from bacteria to mammals.
Filamentous fungi are important in medicine, industry, agriculture, and basic biological research. For example, some fungal species are pathogenic to humans, whereas others produce beta-lactam antibiotics (penicillin and cephalosporin). Industrial strains produce large amounts of enzymes, such as glucoamylase and proteases, and low molecular weight compounds, such as citric acid. The largest and most economically important group of plant pathogens are fungi. Several fungal species have biological properties and genetic systems that make them ideally suited for basic biological research. Recently developed techniques for genetic engineering of filamentous fungi make it possible to alter their detrimental and beneficial activities in novel ways.
Antibodies were raised against a synthetic peptide corresponding to 14 amino acid residues at the COOH-terminus of a protein deduced from the human c-erbB-2 nucleotide sequence. These antibodies immunoprecipitated a 185-kilodalton glycoprotein from MKN-7 adenocarcinoma cells. Incubation of the immunoprecipitates with (gamma-32P)ATP resulted in the phosphorylation of this protein on tyrosine residues. These results indicate that the human c-erbB-2 gene product is the 185-kilodalton glycoprotein that is associated with tyrosine kinase activity. Although the c-erbB-2 protein was predicted to encode a protein very similar to epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor, EGF did not stimulate this kinase activity either in vivo or in vitro.
Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (LEF-1) and the closely related T-cell factor 1 (TCF-1) are sequence-specific and cell-type-specific DNA-binding proteins that play important regulatory roles in organogenesis and thymocyte differentiation. LEF-1 participates in regulation of the enhancer associated with the T cell receptor (TCR)-alpha gene by inducing a sharp bend in the DNA and facilitating interactions between Ets-1, PEBP2-alpha, and ATF/CREB, transcription factors bound at sites flanking the LEF-1 site. It seems that LEF-1 plays an architectural role in the assembly and function of this regulatory nucleoprotein complex. LEF-1 recognizes a specific nucleotide sequence through a high-mobility-group (HMG) domain. Proteins containing HMG domains bind DNA in the minor groove, bend the double helix, and recognize four-way junctions and other irregular DNA structures. Here we report the solution structure of a complex of the LEF-1 HMG domain and adjacent basic region with its cognate DNA. The structure reveals the HMG domain bound in the widened minor groove of a markedly distorted and bent double helix. The basic region binds across the narrowed major groove and contributes to DNA recognition.
Proteasomal receptors that recognize ubiquitin chains attached to substrates are key mediators of selective protein degradation in eukaryotes. Here we report the identification of a new ubiquitin receptor, Rpn13/ARM1, a known component of the proteasome. Rpn13 binds ubiquitin through a conserved amino-terminal region termed the pleckstrin-like receptor for ubiquitin (Pru) domain, which binds K48-linked diubiquitin with an affinity of approximately 90 nM. Like proteasomal ubiquitin receptor Rpn10/S5a, Rpn13 also binds ubiquitin-like (UBL) domains of UBL-ubiquitin-associated (UBA) proteins. In yeast, a synthetic phenotype results when specific mutations of the ubiquitin binding sites of Rpn10 and Rpn13 are combined, indicating functional linkage between these ubiquitin receptors. Because Rpn13 is also the proteasomal receptor for Uch37, a deubiquitinating enzyme, our findings suggest a coupling of chain recognition and disassembly at the proteasome.
The function of introns in the evolution of genes can be explained in at least two ways: either introns appeared late in evolution and therefore could not have participated in the construction of primordial genes, or RNA splicing and introns existed in the earliest organisms but were lost during the evolution of the modern prokaryotes. The latter alternative allows the possibility of intron participation in the formation of primordial genes before the divergence of modern prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Blake suggested that evidence for intron-facilitated evolution of a gene might be found by comparing the borders of functional protein domains with the placement of introns. We therefore examined glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), a glycolytic enzyme, because it is the first protein for which the following data are available: X-ray crystallographic studies demonstrating structurally independent protein 'domains' which were highly conserved during the divergence of prokaryotes and eukaryotes; and a study of genomic organization which mapped introns in the gene. Sequencing of the chicken GAPDH gene revealed 11 introns. We report here that sites of three of the introns (IV, VI and XI) correspond closely with the borders of the NAD-binding, catalytic and helical tail domains of the enzyme, supporting the hypothesis that introns did have a role in the evolution of primitive genes. In addition, other biochemical and structural data were used to construct a model of the intron-mediated assembly of the GAPDH gene that explains the existence of 10 introns.
Homeostatic mechanisms in mammals respond to hormones and nutrients to maintain blood glucose levels within a narrow range. Caloric restriction causes many changes in glucose metabolism and extends lifespan; however, how this metabolism is connected to the ageing process is largely unknown. We show here that the Sir2 homologue, SIRT1--which modulates ageing in several species--controls the gluconeogenic/glycolytic pathways in liver in response to fasting signals through the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1alpha. A nutrient signalling response that is mediated by pyruvate induces SIRT1 protein in liver during fasting. We find that once SIRT1 is induced, it interacts with and deacetylates PGC-1alpha at specific lysine residues in an NAD(+)-dependent manner. SIRT1 induces gluconeogenic genes and hepatic glucose output through PGC-1alpha, but does not regulate the effects of PGC-1alpha on mitochondrial genes. In addition, SIRT1 modulates the effects of PGC-1alpha repression of glycolytic genes in response to fasting and pyruvate. Thus, we have identified a molecular mechanism whereby SIRT1 functions in glucose homeostasis as a modulator of PGC-1alpha. These findings have strong implications for the basic pathways of energy homeostasis, diabetes and lifespan.
The RAD25 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae functions in nucleotide excision repair of ultraviolet-damaged DNA and is also required for cell viability. The RAD25 protein shows remarkable homology to the protein encoded by the human nucleotide-excision-repair gene XPB (ERCC3), mutations in which cause the cancer-prone disease xeroderma pigmentosum and also Cockayne's syndrome. Here we purify RAD25 protein from S. cerevisiae and show that it contains single-stranded DNA-dependent ATPase and DNA helicase activities. Extract from the conditional lethal mutant rad25-ts24 exhibits a thermolabile transcriptional defect which can be corrected by the addition of RAD25 protein, indicating a direct and essential role of RAD25 in RNA polymerase II transcription. The protein encoded by the rad25799am allele is defective in DNA repair but is proficient in RNA polymerase II transcription, indicating that RAD25 DNA-repair activity is separable from its transcription function. The rad25 Arg-392 encoded product, which contains a mutation in the ATP-binding motif, is defective in RNA polymerase II transcription, suggesting that the RAD25-encoded DNA helicase functions in DNA duplex opening during transcription initiation.
Fifty of 75 serum samples collected in the West Nile district of Uganda between August 1972 and July 1973 contained antibodies reactive with human T-cell leukemia (lymphotropic) virus type 3 (HTLV-III; mean titer, 601), while 12 of 75 samples were positive in a similar test for HTLV type 1 (HTLV-1) antibodies (mean titer, 236). The samples were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and positive results were confirmed by a newly developed unlabeled antibody-peroxidase procedure with enhanced sensitivity for detection of antibody binding to immunoblots of HTLV-III antigen, demonstrating antibodies to proteins with molecular weights of 24,000, 41,000, and 76,000 in nearly all positive samples. Analysis of titration data indicated enhanced titers of antibody against HTLV-III and HTLV-I when coinfection occurred. The high prevalence and relatively low titers [compared to serum from patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)] of antibodies recognizing HTLV-III proteins in sera from this population at a time that may predate or coincide with the appearance or spread of the AIDS agent (HTLV-III) suggest that the virus detected may have been a predecessor of HTLV-III or is HTLV-III itself but existing in a population acclimated to its presence. It further suggests an African origin of HTLV-III.
Chromatin is composed of DNA and a variety of modified histones and non-histone proteins, which have an impact on cell differentiation, gene regulation and other key cellular processes. Here we present a genome-wide chromatin landscape for Drosophila melanogaster based on eighteen histone modifications, summarized by nine prevalent combinatorial patterns. Integrative analysis with other data (non-histone chromatin proteins, DNase I hypersensitivity, GRO-Seq reads produced by engaged polymerase, short/long RNA products) reveals discrete characteristics of chromosomes, genes, regulatory elements and other functional domains. We find that active genes display distinct chromatin signatures that are correlated with disparate gene lengths, exon patterns, regulatory functions and genomic contexts. We also demonstrate a diversity of signatures among Polycomb targets that include a subset with paused polymerase. This systematic profiling and integrative analysis of chromatin signatures provides insights into how genomic elements are regulated, and will serve as a resource for future experimental investigations of genome structure and function.
The plasma membrane ATPase of plants and fungi is a hydrogen ion pump. The proton gradient generated by the enzyme drives the active transport of nutrients by H+-symport. In addition, the external acidification in plants and the internal alkalinization in fungi, both resulting from activation of the H+ pump, have been proposed to mediate growth responses. This ATPase has a relative molecular mass (Mr) similar to those of the Na+-, K+- and Ca2+-ATPases of animal cells and, like these proteins, forms an aspartylphosphate intermediate. We have cloned, mapped and sequenced the gene encoding the yeast plasma membrane ATPase (PMA1) and report here that it maps to chromosome VII adjacent to LEU1. The strong homology between the amino-acid sequence encoded by PMA1 and those of (Na+ + K+), Na+-, K+- and Ca2+- ATPases is consistent with the notion that the family of cation pumps which form a phosphorylated intermediate evolved from a common ancestral ATPase. The function of the PMA1 gene is essential because a null mutation is lethal in haploid cells.
Cells of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae choose bud sites in a non-random spatial pattern that depends on mating type: axial for haploid cells and bipolar for a/alpha diploid cells. We identified a mutant yeast, axl 1, in which the budding pattern is altered from axial to bipolar. Expression of the AXL1 gene is repressed in a/alpha diploid cells. With the ectopic expression of AXL1, a/alpha cells exhibited an axial budding pattern, thus AXL1 is a key morphological determinant that distinguishes the budding pattern of haploid cells from that of a/alpha diploid cells. AXL1 encodes a protein similar in sequence of the human and Drosophila insulin-degrading enzymes and to the Escherichia coli ptr gene product. The axial budding pattern might result from degradation of a target protein by the putative Axl1 protease.
Selective trafficking of membrane proteins to lysosomes for destruction is required for proper cell signalling and metabolism. Ubiquitylation aids this process by specifying which proteins should be transported to the lysosome lumen by the multivesicular endosome pathway. The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery sorts cargo labelled with ubiquitin into invaginations of endosome membranes. Then, through a highly conserved mechanism also used in cytokinesis and viral budding, it mediates the breaking off of the cargo-containing intraluminal vesicles from the perimeter membrane. The involvement of the ESCRT machinery in suppressing diseases such as cancer, neurodegeneration and infections underscores its importance to the cell.
The active site of potassium (K+) channels catalyses the transport of K+ ions across the plasma membrane--similar to the catalytic function of the active site of an enzyme--and is inhibited by toxins from scorpion venom. On the basis of the conserved structures of K+ pore regions and scorpion toxins, detailed structures for the K+ channel-scorpion toxin binding interface have been proposed. In these models and in previous solution-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies using detergent-solubilized membrane proteins, scorpion toxins were docked to the extracellular entrance of the K+ channel pore assuming rigid, preformed binding sites. Using high-resolution solid-state NMR spectroscopy, here we show that high-affinity binding of the scorpion toxin kaliotoxin to a chimaeric K+ channel (KcsA-Kv1.3) is associated with significant structural rearrangements in both molecules. Our approach involves a combined analysis of chemical shifts and proton-proton distances and demonstrates that solid-state NMR is a sensitive method for analysing the structure of a membrane protein-inhibitor complex. We propose that structural flexibility of the K+ channel and the toxin represents an important determinant for the high specificity of toxin-K+ channel interactions.
The bacteriophage lambda N gene product positively controls development by preventing termination of transcription at terminator sites critical to the sequential expression of phage genes. Many host transcription factors, including RNA polymerase, are involved in N gene action. Recent findings have shown that ribosomal proteins are also involved. The current understanding of how the N protein affects transcription termination is reviewed, and a possible model and current problems are discussed.
RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) is responsible for transcribing all messenger RNAs in eukaryotic cells during a highly regulated process that is conserved from yeast to human, and that serves as a central control point for cellular function. Here we investigate the transcription dynamics of single RNAP II molecules from Saccharomyces cerevisiae against force and in the presence and absence of TFIIS, a transcription elongation factor known to increase transcription through nucleosomal barriers. Using a single-molecule dual-trap optical-tweezers assay combined with a novel method to enrich for active complexes, we found that the response of RNAP II to a hindering force is entirely determined by enzyme backtracking. Surprisingly, RNAP II molecules ceased to transcribe and were unable to recover from backtracks at a force of 7.5 +/- 2 pN, only one-third of the force determined for Escherichia coli RNAP. We show that backtrack pause durations follow a t(-3/2) power law, implying that during backtracking RNAP II diffuses in discrete base-pair steps, and indicating that backtracks may account for most of RNAP II pauses. Significantly, addition of TFIIS rescued backtracked enzymes and allowed transcription to proceed up to a force of 16.9 +/- 3.4 pN. Taken together, these results describe a regulatory mechanism of transcription elongation in eukaryotes by which transcription factors modify the mechanical performance of RNAP II, allowing it to operate against higher loads.
Daily intraperitoneal injection of cadmium chloride (1 milligram per kilogram) for 45 days enhanced gluconeogenesis as evidenced by significant increases in the activities of liver and kidney cortex pyruvate carboxylase, phosphopyruvate carboxylase, hexosediphosphatase, and glucose-6-phosphatase, the quartet of key, rate-limiting enzymes involved in the biotransformation of noncarbohydrate precursors into glucose. Whereas cadmium treatment decreased the level of hepatic glycogen, the concentration of blood glucose and urea was significantly elevated by this heavy metal. Discontinuation of the heavy metal treatment for 28 days, in rats previously injected with cadmium for 45 days, failed to restore the observed biochemical alterations in hepatic and renal carbohydrate metabolism to control values. Evidence indicates that cadmium augments the glucose-synthesizing capacity of liver and kidney cortex and that various metabolic changes persist even after a 4-week period of withdrawal from exposure to the heavy metal.
All reactions involving reverse transcription of RNA are segregated from the cytosol within a subviral particle or capsid composed of the major capsid protein, the polymerase and the RNA template. A key step in the formation of these particles is the selective encapsidation of the RNA template. Although an important general feature of the reverse transcription pathway, encapsidation has been carefully studied only for retroviruses. We have now examined the encapsidation reaction in a family of enveloped DNA viruses that replicate by reverse transcription--the hepatitis B viruses (hepadnaviruses). Our results indicate that the hepadnaviral polymerase (P) gene product is required for RNA packaging, and that the encapsidation function of the enzyme can be separated from its DNA polymerase activity. To our knowledge, this is the first description of a role for polymerase gene products in this step of the reverse transcription pathway.
The contribution of co-translational chaperone functions to protein folding is poorly understood. Ribosome-associated trigger factor (TF) is the first molecular chaperone encountered by nascent polypeptides in bacteria. Here we show, using fluorescence spectroscopy to monitor TF function and structural rearrangements in real time, that TF interacts with ribosomes and translating polypeptides in a dynamic reaction cycle. Ribosome binding stabilizes TF in an open, activated conformation. Activated TF departs from the ribosome after a mean residence time of approximately 10 s, but may remain associated with the elongating nascent chain for up to 35 s, allowing entry of a new TF molecule at the ribosome docking site. The duration of nascent-chain interaction correlates with the occurrence of hydrophobic motifs in translating polypeptides, reflecting a high aggregation propensity. These findings can explain how TF prevents misfolding events during translation and may provide a paradigm for the regulation of nucleotide-independent chaperones.
The crystal structure of squalene-hopene cyclase from Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius was determined at 2.9 angstrom resolution. The mechanism and sequence of this cyclase are closely related to those of 2,3-oxidosqualene cyclases that catalyze the cyclization step in cholesterol biosynthesis. The structure reveals a membrane protein with membrane-binding characteristics similar to those of prostaglandin-H2 synthase, the only other reported protein of this type. The active site of the enzyme is located in a large central cavity that is of suitable size to bind squalene in its required conformation and that is lined by aromatic residues. The structure supports a mechanism in which the acid starting the reaction by protonating a carbon-carbon double bond is an aspartate that is coupled to a histidine. Numerous surface alpha helices are connected by characteristic QW-motifs (Q is glutamine and W is tryptophan) that tighten the protein structure, possibly for absorbing the reaction energy without structural damage.
Maintenance methylation of hemimethylated CpG dinucleotides at DNA replication forks is the key to faithful mitotic inheritance of genomic methylation patterns. UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, containing PHD and RING finger domains 1) is required for maintenance methylation by interacting with DNA nucleotide methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), the maintenance methyltransferase, and with hemimethylated CpG, the substrate for DNMT1 (refs 1 and 2). Here we present the crystal structure of the SET and RING-associated (SRA) domain of mouse UHRF1 in complex with DNA containing a hemimethylated CpG site. The DNA is contacted in both the major and minor grooves by two loops that penetrate into the middle of the DNA helix. The 5-methylcytosine has flipped completely out of the DNA helix and is positioned in a binding pocket with planar stacking contacts, Watson-Crick polar hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions specific for 5-methylcytosine. Hence, UHRF1 contains a previously unknown DNA-binding module and is the first example of a non-enzymatic, sequence-specific DNA-binding protein domain to use the base flipping mechanism to interact with DNA.
The Wilms tumor suppressor gene wt1 encodes a zinc finger DNA binding protein, WT1, that functions as a transcriptional repressor. The fetal mitogen insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) is overexpressed in Wilms tumors and may have autocrine effects in tumor progression. The major fetal IGF-II promoter was defined in transient transfection assays as a region spanning from nucleotides -295 to +135, relative to the transcription start site. WT1 bound to multiple sites in this region and functioned as a potent repressor of IGF-II transcription in vivo. Maximal repression was dependent on the presence of WT1 binding sites on each side of the transcriptional initiation site. These findings provide a molecular basis for overexpression of IGF-II in Wilms tumors and suggest that WT1 negatively regulates blastemal cell proliferation by limiting the production of a fetal growth factor in the developing vertebrate kidney.
The nucleotide sequence of a transforming human c-sis complementary DNA shows an open reading frame 723 base pairs in length located downstream from an in-phase terminator thymine-guanine-adenine codon. Sequences within this region were identical to those previously determined for the exons of the normal human c-sis gene. Thus, the predicted transforming product, a protein of 27,281 daltons, may be the actual precursor for normal human platelet-derived growth factor chain A.
After infection and a prolonged incubation period, the scrapie agent causes a degenerative disease of the central nervous system in sheep and goats. Six lines of evidence including  sensitivity to proteases demonstrate that this agent contains a protein that is required for infectivity. Although the scrapie agent is irreversibly inactivated by alkali, five procedures with more specificity for modifying nucleic acids failed to cause inactivation. The agent shows heterogeneity with respect to size, apparently a result of its hydrophobicity; the smallest form may have a molecular weight of 50,000 or less. Because the novel properties of the scrapie agent distinguish it from viruses, plasmids, and viroids, a new term "prion" is proposed to denote a small proteinaceous infectious particle which is resistant to inactivation by most procedures that modify nucleic acids. Knowledge of the scrapie agent structure may have significance for understanding the causes of several degenerative diseases.
Smallpox eradication culminated the most successful antimicrobial campaign in medical history. To characterize further the linear double-stranded DNA genome of the aetiological agent of smallpox, we have determined the entire nucleotide sequence of the highly virulent variola major virus, strain Bangladesh-1975 (VAR-BSH; 186,102 base pairs, 33.7% G + C; Genbank accession number, L22579). Here we highlight features of the molecule and focus on a few of the 187 putative proteins that probably contribute to pathogenicity and virus host-range properties. One hundred and fifty proteins were markedly similar to those of vaccinia virus (smallpox vaccine), for which a complete sequence has been reported for strain Copenhagen (VAC-CPN; 191,636 base pairs, 33.3% G + C). The remaining 37 proteins reflected variola-specific sequences or open reading frame divergences for variant proteins, which are often truncated or elongated compared with their vaccinia counterparts.
Expression of Q205L Galphao (Galphao*), an alpha subunit of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) that lacks guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity in NIH-3T3 cells, results in transformation. Expression of Galphao* in NIH-3T3 cells activated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) but not mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases 1 or 2. Coexpression of dominant negative Stat3 inhibited Galphao*-induced transformation of NIH-3T3 cells and activation of endogenous Stat3. Furthermore, Galphao* expression increased activity of the tyrosine kinase c-Src, and the Galphao*-induced activation of Stat3 was blocked by expression of Csk (carboxyl-terminal Src kinase), which inactivates c-Src. The results indicate that Stat3 can function as a downstream effector for Galphao* and mediate its biological effects.
Pyrimidine dimer formation in response to UV radiation is governed by the thymine content of the potential dimer and the two flanking nucleotides. An enzymatic activity can be purified from Micrococcus luteus that cleaves the N-glycosyl bond between the 5' pyrimidine of a dimer and the corresponding sugar without rupture of a phosphodiester bond. We propose that strand scission at a dimer site by the M. luteus enzyme requires two activities, a pyrimidine dimer DNA-glycosylase and an apyrimidinic/apurinic endonuclease.
Although only a subset of protein enzymes depend on the presence of a metal ion for their catalytic function, all naturally occurring RNA enzymes require metal ions to stabilize their structure and for catalytic competence. In the self-splicing group I intron from Tetrahymena thermophila, several divalent metals can serve structural roles, but only Mg2+ and Mn2+ promote splice-site cleavage and exon ligation. A study of a ribozyme reaction analogous to 5'-splice-site cleavage by guanosine uncovered the first metal ion with a definitive role in catalysis. Substitution of the 3'-oxygen of the leaving group with sulphur resulted in a metal-specificity switch, indicating an interaction between the leaving group and the metal ion. Here we use 3'-(thioinosylyl)-(3'-->5')-uridine, IspU, as a substrate in a reaction that emulates exon ligation. Activity requires the addition of a thiophilic metal ion (Cd2+ or Mn2+), providing evidence for stabilization of the leaving group by a metal ion in that step of splicing. Based on the principle of microscopic reversibility, this metal ion activates the nucleophilic 3'-hydroxyl of guanosine in the first step of splicing, supporting the model of a two-metal-ion active site.
The complete nucleotide sequence of a mammalian transforming retrovirus. Moloney murine sarcoma virus, has been determined. MSV, recombinant virus derived of helper viral and cellular sequences, possesses termini resembling prokaryotic transposable elements. The viral genome has the coding capacity for the Moloney murine leukemia virus gag gene product and contains large deletions in pol and env genes. A large open reading frame encompassing its cell-derived sequences codes for its putative transforming protein. The nature of some of the important domains in the viral genome has been established, and their structure is discussed in relation to their function.
Many bacteria, including several pathogens of plants and humans, use a pheromone called an autoinducer to regulate gene expression in a cell density-dependent manner. Agrobacterium autoinducer [AAI, N-(3-oxo-octanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone] of A. tumefaciens is synthesized by the Tral protein, which is encoded by the tumor-inducing plasmid. Purified hexahistidinyl-Tral (H6-Tral) used S-adenosylmethionine to make the homoserine lactone moiety of AAI, but did not use related compounds. H6-Tral used 3-oxo-octanoyl-acyl carrier protein to make the 3-oxo-octanoyl moiety of AAI, but did not use 3-oxo-octanoyl-coenzyme A. These results demonstrate the enzymatic synthesis of an autoinducer through the use of purified substrates.
The stimulation of a variety of cell surface receptors promotes the accumulation of the active, GTP-bound form of Ras proteins in cells. This is a critical step in signal transduction because inhibition of Ras activation by anti-Ras antibodies or dominant inhibitory Ras mutants blocks many of the effects of these receptors on cellular function. To reach the active GTP-bound state, Ras proteins must first release bound GDP. This rate-limiting step in GTP binding is thought to be catalysed by a guanine-nucleotide-releasing factor (GRF). Here we report the cloning of complementary DNAs from a rat brain library that encode a approximately 140K GRF for Ras p21 (p140Ras-GRF). Its carboxy-terminal region is similar to that of CDC25, a GRF for Saccharomyces cerevisiae RAS. This portion of Ras-GRF accelerated the release of GDP from RasH and RasN p21 in vitro, but not from the related RalA, or CDC42Hs GTP-binding proteins. A region in the amino-terminal end of Ras-GRF is similar to both the human breakpoint cluster protein, Bcr, and the dbl oncogene product, a guanine-nucleotide-releasing factor for CDC42Hs. An understanding of Ras-GRF function will enhance our knowledge of the many signal transduction pathways mediated by Ras proteins.
Networks of interacting proteins orchestrate the responses of living cells to a variety of external stimuli, but how sensitive is the functioning of these protein networks to variations in their biochemical parameters? One possibility is that to achieve appropriate function, the reaction rate constants and enzyme concentrations need to be adjusted in a precise manner, and any deviation from these 'fine-tuned' values ruins the network's performance. An alternative possibility is that key properties of biochemical networks are robust; that is, they are insensitive to the precise values of the biochemical parameters. Here we address this issue in experiments using chemotaxis of Escherichia coli, one of the best-characterized sensory systems. We focus on how response and adaptation to attractant signals vary with systematic changes in the intracellular concentration of the components of the chemotaxis network. We find that some properties, such as steady-state behaviour and adaptation time, show strong variations in response to varying protein concentrations. In contrast, the precision of adaptation is robust and does not vary with the protein concentrations. This is consistent with a recently proposed molecular mechanism for exact adaptation, where robustness is a direct consequence of the network's architecture.
CHANGES in transcriptional activity at defined loci are often correlated with significant local structural changes in the genome(1), and in polytene chromosomes, such changes are thought to be associated with compositional or conformational changes in the protein complement at these particular bands(2,3). Thus, various studies on Balfoiani rings and specific 'puffs' in such chromosomes are useful for elucidating the role of defined chromosomal components in both chromosome structure and gene activity. Such studies require specific probes which will allow in situ localisation of a chromosomal component during the various stages of puffing. Antibodies specific to purified histone fractions(4-7), HMG proteins(8), RNA polymerase(9) and non-histone protein subfractions(10) have been used in studies on chromatin and chromosome structure. We reported previously that concanavalin A (Con A) specifically binds to three types of non-histone proteins present in chromatin purified from rat liver nuclei and suggested that derivatives of Con A might serve as specific probes to study the in situ organisation of these non-histone proteins(11). We have now reacted fluorescein-labelled Con A with polytene chromosomes isolated from different developmental stages of Chironomus thummi and visualised the location of the bound Con A by fluorescence microscopy. We observed that the fluorescent lectin, which has an affinity for glucose- and mannose-containing molecules, specifically bound to the transcriptionally active regions of chromosome IV. The extent of binding of Con A to the Balbiani rings present in regions b and c of chromosome IV is proportional to the size of the respective ring. Our results indicate that glucose- or mannose-containing molecules are present in these Balbiani rings and that the availability of these sugars to interact with Con A can be correlated with the developmental stage of a puff. We suggest that lectins can be useful cytological tools with which to study the in situ organisation of defined chromosomal components during various functional states of the genome.
Two complementary DNA's, encoding the complete sequences of 671 and 673 amino acids for subspecies of rat brain protein kinase C, were expressed in COS 7 cells. The complementary DNA sequence analysis predicted that the two enzymes are derived from different ways of splicing and differ from each other only in the short ranges of their carboxyl-terminal regions. Both enzymes showed typical characteristics of protein kinase C that responded to Ca2+, phospholipid, and diacylglycerol. The enzymes showed practically identical physical and kinetic properties and were indistinguishable from one of the several subspecies of protein kinase C that occurs in rat brain but not in untransfected COS 7 cells. Partial analysis of the genomic structure confirmed that these two subspecies of protein kinase C resulted indeed from alternative splicing of a single gene.
ErbB-4 is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase that regulates cell proliferation and differentiation. After binding of its ligand heregulin (HRG) or activation of protein kinase C (PKC) by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), the ErbB-4 ectodomain is cleaved by a metalloprotease. We now report a subsequent cleavage by gamma-secretase that releases the ErbB-4 intracellular domain from the membrane and facilitates its translocation to the nucleus. gamma-Secretase cleavage was prevented by chemical inhibitors or a dominant negative presenilin. Inhibition of gamma-secretase also prevented growth inhibition by HRG. gamma-Secretase cleavage of ErbB-4 may represent another mechanism for receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated signaling.
Bcl-2 and related cytoplasmic proteins are key regulators of apoptosis, the cell suicide program critical for development, tissue homeostasis, and protection against pathogens. Those most similar to Bcl-2 promote cell survival by inhibiting adapters needed for activation of the proteases (caspases) that dismantle the cell. More distant relatives instead promote apoptosis, apparently through mechanisms that include displacing the adapters from the pro-survival proteins. Thus, for many but not all apoptotic signals, the balance between these competing activities determines cell fate. Bcl-2 family members are essential for maintenance of major organ systems, and mutations affecting them are implicated in cancer.
The multisubunit transcription factor IID (TFIID) is an essential component of the eukaryotic RNA polymerase II machinery that works in concert with TFIIA (IIA) and TFIIB (IIB) to assemble initiation complexes at core eukaryotic promoters. Here the structures of human TFIID and the TFIID-IIA-IIB complex that were obtained by electron microscopy and image analysis to 35 angstrom resolution are presented. TFIID is a trilobed, horseshoe-shaped structure, with TFIIA and TFIIB bound on opposite lobes and flanking a central cavity. Antibody studies locate the TATA-binding protein (TBP) between TFIIA and TFIIB at the top of the cavity that most likely encompasses the TATA DNA binding region of the supramolecular complex.
Deposits of beta-amyloid are one of the main pathological characteristics of Alzheimer's disease. The beta-amyloid peptide constituent (relative molecular mass 4,200) of the deposits is derived from the beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP) which is expressed in several different isoforms. The two most prevalent beta-APP isoforms are distinguished by either the presence (beta-APP751) or absence (beta-APP695) of a Kunitz serine protease inhibitor domain. Changes in the abundance of different beta-APP messenger RNAs in brains of Alzheimer's disease victims have been widely reported. Although these results have been controversial, most evidence favours an increase in the mRNAs encoding protease inhibitor-containing isoforms of beta-APP and it is proposed that this change contributes to beta-amyloid formation. We have now produced an imbalance in the normal neuronal ratio of beta-APP isoforms by preparing transgenic mice expressing additional beta-APP751 under the control of a neural-specific promoter. The cortical and hippocampal brain regions of the transgenic mice display extracellular beta-amyloid immunoreactive deposits varying in size (less than 5-50 microns) and abundance. These results suggest that one mechanism of beta-amyloid formation may involve a disruption of the normal ratio of neuronal beta-APP isoform expression and support a direct relationship between increased expression of Kunitz inhibitor-bearing beta-APP isoforms and beta-amyloid deposition.
The plasma membrane-bound mammalian ras proteins of relative molecular mass 21,000 (ras p21) share biochemical and structural properties with other guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins (G-proteins). Oncogenic ras p21 variants result from amino acid substitutions at specific positions that cause p21 to occur predominantly complexed to GTP in vivo. Recently, a GTPase activating protein (GAP) with cytosolic activity has been discovered that stimulates the GTPase activity of normal but not of oncogenic ras p21. GAP might be either a negative regulatory agent which acts further upstream in the regulatory pathway or the downstream target of ras p21. We have identified a protein from bovine brain with apparent relative molecular mass 125,000 that has GAP activity. Here, using pure GAP in a kinetic competition assay, we show that GAP interacts preferentially with the active GTP complexes of both normal and oncogenic Harvey (Ha) ras p21 compared with the inactive GDP complexes. We also report the cloning and sequencing of the complementary DNA for bovine GAP. Regions of GAP share amino acid similarity with the noncatalytic domain of adenylate cyclase from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and with regions conserved between phospholipase C-148, the crk oncogene product and the nonreceptor tyrosine kinases.
The rate at which the TATA-binding protein (TBP) interacts with the TATA element and promotes transcription by RNA polymerase II was determined in yeast cells. A TBP derivative with altered TATA-element specificity was rapidly induced, and transcription from promoters with appropriately mutated TATA elements was measured. Without a functional activator protein, basal transcription was observed only after a lag of several hours. In contrast, GCN4-activated transcription occurred rapidly upon induction of the TBP derivative. These results suggest that accessibility of TBP to the chromatin template in vivo is rate limiting and that activation domains increase recruitment of TBP to the promoter.
Intracellular perfusion of atrial myocytes with adenosine 5'-(gamma-thio) triphosphate (ATP gamma S), an ATP analog, elicits a progressive increase of the muscarinic potassium channel current, IK(M), in the absence of agonists. In this respect, ATP gamma S mimics the actions of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) analogs, which produce direct, persistent activation of the guanyl nucleotide-binding (G) protein controlling the K+(M) channel. The effect of ATP gamma S on IK(M), however, differs from that produced by GTP analogs in two aspects: it requires relatively large ATP gamma S concentrations, and it appears after a considerable delay, suggesting a rate-limiting step not present in similar experiments performed with guanosine 5'-(gamma-thio) triphosphate (GTP gamma S). Incubation of atrial homogenates with [35S]ATP gamma S leads to formation of significant amounts of [35S]GTP gamma S, suggesting that activation of IK(M) by ATP gamma S arises indirectly through its conversion into GTP gamma S by cellular enzymes. ATP gamma S is often used to demonstrate the involvement of protein phosphorylation in the control of various cellular processes. The finding that cytosolic application of ATP gamma S can also lead to G-protein activation implies that experiments with ATP gamma S must be interpreted with caution.
We have found that two-photon fluorescence imaging of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) provides the sensitivity and spatial three-dimensional resolution to resolve metabolic signatures in processes of astrocytes and neurons deep in highly scattering brain tissue slices. This functional imaging reveals spatiotemporal partitioning of glycolytic and oxidative metabolism between astrocytes and neurons during focal neural activity that establishes a unifying hypothesis for neurometabolic coupling in which early oxidative metabolism in neurons is eventually sustained by late activation of the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle. Our model integrates existing views of brain energy metabolism and is in accord with known macroscopic physiological changes in vivo.
Neurospora crassa is a central organism in the history of twentieth-century genetics, biochemistry and molecular biology. Here, we report a high-quality draft sequence of the N. crassa genome. The approximately 40-megabase genome encodes about 10,000 protein-coding genes--more than twice as many as in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe and only about 25% fewer than in the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster. Analysis of the gene set yields insights into unexpected aspects of Neurospora biology including the identification of genes potentially associated with red light photobiology, genes implicated in secondary metabolism, and important differences in Ca2+ signalling as compared with plants and animals. Neurospora possesses the widest array of genome defence mechanisms known for any eukaryotic organism, including a process unique to fungi called repeat-induced point mutation (RIP). Genome analysis suggests that RIP has had a profound impact on genome evolution, greatly slowing the creation of new genes through genomic duplication and resulting in a genome with an unusually low proportion of closely related genes.
As technical obstacles yield, en masse protein testing is poised to take one of biochemistry's most exciting techniques into the heart of cellular chemistry. On page 1760 of this issue, researchers report creating arrays of over 10,000 proteins on a piece of glass just half the size of a microscope slide. They then used their arrays to study a variety of protein functions, including identifying members of the array that bind to other free-floating proteins and to small, druglike molecules.
A phosphatidylinositol-glycan-specific phospholipase D (PI-G PLD) that specifically hydrolyzes the inositol phosphate linkage in proteins anchored by phosphatidylinositol-glycans (PI-Gs) has recently been purified from human and bovine sera. The primary structure of bovine PI-G PLD has now been determined and the functional activity of the enzyme has been studied. Expression of PI-G PLD complementary DNA in COS cells produced a protein that specifically hydrolyzed the inositol phosphate linkage of the PI-G anchor. Cotransfection of PI-G PLD with a PI-G-anchored protein resulted in the secretion of the PI-G-anchored protein. The results suggest that the expression of PI-G PLD may influence the expression and location of PI-G-anchored proteins.
Pathogenic microbes use effectors to enhance susceptibility in host plants. However, plants have evolved a sophisticated immune system to detect these effectors using cognate disease resistance proteins, a recognition that is highly specific, often elicits rapid and localized cell death, known as a hypersensitive response, and thus potentially limits pathogen growth. Despite numerous genetic and biochemical studies on the interactions between pathogen effector proteins and plant resistance proteins, the structural bases for such interactions remain elusive. The direct interaction between the tomato protein kinase Pto and the Pseudomonas syringae effector protein AvrPto is known to trigger disease resistance and programmed cell death through the nucleotide-binding site/leucine-rich repeat (NBS-LRR) class of disease resistance protein Prf. Here we present the crystal structure of an AvrPto-Pto complex. Contrary to the widely held hypothesis that AvrPto activates Pto kinase activity, our structural and biochemical analyses demonstrated that AvrPto is an inhibitor of Pto kinase in vitro. The AvrPto-Pto interaction is mediated by the phosphorylation-stabilized P+1 loop and a second loop in Pto, both of which negatively regulate the Prf-mediated defences in the absence of AvrPto in tomato plants. Together, our results show that AvrPto derepresses host defences by interacting with the two defence-inhibition loops of Pto.
Metalloproteins play structural and catalytic roles in gene expression. The metalloregulatory proteins are a subclass that exerts metal-responsive control of genes involved in respiration, metabolism, and metal-specific homeostasis or stress-response systems, such as iron uptake and storage, copper efflux, and mercury detoxification. Two allosteric mechanisms for control of gene expression were first discovered in metalloregulatory systems: an iron-responsive translational control mechanism for ferritin production and a mercury-responsive DNA-distortion mechanism for transcriptional control of detoxification genes. These otherwise unrelated mechanisms give rise to a rapid physiological response when metal ion concentrations exceed a dangerous threshold. Molecular recognition in these allosteric metal ion receptors is achieved through atypical coordination geometries, cluster formation, or complexes with prosthetic groups, such as sulfide and heme. Thus, many of the inorganic assemblies that otherwise buttress the structure of biopolymers or catalyze substrate transformation in active sites of enzymes have also been adapted to serve sensor functions in the metalloregulatory proteins. Mechanistic studies of these metal-sensor protein interactions are providing new insights into fundamental aspects of inorganic chemistry, molecular biology, and cellular physiology.
Plant disease-resistance (R) proteins are thought to function as receptors for ligands produced directly or indirectly by pathogen avirulence (Avr) proteins. The biochemical functions of most Avr proteins are unknown, and the mechanisms by which they activate R proteins have not been determined. In Arabidopsis, resistance to Pseudomonas syringae strains expressing AvrPphB requires RPS5, a member of the class of R proteins that have a predicted nucleotide-binding site and leucine-rich repeats, and PBS1, a protein kinase. AvrPphB was found to proteolytically cleave PBS1, and this cleavage was required for RPS5-mediated resistance, which indicates that AvrPphB is detected indirectly via its enzymatic activity.
Plasma high density lipoproteins (HDL) are a negative risk factor for atherosclerosis. Increased HDL is sometimes clustered in families, but a genetic basis has never been clearly documented. The plasma cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) catalyses the transfer of cholesteryl ester from HDL to other lipoproteins and therefore might influence HDL levels. Using monoclonal antibodies, we show that CETP is absent in two Japanese siblings who have markedly increased and enlarged HDL. Furthermore, they are homozygous for a point mutation in the 5'-splice donor site of intron 14 of the gene for CETP, a change that is incompatible with normal splicing of pre-messenger RNA. The results indicate that the family has an inherited deficiency of CETP due to a gene splicing defect, and illustrate the key role that CETP has in human HDL metabolism.
Highly reducing iterative polyketide synthases are large, multifunctional enzymes that make important metabolites in fungi, such as lovastatin, a cholesterol-lowering drug from Aspergillus terreus. We report efficient expression of the lovastatin nonaketide synthase (LovB) from an engineered strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as well as complete reconstitution of its catalytic function in the presence and absence of cofactors (the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate and S-adenosylmethionine) and its partner enzyme, the enoyl reductase LovC. Our results demonstrate that LovB retains correct intermediates until completion of synthesis of dihydromonacolin L, but off-loads incorrectly processed compounds as pyrones or hydrolytic products. Experiments replacing LovC with analogous MlcG from compactin biosynthesis demonstrate a gate-keeping function for this partner enzyme. This study represents a key step in the understanding of the functions and structures of this family of enzymes.
The Myc family proteins are thought to be involved in transcription because they have both a carboxy-terminal basic-helix-loop-helix-zipper (bHLH-Z) domain, common to a large class of transcription factors, and an amino-terminal fragment which, for c-Myc, has transactivating function when assayed in chimaeric constructs. In addition, c-, N- and L-Myc proteins heterodimerize, in vitro and in vivo, with the bHLH-Z protein Max. In vitro, Max homodimerizes but preferentially associates with Myc, which homodimerizes poorly. Furthermore Myc-Max heterodimers specifically bind the nucleotide sequence CACGTG with higher affinity than either homodimer alone. The identification of Max and the specific DNA-binding activities of Myc and Max provides an opportunity for directly testing the transcriptional activities of these proteins in mammalian cells. We report here that Myc overexpression activates, whereas Max overexpression represses, transcription of a reporter gene. Max-induced repression is relieved by overexpression of c-Myc. Repression requires the DNA-binding domain of Max, whereas relief of repression requires the dimerization and transcriptional activation activities of Myc. Both effects require Myc-Max-binding sites in the reporter gene.
Osmotic release of beta-glucuronidase from polymorphonuclear leukocyte lysosomes is inhibited by catecholamines and adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate, and accelerated by cholinergic agents and guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate. These actions are specific for the sympathetic and parasympathetic neurotransmitters and for the two cyclic nucleotides, as phenylephrine, tyramine, choline, adenosine 5'-monophosphate and guanosine 5'-monophosphate do not inodify lysosomal enzyme release.
Although thyroxine (3,5,3',5'-tetraiodothyronine, T4) is the principal secretory product of the vertebrate thyroid, its essential metabolic and developmental effects are all mediated by 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine (T3), which is produced from the prohormone by 5'-deiodination. The type-I iodothyronine deiodinase, a thiol-requiring propylthiouracil-sensitive oxidoreductase, is found mainly in liver and kidney and provides most of the circulating T3(1) but so far this enzyme has not been purified. Using expression cloning in the Xenopus oocyte, we have isolated a 2.1-kilobase complementary DNA for this deiodinase from a rat liver cDNA library. The kinetic properties of the protein expressed in transient assay systems, the tissue distribution of the messenger RNA, and its changes with thyroid status, all confirm its identity. We find that the mRNA for this enzyme contains a UGA codon for selenocysteine which is necessary for maximal enzyme activity. This explains why conversion of T4 to T3 is impaired in experimental selenium deficiency and identifies an essential role for this trace element in thyroid hormone action.
The protein encoded by the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene (Rb) functions as a tumour suppressor and negative growth regulator. As actively growing cells require the ongoing synthesis of ribosomal RNA, we considered that Rb might interact with the ribosomal DNA transcription apparatus. Here we report that (1) there is an accumulation of Rb protein in the nucleoli of differentiated U937 cells which correlates with inhibition of rDNA transcription; (2) addition of Rb to an in vitro transcription system inhibits transcription by RNA polymerase I; (3) this inhibition requires a functional Rb pocket; and (4) Rb specifically inhibits the activity of the RNA polymerase I transcription factor UBF (upstream binding factor) in vitro. This last observation was confirmed by affinity chromatography and immunoprecipitation, which demonstrated an interaction between Rb and UBF. These results indicate that there is an additional mechanism by which Rb suppresses cell growth, namely that Rb directly represses transcription of the rRNA genes.
Genetic engineering is a powerful tool for exploring correlations between structure and function in proteins, but as yet we are unable to use it for effective protein design. One of the most interesting examples, which would seem to be obvious, is reversing the polarity of an ion pair. Changing a positively charged protein group, that provides a strong binding for negative substrates, to a negative group is expected to provide an effective binding site for a positively charged substrate. But several recent experiments on aspartate aminotransferase, trypsin and aspartate transcarbamoylase (Schachman, H. K. personal communication) have indicated that polarity reversal is not so successful. Here we argue that the same factors that make the enzyme an effective system for the (-+) pair will make it a much less effective system for the (+-) pair. We also point out that the unusually low effective dielectric constant (epsilon approximately equal to 13) for the (-+) interaction is due to its microenvironment and this will destabilize a (+-) arrangement having an entirely different dielectric constant (epsilon approximately equal to 80). The calculations presented here evaluate the energetics of ion pairs in protein active sites on a semiquantitative level. This is particularly important when dealing with strong, functionally important interactions that are difficult to evaluate with macroscopic models.
Plants, like animals, use signal transduction pathways based on heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) to regulate many aspects of development and cell signaling. Some components of G protein signaling are highly conserved between plants and animals and some are not. This Viewpoint compares key aspects of G protein signal transduction in plants and animals and describes the current knowledge of this system in plants, the questions that still await exploration, and the value of research on plant G proteins to scientists who do not study plants. Pathways in Science's Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment Connections Maps database provide details about the emerging roles of G proteins in several cellular processes of plants.
Kidneys from BALB/c mice contain a potent metalloendoproteinase, termed meprin, that is active against large proteins as well as small peptides. The enzyme is present in mouse strains C57BR/cdJ, C57BL/6J, BALB/cJ, A/J, DBA/IJ, CD/l, Swiss, and ICR. Three related inbred strains, CBA/J, CBA/CaJ, and C3H/He, are markedly deficient in this enzymatic activity. This is the first report of a heritable deficiency of an intracellular proteinase in mammalian tissues. Meprin deficiency appears to have arisen as an early event in the development of the C stock. Furthermore, meprin is present in the progeny of a cross between a meprin-sufficient female (C57BL/6) and a meprin-deficient male (C3H/HeN), an indication that the trait for the deficiency is recessive.
The DNA polymerase from Thermus aquaticus (Taq polymerase), famous for its use in the polymerase chain reaction, is homologous to Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I (pol I) Like pol I, Taq polymerase has a domain at its amino terminus (residues 1-290) that has 5' nuclease activity and a domain at its carboxy terminus that catalyses the polymerase reaction. Unlike pol I, the intervening domain in Taq polymerase has lost the editing 3'-5' exonuclease activity. Although the structure of the Klenow fragment of pol I has been known for ten years, that of the intact pol I has proved more elusive. The structure of Taq polymerase determined here at 2.4 A resolution shows that the structures of the polymerase domains of the thermostable enzyme and of the Klenow fragment are nearly identical, whereas the catalytically critical carboxylate residues that bind two metal ions are missing from the remnants of the 3'-5' exonuclease active site of Taq polymerase. The first view of the 5' nuclease domain, responsible for excising the Okazaki RNA in lagging-strand DNA replication, shows a cluster of conserved divalent metal-ion-binding carboxylates at the bottom of a cleft. The location of this 5'-nuclease active site some 70 A from the polymerase active site in this crystal form highlights the unanswered question of how this domain works in concert with the polymerase domain to produce a duplex DNA product that contains only a nick.
The exosome is a major eukaryotic nuclease located in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm that contributes to the processing, quality control and/or turnover of a large number of cellular RNAs. This large macromolecular assembly has been described as a 3'-->5' exonuclease and shown to contain a nine-subunit ring structure evolutionarily related to archaeal exosome-like complexes and bacterial polynucleotide phosphorylases. Recent results have shown that, unlike its prokaryotic counterparts, the yeast and human ring structures are catalytically inactive. In contrast, the exonucleolytic activity of the yeast exosome core was shown to be mediated by the RNB domain of the eukaryote-specific Dis3 subunit. Here we show, using in vitro assays, that yeast Dis3 has an additional endoribonuclease activity mediated by the PIN domain located at the amino terminus of this multidomain protein. Simultaneous inactivation of the endonucleolytic and exonucleolytic activities of the exosome core generates a synthetic growth phenotype in vivo, supporting a physiological function for the PIN domain. This activity is responsible for the cleavage of some natural exosome substrates, independently of exonucleolytic degradation. In contrast with current models, our results show that eukaryotic exosome cores have both endonucleolytic and exonucleolytic activities, mediated by two distinct domains of the Dis3 subunit. The mode of action of eukaryotic exosome cores in RNA processing and degradation should be reconsidered, taking into account the cooperation between its multiple ribonucleolytic activities.
Guanosine triphosphate (GTP) cyclohydrolase I, the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), is subject to feedback inhibition by BH4, a cofactor for phenylalanine hydroxylase. Inhibition was found to depend specifically on BH4 and the presence of another protein (p35). The inhibition occurred through BH4-dependent complex formation between p35 protein and GTP cyclohydrolase I. Furthermore, the inhibition was specifically reversed by phenylalanine, and, in conjunction with p35, phenylalanine reduced the cooperativity of GTP cyclohydrolase I. These findings also provide a molecular basis for high plasma BH4 concentrations observed in patients with hyperphenylalaninemia caused by phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency.
Eukaryotic transfer RNA genes have two internal discontinuous control regions, the A and B blocks, which correspond approximately to the D-stem and the pseudo-U arm of tRNA. In reconstituted transcription systems at least two components are required to direct accurate initiation by RNA polymerase (refs 4,5). However, little is known about the mechanism of interaction of the internal promoter sequences with factors and RNA polymerase C within the transcription complex, although tRNA-like conformation of the B block sequence was surmised to be critical for DNA recognition. By analogy with the 5S RNA system, where a transcription factor required for 5S DNA expression was shown to interact both with 5S RNA and with the noncoding strand of the 5S gene, we explored the possibility that a protein which normally binds to tRNA could also interact with the tRNA gene and regulate its transcription. Here we show that in vitro transcription of the yeast SUP4 tRNATyr gene in crude yeast extracts is strongly stimulated by tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (TyrRS) but not by two other non-cognate synthetases. Substrates of the synthetase, tRNATyr and tyrosine, interfere with stimulation of tRNA synthesis.
Programmed cell death (apoptosis) is a prominent feature of the development of the immune and nervous systems. The identification of the Caenorhabditis elegans cell death gene, ced-3, as a prototype of the interleukin-1beta converting enzyme (ICE) protease family has led to extensive evidence implicating these enzymes in apoptosis. Among the ten or more members of the ICE protease family, CPP32/yama/apopain exhibits the highest similarity to CED-3 in both sequence homology and substrate specificity. To analyse its function in vivo, we generated CPP32-deficient mice by homologous recombination. These mice, born at a frequency lower than expected by mendelian genetics, were smaller than their littermates and died at 1-3 weeks of age. Although their thymocytes retained normal susceptibility to various apoptotic stimuli, brain development in CPP32-deficient mice was profoundly affected, and discernible by embryonic day 12, resulting in a variety of hyperplasias and disorganized cell deployment. These supernumerary cells were postmitotic and terminally differentiated by the postnatal stage. Pyknotic clusters at sites of major morphogenetic change during normal brain development were not observed in the mutant embryos, indicating decreased apoptosis in the absence of CPP32. Thus CPP32 is shown to play a critical role during morphogenetic cell death in the mammalian brain.
Stimulation of beta2-adrenergic receptors on the cell surface by adrenaline or noradrenaline leads to alterations in the metabolism, excitability, differentiation and growth of many cell types. These effects have traditionally been thought to be mediated exclusively by receptor activation of intracellular G proteins. However, certain physiological effects of beta2-adrenergic receptor stimulation, notably the regulation of cellular pH by modulation of Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE) function, do not seem to be entirely dependent on G-protein activation. We report here a direct agonist-promoted association of the beta2-adrenergic receptor with the Na+/H+ exchanger regulatory factor (NHERF), a protein that regulates the activity of the Na+/H+ exchanger type 3 (NHE3). NHERF binds to the beta2-adrenergic receptor by means of a PDZ-domain-mediated interaction with the last few residues of the carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic domain of the receptor. Mutation of the final residue of the beta2-adrenergic receptor from leucine to alanine abolishes the receptor's interaction with NHERF and also markedly alters beta2-adrenergic receptor regulation of NHE3 in cells without altering receptor-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase. Our findings indicate that agonist-dependent beta2-adrenergic receptor binding of NHERF plays a role in beta2-adrenergic receptor-mediated regulation of Na+/H+ exchange.
The basis of the chemiosmotic theory is that energy from light or respiration is used to generate a trans-membrane proton gradient. This is largely achieved by membrane-spanning enzymes known as 'proton pumps. There is intense interest in experiments which reveal, at the molecular level, how protons are drawn through proteins. Here we report the mechanism, at atomic resolution, for a single long-range electron-coupled proton transfer. In Azotobacter vinelandii ferredoxin I, reduction of a buried iron-sulphur cluster draws in a solvent proton, whereas re-oxidation is 'gated' by proton release to the solvent. Studies of this 'proton-transferring module' by fast-scan protein film voltammetry, high-resolution crystallography, site-directed mutagenesis and molecular dynamics, reveal that proton transfer is exquisitely sensitive to the position and pK of a single amino acid. The proton is delivered through the protein matrix by rapid penetrative excursions of the side-chain carboxylate of a surface residue (Asp 15), whose pK shifts in response to the electrostatic charge on the iron-sulphur cluster. Our analysis defines the structural, dynamic and energetic requirements for proton courier groups in redox-driven proton-pumping enzymes.
A new term, autogenous regulation, is used to describe a phenomenon that is not a new discovery but rather is newly appreciated as a mechanism common to a number of systems in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. In this mechanism the product of a structural gene regulates expression of the operon in which that structural gene resides. In many (perhaps all) cases, the regulatory gene product has several functions, since it may act not only as a regulatory protein but also as an enzyme, structural protein, or antibody, for example. In a few cases, this protein is the multimeric allosteric enzyme that catalyzes the first step of a metabolic pathway, gearing together the two most important mechanisms for controlling the biosynthesis of metabolites in bacterial cells-feedback inhibition and repression. Autogenous regulation may provide a mechanism for amplification of gene expression (84); for severe and prolonged inactivation of gene expression (85); for buffering the response of structural genes to changes in the environment (45, 52); and for maintaining a constant intracellular concentration of a protein, independent of cell size or growth rate (86). Thus, autogenous regulation provides the cell with means for accomplishing a number of different regulatory tasks, each suited to better satisfying the needs of the organism for its survival.
Chaperonins assist protein folding with the consumption of ATP. They exist as multi-subunit protein assemblies comprising rings of subunits stacked back to back. In Escherichia coli, asymmetric intermediates of GroEL are formed with the co-chaperonin GroES and nucleotides bound only to one of the seven-subunit rings (the cis ring) and not to the opposing ring (the trans ring). The structure of the GroEL-GroES-(ADP)7 complex reveals how large en bloc movements of the cis ring's intermediate and apical domains enable bound GroES to stabilize a folding chamber with ADP confined to the cis ring. Elevation and twist of the apical domains double the volume of the central cavity and bury hydrophobic peptide-binding residues in the interface with GroES, as well as between GroEL subunits, leaving a hydrophilic cavity lining that is conducive to protein folding. An inward tilt of the cis equatorial domain causes an outward tilt in the trans ring that opposes the binding of a second GroES. When combined with new functional results, this negative allosteric mechanism suggests a model for an ATP-driven folding cycle that requires a double toroid.
The crystal structures of a cysteine-215-->serine mutant of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B complexed with high-affinity peptide substrates corresponding to an autophosphorylation site of the epidermal growth factor receptor were determined. Peptide binding to the protein phosphatase was accompanied by a conformational change of a surface loop that created a phosphotyrosine recognition pocket and induced a catalytically competent form of the enzyme. The phosphotyrosine side chain is buried within the period and anchors the peptide substrate to its binding site. Hydrogen bonds between peptide main-chain atoms and the protein contribute to binding affinity, and specific interactions of acidic residues of the peptide with basic residues on the surface of the enzyme confer sequence specificity.
The universal 3'-terminal CCA sequence of all transfer RNAs (tRNAs) is repaired, and sometimes constructed de novo, by the CCA-adding enzyme [ATP(CTP):tRNA nucleotidyltransferase]. This RNA polymerase has no nucleic acid template, yet faithfully builds the CCA sequence one nucleotide at a time using cytidine triphosphate (CTP) and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) as substrates. All previously characterized CCA-adding enzymes from all three kingdoms are single polypeptides with CCA-adding activity. Here, we demonstrate through biochemical and genetic approaches that CCA addition in Aquifex aeolicus requires collaboration between two related polypeptides, one that adds CC and another that adds A.
The tapeworm Hymenolepis diminuta releases proteins that inhibit trypsin activity. These proteins may be either antienzymes or nonspecific macromolecules that interfere with trypsin. Saline solutions with initial pH values ranging from 5.5 to 10.0 were all acidified to pH 5.0 by tapeworms. If the initial pH was lower than 5.0, it was raised. Because trypsin activity is inhibited at pH 5.0, this intestinal parasite can protect itself from digestion by regulating its environmental pH or releasing trypsin inhibitors, or both.
A free NH2-terminal group has been previously shown to be an obligatory signal for recognition and subsequent degradation of proteins in a partially fractionated and reconstituted ubiquitin proteolytic system. Naturally occurring proteins with acetylated NH2-termini--most cellular proteins fall in this category--were not degraded by this system. Other studies have suggested that the identity of the NH2-terminal residue is important in determining the metabolic stability of a protein in vivo (N-end rule). Whole reticulocyte lysate and antibodies directed against the ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1) have now been used to show that such acetylated proteins are degraded in a ubiquitin-dependent mode. Although fractionation of lysate does not affect its proteolytic activity toward substrates with free NH2-termini, it completely abolishes the activity toward the blocked substrates, indicating that an important component of the system was either removed or inactivated during fractionation. An NH2-terminal "unblocking" activity that removes the blocking group, thus exposing a free NH2-terminus for recognition according to the N-end rule, does not seem to participate in this pathway. Incubation of whole lysate with labeled histone H2A results in the formation of multiple ubiquitin conjugates. In contrast, the fractionated system is devoid of any significant conjugating activity. These results suggest that a novel conjugating enzyme (possibly a ubiquitin-protein ligase) may be responsible for the degradation of these acetylated proteins by recognizing structural features of the substrate that are downstream and distinct from the NH2-terminal residue.
Although RNA is generally thought to be a passive genetic blueprint, some RNA molecules, called ribozymes, have intrinsic enzyme-like activity--they can catalyse chemical reactions in the complete absence of protein cofactors. In addition to the well-known small ribozymes that cleave phosphodiester bonds, we now know that RNA catalysts probably effect a number of key cellular reactions. This versatility has lent credence to the idea that RNA molecules may have been central to the early stages of life on Earth.
A backbone model of a 10-subunit yeast RNA polymerase II has been derived from x-ray diffraction data extending to 3 angstroms resolution. All 10 subunits exhibit a high degree of identity with the corresponding human proteins, and 9 of the 10 subunits are conserved among the three eukaryotic RNA polymerases I, II, and III. Notable features of the model include a pair of jaws, formed by subunits Rpb1, Rpb5, and Rpb9, that appear to grip DNA downstream of the active center. A clamp on the DNA nearer the active center, formed by Rpb1, Rpb2, and Rpb6, may be locked in the closed position by RNA, accounting for the great stability of transcribing complexes. A pore in the protein complex beneath the active center may allow entry of substrates for polymerization and exit of the transcript during proofreading and passage through pause sites in the DNA.
Plants and animals are obligate aerobes, requiring oxygen for mitochondrial respiration and energy production. In plants, an unanticipated decline in oxygen availability (hypoxia), as caused by roots becoming waterlogged or foliage submergence, triggers changes in gene transcription and messenger RNA translation that promote anaerobic metabolism and thus sustain substrate-level ATP production. In contrast to animals, oxygen sensing has not been ascribed to a mechanism of gene regulation in response to oxygen deprivation in plants. Here we show that the N-end rule pathway of targeted proteolysis acts as a homeostatic sensor of severe low oxygen levels in Arabidopsis, through its regulation of key hypoxia-response transcription factors. We found that plants lacking components of the N-end rule pathway constitutively express core hypoxia-response genes and are more tolerant of hypoxic stress. We identify the hypoxia-associated ethylene response factor group VII transcription factors of Arabidopsis as substrates of this pathway. Regulation of these proteins by the N-end rule pathway occurs through a characteristic conserved motif at the amino terminus initiating with Met-Cys. Enhanced stability of one of these proteins, HRE2, under low oxygen conditions improves hypoxia survival and reveals a molecular mechanism for oxygen sensing in plants via the evolutionarily conserved N-end rule pathway. SUB1A-1, a major determinant of submergence tolerance in rice, was shown not to be a substrate for the N-end rule pathway despite containing the N-terminal motif, indicating that it is uncoupled from N-end rule pathway regulation, and that enhanced stability may relate to the superior tolerance of Sub1 rice varieties to multiple abiotic stresses.
Alternative pre-messenger RNA splicing is an important mechanism for generating protein diversity and may explain in part how mammalian complexity arises from a surprisingly small complement of genes. Here, we describe "digital polony exon profiling,"a single molecule-based technology for studying complex alternative pre-messenger RNA splicing. This technology allows researchers to monitor the combinatorial diversity of exon inclusion in individual transcripts. A minisequencing strategy provides single nucleotide resolution, and the digital nature of the technology allows quantitation of individual splicing variants. Digital polony exon profiling can be used to investigate the physiological and pathological roles of alternately spliced messenger RNAs, as well as the mechanisms by which these messenger RNAs are produced.
In addition to its well-documented effects on gene silencing, cytosine methylation is a prominent cause of mutations. In humans, the mutation rate from 5-methylcytosine (m5C) to thymine (T) is 10-50-fold higher than other transitions and the methylated sequence CpG is consequently under-represented. Over one-third of germline point mutations associated with human genetic disease and many somatic mutations leading to cancer involve loss of CpG. The primary cause of mutability appears to be hydrolytic deamination. Cytosine deamination produces mismatched uracil (U), which can be removed by uracil glycosylase, whereas m5C deamination generates a G x T mispair that cannot be processed by this enzyme. Correction of m5CpG x TpG mismatches may instead be initiated by the thymine DNA glycosylase, TDG. Here we show that MBD4, an unrelated mammalian protein that contains a methyl-CpG binding domain, can also efficiently remove thymine or uracil from a mismatches CpG site in vitro. Furthermore, the methyl-CpG binding domain of MBD4 binds preferentially to m5CpG x TpG mismatches-the primary product of deamination at methyl-CpG. The combined specificities of binding and catalysis indicate that this enzyme may function to minimize mutation at methyl-CpG.
Electrophoresis of protein (including enzyme) was conducted in a gel medium across which, transverse to the direction of protein migration, a continuous (p)H gradient extends. Any splitting of a resultant trace for the change of protein mobility with (p)H suggests both protein heterogeneity and the (p)H conditions under which further purification and subfractionation may best be pursued.
Humans with a defect in the XPG protein suffer from xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) resulting from an inability to perform DNA nucleotide excision repair properly. Here we show that XPG makes a structure-specific endonucleolytic incision in a synthetic DNA substrate containing a duplex region and single-stranded arms. One strand of the duplex is cleaved at the border with single-stranded DNA. A cut with the same polarity is also made in a bubble structure, at the 3' side of the centrally unpaired region. Normal cell extracts introduce a nick 3' to a platinum-DNA lesion, but an XP-G cell extract is defective in making this incision. These data show that XPG has a direct role in making one of the incisions required to excise a damaged oligonucleotide, by cleaving 3' to DNA damage during nucleotide excision repair.
The SNF1 gene plays a central role in carbon catabolite repression in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, namely that SNF1 function is required for expression of glucose-repressible genes. The nucleotide sequence of the cloned SNF1 gene was determined, and the predicted amino acid sequence shows that SNF1 encodes a 72,040-dalton polypeptide that has significant homology to the conserved catalytic domain of mammalian protein kinases. Specific antisera were prepared and used to identify the SNF1 protein. The protein was shown to transfer phosphate from adenosine triphosphate to serine and threonine residues in an in vitro autophosphorylation reaction. These findings indicate that SNF1 encodes a protein kinase and suggest that protein phosphorylation plays a critical role in regulation by carbon catabolite repression in eukaryotic cells.
HLA class II molecules are a highly polymorphic family of dimeric cell-surface proteins primarily involved in regulating T-cell responses to extrinsic antigens. To define regions of class II molecules involved in T-cell recognition, we have now compared sequences of three HLA DR beta cDNA clones obtained from cells that all express the same serologically defined determinants but differ in terms of T-cell-recognized specificities. The comparisons indicate that very few (one to four) nucleotides differ between what are almost certainly alleles of the DR beta 1 locus. All differences were in the first domain of the molecule and all localized to a region from amino acids 71-86. Because all differences were found only in this region of the molecule, and because DR alpha-chains seem to be relatively non-polymorphic, these positions in the DR beta-chain must have a major role in influencing T-cell recognition of the DR molecule.
Disulphide bonds can significantly stabilize the native structures of proteins. The effect is presumed to be due mainly to a decrease in the configurational chain entropy of the unfolded polypeptide. In phage T4 lysozyme, a disulphide-free enzyme, engineered disulphide mutants that crosslink residues 3-97, 9-164 and 21-142 are significantly more stable than the wild-type protein. To investigate the effect of multiple-disulphide bonds on protein stability, mutants were constructed in which two or three stabilizing disulphide bridges were combined in the same protein. Reversible thermal denaturation shows that the increase in melting temperature resulting from the individual disulphide bonds is approximately additive. The triple-disulphide variant unfolds at a temperature 23.4 degrees C higher than wild-type lysozyme. The results demonstrate that a combination of disulphide bonds, each of which contributes to stability, can achieve substantial overall improvement in the stability of a protein.
Huntington's disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorder caused by expansion of CAG triplet repeats in the huntingtin (HTT) gene (also called HD) and characterized by accumulation of aggregated fragments of polyglutamine-expanded HTT protein in affected neurons. Abnormal enrichment of HD inclusion bodies with ubiquitin, a diagnostic characteristic of HD and many other neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, has suggested that dysfunction in ubiquitin metabolism may contribute to the pathogenesis of these diseases. Because modification of proteins with polyubiquitin chains regulates many essential cellular processes including protein degradation, cell cycle, transcription, DNA repair and membrane trafficking, disrupted ubiquitin signalling is likely to have broad consequences for neuronal function and survival. Although ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation is impaired in cell-culture models of HD and of other neurodegenerative diseases, it has not been possible to evaluate the function of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) in HD patients or in animal models of the disease, and a functional role for UPS impairment in neurodegenerative disease pathogenesis remains controversial. Here we exploit a mass-spectrometry-based method to quantify polyubiquitin chains and demonstrate that the abundance of these chains is a faithful endogenous biomarker of UPS function. Lys 48-linked polyubiquitin chains accumulate early in pathogenesis in brains from the R6/2 transgenic mouse model of HD, from a knock-in model of HD and from human HD patients, establishing that UPS dysfunction is a consistent feature of HD pathology. Lys 63- and Lys 11-linked polyubiquitin chains, which are not typically associated with proteasomal targeting, also accumulate in the R6/2 mouse brain. Thus, HD is linked to global changes in the ubiquitin system to a much greater extent than previously recognized.
Two structurally homologous guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) domains interact directly during signal recognition particle (SRP)-mediated cotranslational targeting of proteins to the membrane. The 2.05 angstrom structure of a complex of the NG GTPase domains of Ffh and FtsY reveals a remarkably symmetric heterodimer sequestering a composite active site that contains two bound nucleotides. The structure explains the coordinate activation of the two GTPases. Conformational changes coupled to formation of their extensive interface may function allosterically to signal formation of the targeting complex to the signal-sequence binding site and the translocon. We propose that the complex represents a molecular "latch" and that its disengagement is regulated by completion of assembly of the GTPase active site.
Anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) in marine sediments is an important microbial process in the global carbon cycle and in control of greenhouse gas emission. The responsible organisms supposedly reverse the reactions of methanogenesis, but cultures providing biochemical proof of this have not been isolated. Here we searched for AOM-associated cell components in microbial mats from anoxic methane seeps in the Black Sea. These mats catalyse AOM rather than carry out methanogenesis. We extracted a prominent nickel compound displaying the same absorption spectrum as the nickel cofactor F430 of methyl-coenzyme M reductase, the terminal enzyme of methanogenesis; however, the nickel compound exhibited a higher molecular mass than F430. The apparent variant of F(430) was part of an abundant protein that was purified from the mat and that consists of three different subunits. Determined amino-terminal amino acid sequences matched a gene locus cloned from the mat. Sequence analyses revealed similarities to methyl-coenzyme M reductase from methanogenic archaea. The abundance of the nickel protein (7% of extracted proteins) in the mat suggests an important role in AOM.
Cultured diploid fibroblasts from a patient with a previously undescribed inborn error of cobalamin metabolism accumulate unmetabolized, nonprotein-bound vitamin B12 in lysosomes. These cells are able to endocytose the transcobalamin II-B12 complex and to release B12 from transcobalamin II. The freed vitamin B12 is not released from lysosomes into the cytoplasm of the cell. This suggests that there is a specific lysosomal transport mechanism for vitamin B12 in the human.
Susceptibility to asthma depends on variation at an unknown number of genetic loci. To identify susceptibility genes on chromosome 7p, we adopted a hierarchical genotyping design, leading to the identification of a 133-kilobase risk-conferring segment containing two genes. One of these coded for an orphan G protein-coupled receptor named GPRA (G protein-coupled receptor for asthma susceptibility), which showed distinct distribution of protein isoforms between bronchial biopsies from healthy and asthmatic individuals. In three cohorts from Finland and Canada, single nucleotide polymorphism-tagged haplotypes associated with high serum immunoglobulin E or asthma. The murine ortholog of GPRA was up-regulated in a mouse model of ovalbumin-induced inflammation. Together, these data implicate GPRA in the pathogenesis of atopy and asthma.
During RNA synthesis in the ternary elongation complex, RNA polymerase enzyme holds nucleic acids in three contiguous sites: the double-stranded DNA-binding site (DBS) ahead of the transcription bubble, the RNA-DNA heteroduplex-binding site (HBS), and the RNA-binding site (RBS) upstream of HBS. Photochemical cross-linking allowed mapping of the DNA and RNA contacts to specific positions on the amino acid sequence. Unexpectedly, the same protein regions were found to participate in both DBS and RBS. Thus, DNA entry and RNA exit occur close together in the RNA polymerase molecule, suggesting that the three sites constitute a single unit. The results explain how RNA in the integrated unit RBS-HBS-DBS may stabilize the ternary complex, whereas a hairpin in RNA result in its dissociation.
The yeast retrotransposon, Ty, encodes a set of proteins that are assembled into virus-like particles, Ty-VLPs (refs 1, 2). These proteins include Ty-VLP structural proteins, a protease that mediates cleavage of primary translation products and a reverse transcriptase. The major structural components of Ty-VLPs are proteolytic products of the primary translation product, p1 (ref. 3). We have recently shown that protein p1 alone can form Ty-VLPs (ref. 3). Here we demonstrate that p1 fusion proteins, comprising most of p1 and part of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) protein gp120, form hybrid HIV:Ty-VLPs. These hybrid particles provide a rapid means of preparing and evaluating HIV antigens for a variety of immunological purposes.
Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a genetically heterogeneous human disease, results from a defect in nucleotide excision repair of ultraviolet-damaged DNA. XP patients are extremely sensitive to sunlight and suffer from a high incidence of skin cancers. Cell fusion studies have identified seven XP complementation groups, A-G. Group D is of particular interest as mutations in this gene can also cause Cockayne's syndrome and trichothiodystrophy. The XPD gene was initially named ERCC2 (excision repair cross complementing) as it was cloned using human DNA to complement the ultraviolet sensitivity of a rodent cell line. We have purified the XPD protein to near homogeneity and show that it possesses single-stranded DNA-dependent ATPase and DNA helicase activities. We tested whether XPD can substitute for its yeast counterpart RAD3, which is essential for excision repair and for cell viability. Expression of the XPD gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae can complement the lethality defect of a mutation in the RAD3 gene, suggesting that XPD is an essential gene in humans.
Amino acid composition of proteins varies substantially between taxa and, thus, can evolve. For example, proteins from organisms with (G + C)-rich (or (A + T)-rich) genomes contain more (or fewer) amino acids encoded by (G + C)-rich codons. However, no universal trends in ongoing changes of amino acid frequencies have been reported. We compared sets of orthologous proteins encoded by triplets of closely related genomes from 15 taxa representing all three domains of life (Bacteria, Archaea and Eukaryota), and used phylogenies to polarize amino acid substitutions. Cys, Met, His, Ser and Phe accrue in at least 14 taxa, whereas Pro, Ala, Glu and Gly are consistently lost. The same nine amino acids are currently accrued or lost in human proteins, as shown by analysis of non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms. All amino acids with declining frequencies are thought to be among the first incorporated into the genetic code; conversely, all amino acids with increasing frequencies, except Ser, were probably recruited late. Thus, expansion of initially under-represented amino acids, which began over 3,400 million years ago, apparently continues to this day.
Pervasive and hidden transcription is widespread in eukaryotes, but its global level, the mechanisms from which it originates and its functional significance are unclear. Cryptic unstable transcripts (CUTs) were recently described as a principal class of RNA polymerase II transcripts in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. These transcripts are targeted for degradation immediately after synthesis by the action of the Nrd1-exosome-TRAMP complexes. Although CUT degradation mechanisms have been analysed in detail, the genome-wide distribution at the nucleotide resolution and the prevalence of CUTs are unknown. Here we report the first high-resolution genomic map of CUTs in yeast, revealing a class of potentially functional CUTs and the intrinsic bidirectional nature of eukaryotic promoters. An RNA fraction highly enriched in CUTs was analysed by a 3' Long-SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression) approach adapted to deep sequencing. The resulting detailed genomic map of CUTs revealed that they derive from extremely widespread and very well defined transcription units and do not result from unspecific transcriptional noise. Moreover, the transcription of CUTs predominantly arises within nucleosome-free regions, most of which correspond to promoter regions of bona fide genes. Some of the CUTs start upstream from messenger RNAs and overlap their 5' end. Our study of glycolysis genes, as well as recent results from the literature, indicate that such concurrent transcription is potentially associated with regulatory mechanisms. Our data reveal numerous new CUTs with such a potential regulatory role. However, most of the identified CUTs corresponded to transcripts divergent from the promoter regions of genes, indicating that they represent by-products of divergent transcription occurring at many and possibly most promoters. Eukaryotic promoter regions are thus intrinsically bidirectional, a fundamental property that escaped previous analyses because in most cases divergent transcription generates short-lived unstable transcripts present at very low steady-state levels.
The rapamycin-sensitive TOR signalling pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae activates a cell-growth program in response to nutrients such as nitrogen and carbon. The TOR1 and TOR2 kinases (TOR) control cytoplasmic protein synthesis and degradation through the conserved TAP42 protein. Upon phosphorylation by TOR, TAP42 binds and possibly inhibits type 2A and type-2A-related phosphatases; however, the mechanism by which TOR controls nuclear events such as global repression of starvation-specific transcription is unknown. Here we show that TOR prevents transcription of genes expressed upon nitrogen limitation by promoting the association of the GATA transcription factor GLN3 with the cytoplasmic protein URE2. The binding of GLN3 to URE2 requires TOR-dependent phosphorylation of GLN3. Phosphorylation and cytoplasmic retention of GLN3 are also dependent on the TOR effector TAP42, and are antagonized by the type-2A-related phosphatase SIT4. TOR inhibits expression of carbon-source-regulated genes by stimulating the binding of the transcriptional activators MSN2 and MSN4 to the cytoplasmic 14-3-3 protein BMH2. Thus, the TOR signalling pathway broadly controls nutrient metabolism by sequestering several transcription factors in the cytoplasm.
The cerebro-hepato-renal syndrome is a rare familial malady with cerebral, renal, and skeletal abnormalities, severe hypotonia, cirrhosis, iron and lipid storage, and death within 6 months. Correlated electron microscopic, histochemical, and biochemical studies demonstrate defects in two oxidative organelles. Peroxisomes cannot be found in hepatocytes and renal proximal tubules. In hepatocytes and cortical astrocytes, mitochondria are distorted in their appearance and glycogen stores are increased. Oxygen consumnption of brain and liver mitochondrial preparations with succinate and with substrates reducing nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide is markedly diminished, but the consumption is normal with ascorbate and tetramethylphenylenediamine, which suggests a defect in electron transport prior to the cytochromes. Histochemical studies of mitochondrial oxidation point to a defect between the succinate dehydrogenase flavoprotein and coenzyme Q, possibly in the region of nonheme iron protein.
Ran/TC4 is a small nuclear G protein that forms a complex with the chromatin-bound guanine nucleotide release factor RCC1 (ref. 2). Loss of RCC1 causes defects in cell cycle progression, RNA export and nuclear protein import. Some of these can be suppressed by overexpression of Ran/TC4 (ref. 1), suggesting that Ran/TC4 functions downstream of RCC1. We have searched for proteins that bind Ran/TC4 by using a two-hybrid screen, and here we report the identification of RanBP2, a novel protein of 3,224 residues. This giant protein comprises an amino-terminal 700-residue leucine-rich region, four RanBP1-homologous (refs 9, 10) domains, eight zinc-finger motifs similar to those of NUP153 (refs 11, 12), and a carboxy terminus with high homology to cyclophilin. The molecule contains the XFXFG pentapeptide motif characteristic of nuclear pore complex (NPC) proteins, and immunolocalization suggests that RanBP2 is a constituent of the NPC. The fact that NLS-mediated nuclear import can be inhibited by an antibody directed against RanBP2 supports a functional role in protein import through the NPC.
Electrospray ionization has recently emerged as a powerful technique for producing intact ions in vacuo from large and complex species in solution. To an extent greater than has previously been possible with the more familiar "soft" ionization methods, this technique makes the power and elegance of mass spectrometric analysis applicable to the large and fragile polar molecules that play such vital roles in biological systems. The distinguishing features of electrospray spectra for large molecules are coherent sequences of peaks whose component ions are multiply charged, the ions of each peak differing by one charge from those of adjacent neighbors in the sequence. Spectra have been obtained for biopolymers including oligonucleotides and proteins, the latter having molecular weights up to 130,000, with as yet no evidence of an upper limit.
The tau gene encodes a protein (Tau) that is a major neuronal microtubule-associated protein localized mostly in axons. It has microtubule-binding and tubulin-polymerizing activity in vitro and is thought to make short crossbridges between axonal microtubules. Further, tau-transfected non-neuronal cells extend long axon-like processes in which microtubule bundles resembling those in axons are formed. In contrast, tau antisense oligonucleotides selectively suppress axonal elongation in cultured neurons. Thus tau is thought to be essential for neuronal cell morphogenesis, especially axonal elongation and maintenance. To test this hypothesis, we used gene targeting to produce mice lacking the tau gene. We show that the nervous system of tau-deficient mice appears to be normal immunohistologically. Furthermore, axonal elongation is not affected in cultured neurons. But in some small-calibre axons, microtubule stability is decreased and microtubule organization is significantly changed. We observed an increase in microtubule-associated protein 1A which may compensate for the functions of tau in large-calibre axons. Our results argue against the suggested role of tau in axonal elongation but confirm that it is crucial in the stabilization and organization of axonal microtubules in a certain type of axon.
The c-ras1H oncogene can be distinguished from its normal cellular counterpart by the loss of a restriction endonuclease site. This sequence alteration is the basis of a rapid screening method for the presence of this oncogene. DNA's from 34 individuals were screened by this method, and all were homozygous for the normal allele. In contrast, DNA from a patient's bladder tumor, as well as DNA from his normal bladder and leukocytes, were heterozygous at that restriction endonuclease site. Further restriction enzyme mapping pinpointed the change in the mutant allele as being one of two nucleotides, either of which would change the 12th amino acid (glycine) in the normal c-ras1H gene product. Point mutations in the codon for this amino acid have previously been described in a bladder tumor cell line and in the viral oncogene v-rasH. These results indicate that the patient carried a c-ras1H oncogene in his germ line, raising the possibility that the c-ras1H oncogene confers a predisposition to neoplasia.
Structures of a 10-subunit yeast RNA polymerase II have been derived from two crystal forms at 2.8 and 3.1 angstrom resolution. Comparison of the structures reveals a division of the polymerase into four mobile modules, including a clamp, shown previously to swing over the active center. In the 2.8 angstrom structure, the clamp is in an open state, allowing entry of straight promoter DNA for the initiation of transcription. Three loops extending from the clamp may play roles in RNA unwinding and DNA rewinding during transcription. A 2.8 angstrom difference Fourier map reveals two metal ions at the active site, one persistently bound and the other possibly exchangeable during RNA synthesis. The results also provide evidence for RNA exit in the vicinity of the carboxyl-terminal repeat domain, coupling synthesis to RNA processing by enzymes bound to this domain.
Ubiquitin is a small protein that was initially found to function as a tag that can be covalently attached to proteins to mark them for destruction by a multisubunit, adenosine 5'-triphosphate-dependent protease called the proteasome. Ubiquitin is now emerging as a key regulator of eukaryotic messenger RNA synthesis, a process that depends on the RNA synthetic enzyme RNA polymerase II and the transcription factors that control its activity. Ubiquitin controls messenger RNA synthesis not only by mechanisms involving ubiquitin-dependent destruction of transcription factors by the proteasome, but also by an intriguing collection of previously unknown and unanticipated mechanisms that appear to be independent of the proteasome.
All cellular organisms respond to vibration, touch, gravity or changes in osmolarity, although the molecules on which such mechanosensations depend are unknown. Candidates include certain channels that gate in response to membrane stretch. Patch-clamp experiments with Escherichia coli envelope have revealed a mechanosensitive channel with very large conductance (MscL) and one with a smaller conductance (MscS) which may be important in osmoregulation. Here we have solubilized and fractionated the envelope, reconstituted the MscL activity in vitro, and traced it to a small protein, whose gene, mscL, we then cloned. Insertional disruption of mscL removes the channel activity, whereas re-expression of mscL borne on an expression plasmid restores it. MscL-channel activities were observed in material from a cell-free expression system with mscL as the only template. The mscL nucleotide sequence predicts a unique protein of only 136 amino acids, with a highly hydrophobic core and very different from porins or other known proteins.
Although trafficking and degradation of several membrane proteins are regulated by ubiquitination catalyzed by E3 ubiquitin ligases, there has been little evidence connecting ubiquitination with regulation of mammalian G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein)-coupled receptor (GPCR) function. Agonist stimulation of endogenous or transfected beta2-adrenergic receptors (beta2ARs) led to rapid ubiquitination of both the receptors and the receptor regulatory protein, beta-arrestin. Moreover, proteasome inhibitors reduced receptor internalization and degradation, thus implicating a role for the ubiquitination machinery in the trafficking of the beta2AR. Receptor ubiquitination required beta-arrestin, which bound to the E3 ubiquitin ligase Mdm2. Abrogation of beta-arrestin ubiquitination, either by expression in Mdm2-null cells or by dominant-negative forms of Mdm2 lacking E3 ligase activity, inhibited receptor internalization with marginal effects on receptor degradation. However, a beta2AR mutant lacking lysine residues, which was not ubiquitinated, was internalized normally but was degraded ineffectively. These findings delineate an adapter role of beta-arrestin in mediating the ubiquitination of the beta2AR and indicate that ubiquitination of the receptor and of beta-arrestin have distinct and obligatory roles in the trafficking and degradation of this prototypic GPCR.
In metazoans, spliceosome assembly is initiated through recognition of the 5' splice site by U1 snRNP and the polypyrimidine tract by the U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle (snRNP) auxiliary factor, U2AF. U2AF is a heterodimer comprising a large subunit, U2AF65, and a small subunit, U2AF35. U2AF65 directly contacts the polypyrimidine tract and is required for splicing in vitro. In comparison, the role of U2AF35 has been puzzling: U2AF35 is highly conserved and is required for viability, but can be dispensed with for splicing in vitro. Here we use site-specific crosslinking to show that very early during spliceosome assembly U2AF35 directly contacts the 3' splice site. Mutational analysis and in vitro genetic selection indicate that U2AF35 has a sequence-specific RNA-binding activity that recognizes the 3'-splice-site consensus, AG/G. We show that for introns with weak polypyrimidine tracts, the U2AF35-3'-splice-site interaction is critical for U2AF binding and splicing. Our results demonstrate a new biochemical activity of U2AF35, identify the factor that initially recognizes the 3' splice site, and explain why the AG dinucleotide is required for the first step of splicing for some but not all introns.
Cyclic AMP is an important second messenger in the coordinated regulation of cellular metabolism. Its effects are mediated by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), which is assembled from two regulatory (R) and two catalytic (C) subunits. In mice there are four R genes (encoding RI alpha, RI beta, RII alpha, and RII beta) and two C gene (encoding C alpha and C beta), expressed in tissue-specific patterns. The RII beta isoform is abundant in brown and white adipose tissue and brain, with limited expression elsewhere. To elucidate its functions, we generated RII beta knockout mice. Here we report that mutants appear healthy but have markedly diminished white adipose tissue despite normal food intake. They are protected against developing diet-induced obesity and fatty livers. Mutant brown adipose tissue exhibits a compensatory increase in RI alpha, which almost entirely replaces lost RII beta, generating an isoform switch. The holoenzyme from mutant adipose tissue binds cAMP more avidly and is more easily activated than wild-type enzyme. This causes induction of uncoupling protein and elevations of metabolic rate and body temperature, contributing to the lean phenotype. Our results demonstrate a role for the RII beta holoenzyme in regulating energy balance and adiposity.
A cycle of clathrin assembly and disassembly drives the formation of coated vesicles, intermediates in intracellular protein transport. The heavy chain of clathrin is needed for assembly, but the function of the clathrin light chains has remained obscure. An enzyme has now been purified which uses ATP hydrolysis to power the release of clathrin from coated vesicles, presumably recycling the coat protein for repeated rounds of vesicle budding. This 'uncoating ATPase' requires clathrin light chains for its action.
Minutes after DNA damage, the variant histone H2AX is phosphorylated by protein kinases of the phosphoinositide kinase family, including ATM, ATR or DNA-PK. Phosphorylated (gamma)-H2AX-which recruits molecules that sense or signal the presence of DNA breaks, activating the response that leads to repair-is the earliest known marker of chromosomal DNA breakage. Here we identify a dynamic change in chromatin that promotes H2AX phosphorylation in mammalian cells. DNA breaks swiftly mobilize heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1)-beta (also called CBX1), a chromatin factor bound to histone H3 methylated on lysine 9 (H3K9me). Local changes in histone-tail modifications are not apparent. Instead, phosphorylation of HP1-beta on amino acid Thr 51 accompanies mobilization, releasing HP1-beta from chromatin by disrupting hydrogen bonds that fold its chromodomain around H3K9me. Inhibition of casein kinase 2 (CK2), an enzyme implicated in DNA damage sensing and repair, suppresses Thr 51 phosphorylation and HP1-beta mobilization in living cells. CK2 inhibition, or a constitutively chromatin-bound HP1-beta mutant, diminishes H2AX phosphorylation. Our findings reveal an unrecognized signalling cascade that helps to initiate the DNA damage response, altering chromatin by modifying a histone-code mediator protein, HP1, but not the code itself.
The preferred antitubercular drug isoniazid specifically targets a long-chain enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase (InhA), an enzyme essential for mycolic acid biosynthesis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Despite the widespread use of this drug for more than 40 years, its precise mode of action has remained obscure. Data from x-ray crystallography and mass spectrometry reveal that the mechanism of isoniazid action against InhA is covalent attachment of the activated form of the drug to the nicotinamide ring of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide bound within the active site of InhA.
Clones of skin fibroblasts cultured from the mother of two sons with X-linked hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase deficiency (Lesch-Nyhan syndrome) were assayed for activity of this enzyme by measurement of the incorporation of (3)H-guanine into guanylic acid as counts per minute per microgram of protein and by autoradiography. The demonstration of two populations of clones, wild-type clones with normal enzyme activity and mutant clones unable to incorporate (3)H-guanine, is evidence that the locus for hypoxanthineguanine phosphoribosyl transferase on one of the X chromosomes is inactive.
A deficiency in the plasma protease inhibitor alpha 1-antitrypsin can cause chronic obstructive emphysema or infantile liver cirrhosis. This deficiency results from a single amino acid substitution created by a G to A transition in the gene for alpha 1-antitrypsin. Chemically synthesized specific oligonucleotide probes (19-mer) have been used to develop a sensitive and direct test for the presence or absence of the mutant gene in any individual, which can be used for prenatal diagnosis of the deficiency syndrome.
Amino acid sequence data from 57 different enzymes were used to determine the divergence times of the major biological groupings. Deuterostomes and protostomes split about 670 million years ago and plants, animals, and fungi last shared a common ancestor about a billion years ago. With regard to these protein sequences, plants are slightly more similar to animals than are the fungi. In contrast, phylogenetic analysis of the same sequences indicates that fungi and animals shared a common ancestor more recently than either did with plants, the greater difference resulting from the fungal lineage changing faster than the animal and plant lines over the last 965 million years. The major protist lineages have been changing at a somewhat faster rate than other eukaryotes and split off about 1230 million years ago. If the rate of change has been approximately constant, then prokaryotes and eukaryotes last shared a common ancestor about 2 billion years ago, archaebacterial sequences being measurably more similar to eukaryotic ones than are eubacterial ones.
Cellular factors controlling alternative splicing of precursor messenger RNA are largely unknown, even though this process plays a central role in specifying the diversity of proteins in the eukaryotic cell. For the identification of such factors, a segment of the rat preprotachykinin gene was used in which differential expression of neuropeptides gamma and K is dependent on alternative splicing of the fourth exon (E4). Sequence variants of the three-exon segment, (E3-E4-E5) were created, resulting in a sensitive assay for factors mediating the splicing switch between E4-skipping and E4-inclusion. A dinucleotide mutation in the 5' splice site of E4 that increase base-pairing of this site to U1 small nuclear RNA resulted in uniform selection of E4, whereas a control mutation that destroyed base-pairing resulted in uniform E4-skipping. Affinity selection of spliceosomes formed on these functionally distinct substrates revealed that the extreme difference in splicing was mediated by differential binding of the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle (snRNP) to the 5' splice site of E4. These data show that, apart from its established role in selecting 5' splice sites, U1 snRNP plays a fundamental role in 3' exon selection and provides insight into possible mechanisms of alternative splicing.
Phosphate esters and anhydrides dominate the living world but are seldom used as intermediates by organic chemists. Phosphoric acid is specially adapted for its role in nucleic acids because it can link two nucleotides and still ionize; the resulting negative charge serves both to stabilize the diesters against hydrolysis and to retain the molecules within a lipid membrane. A similar explanation for stability and retention also holds for phosphates that are intermediary metabolites and for phosphates that serve as energy sources. Phosphates with multiple negative charges can react by way of the monomeric metaphosphate ion PO3- as an intermediate. No other residue appears to fulfill the multiple roles of phosphate in biochemistry. Stable, negatively charged phosphates react under catalysis by enzymes; organic chemists, who can only rarely use enzymatic catalysis for their reactions, need more highly reactive intermediates than phosphates.
Isoleucyl-transfer RNA (tRNA) synthetase (IleRS) joins Ile to tRNA(Ile) at its synthetic active site and hydrolyzes incorrectly acylated amino acids at its editing active site. The 2.2 angstrom resolution crystal structure of Staphylococcus aureus IleRS complexed with tRNA(Ile) and Mupirocin shows the acceptor strand of the tRNA(Ile) in the continuously stacked, A-form conformation with the 3' terminal nucleotide in the editing active site. To position the 3' terminus in the synthetic active site, the acceptor strand must adopt the hairpinned conformation seen in tRNA(Gln) complexed with its synthetase. The amino acid editing activity of the IleRS may result from the incorrect products shuttling between the synthetic and editing active sites, which is reminiscent of the editing mechanism of DNA polymerases.
The RNA moiety of the ribonucleoprotein enzyme telomerase from the ciliate Euplotes crassus was identified and its gene was sequenced. Functional analysis, in which oligonucleotides complementary to portions of the telomerase RNA were tested for their ability to prime telomerase in vitro, showed that the sequence 5' CAAAACCCCAAA 3' in this RNA is the template for synthesis of telomeric TTTTGGGG repeats by the Euplotes telomerase. The data provide a direct demonstration of a template function for a telomerase RNA and demarcate the outer boundaries of the telomeric template. Telomerase can now be defined as a specialized reverse transcriptase.
A small RNA of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi 29 is shown to have a novel and essential role in viral DNA packaging in vitro. This requirement for RNA in the encapsidation of viral DNA provides a new dimension of complexity to the attendant protein-DNA interactions. The RNA is a constituent of the viral precursor shell of the DNA-packaging machine but is not a component of the mature virion. Studies of the sequential interactions involving this RNA molecule are likely to provide new insight into the structural and possible catalytic roles of small RNA molecules. The phi 29 assembly in extracts and phi 29 DNA packaging in the defined in vitro system were strongly inhibited by treatment with the ribonucleases A or T1. However, phage assembly occurred normally in the presence of ribonuclease A that had been treated with a ribonuclease inhibitor. An RNA of approximately 120 nucleotides co-purified with the phi 29 precursor protein shell (prohead), and this particle was the target of ribonuclease action. Removal of RNA from the prohead by ribonuclease rendered it inactive for DNA packaging. By RNA-DNA hybridization analysis, the RNA was shown to originate from a viral DNA segment very near the left end of the genome, the end packaged first during in vitro assembly.
Somatostatin and dopamine are two major neurotransmitter systems that share a number of structural and functional characteristics. Somatostatin receptors and dopamine receptors are colocalized in neuronal subgroups, and somatostatin is involved in modulating dopamine-mediated control of motor activity. However, the molecular basis for such interaction between the two systems is unclear. Here, we show that dopamine receptor D2R and somatostatin receptor SSTR5 interact physically through hetero-oligomerization to create a novel receptor with enhanced functional activity. Our results provide evidence that receptors from different G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding protein)-coupled receptor families interact through oligomerization. Such direct intramembrane association defines a new level of molecular crosstalk between related G protein-coupled receptor subfamilies.
In eukaryotes, dozens of posttranscriptional modifications are directed to specific nucleotides in ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) by small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs). We identified homologs of snoRNA genes in both branches of the Archaea. Eighteen small sno-like RNAs (sRNAs) were cloned from the archaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius by coimmunoprecipitation with archaeal fibrillarin and NOP56, the homologs of eukaryotic snoRNA-associated proteins. We trained a probabilistic model on these sRNAs to search for more sRNAs in archaeal genomic sequences. Over 200 additional sRNAs were identified in seven archaeal genomes representing both the Crenarchaeota and the Euryarchaeota. snoRNA-based rRNA processing was therefore probably present in the last common ancestor of Archaea and Eukarya, predating the evolution of a morphologically distinct nucleolus.
Retrotransposons are mobile genetic elements that populate chromosomes, where the host largely controls their activities. In plants and mammals, retrotransposons are transcriptionally silenced by DNA methylation, which in Arabidopsis is propagated at CG dinucleotides by METHYLTRANSFERASE 1 (MET1). In met1 mutants, however, mobilization of retrotransposons is not observed, despite their transcriptional activation. A post-transcriptional mechanism therefore seems to be preventing retrotransposition. Here we show that a copia-type retrotransposon (Evade, French for 'fugitive') evaded suppression of its movement during inbreeding of hybrid epigenomes consisting of met1- and wild-type-derived chromosomes. Evade (EVD) reinsertions caused a series of developmental mutations that allowed its identification. Genetic testing of host control of the EVD life cycle showed that transcriptional suppression occurred by CG methylation supported by RNA-directed DNA methylation. On transcriptional reactivation, subsequent steps of the EVD cycle were inhibited by plant-specific RNA polymerase IV/V and the histone methyltransferase KRYPTONITE (KYP). Moreover, genome resequencing demonstrated retrotransposition of EVD but no other potentially active retroelements when this combination of epigenetic mechanisms was compromised. Our results demonstrate that epigenetic control of retrotransposons extends beyond transcriptional suppression and can be individualized for particular elements.
More than 10 different dominant transforming genes (oncogenes) have been identified in human tumours. A human bladder carcinoma oncogene, closely related in sequence to retroviral transforming genes, is split into four exons; the first encodes the N-terminal 37 residues of p21, a protein of unknown function. The oncogene is activated by a single point mutation (guanine to thymine) resulting in the change glycine to valine at position 12 of p21 (refs 3, 4). We report here that the amino acid sequence surrounding this residue is highly homologous to the beta-subunit of mitochondrial and bacterial ATP-synthase in the region of the polypeptide that is believed to contribute to nucleotide binding. Thus, p21 may form part of an enzyme that uses purine nucleotides in catalysis. This is consistent with the finding that an equivalent murine oncogene product binds GTP.
Human foamy virus (HFV) is the prototype of the Spumavirus genus of Retroviridae. In all other retroviruses, the pol gene products, including reverse transcriptase, are synthesized as Gag-Pol fusion proteins and are cleaved to functional enzymes during viral budding or release. In contrast, the Pol protein of HFV is translated from a spliced messenger RNA and lacks Gag domains. Infectious HFV particles contain double-stranded DNA similar in size to full-length provirus, suggesting that reverse transcription has taken place in viral particles before new rounds of infection, reminiscent of hepadnaviruses. These data suggest that foamy viruses possess a replication pathway containing features of both retroviruses and hepadnaviruses but distinct from both.
The serine protease inhibitors (serpins) are a family of proteins that function to control the action of serine proteases in many diverse physiological processes. The functional region or reactive centre of these inhibitors is near the C-terminal end and is an exposed site that acts as a bait for the appropriate serine protease to recognize and covalently bind. The specificity of the inhibitor is determined, at least in part, by a single amino acid that resides in this region at the P1 position. We show here that following a gene duplication event the reactive centres of three related rodent protease inhibitors have diverged from each other at unprecedented rates. This has resulted in proteins with different predicted specificities and we postulate that these changes were fixed by positive darwinian selection and that the most likely selective forces are extrinsic proteases, namely those used by parasites to facilitate their spread throughout the host.
Dynamin was discovered in bovine brain tissue as a nucleotide-sensitive microtubule-binding protein of relative molecular mass 100,000. It was found to cross-link microtubules into highly ordered bundles, and appeared to have a role in intermicrotubule sliding in vitro. Cloning and sequencing of rat brain dynamin complementary DNA identified an N-terminal region of about 300 amino acids which contained the three consensus elements characteristic of GTP-binding proteins. Extensive homology was found between this domain and the mammalian Mx proteins which are involved in interferon-induced viral resistance, and with the product of the VPS1 locus in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which has been implicated both in membrane protein sorting, and in meiotic spindle pole separation. Dynamin-containing microtubule bundles were not observed in an immunofluorescence study of cultured mammalian cells, but a role for a GTP-requiring protein in intermicrotubule sliding during mitosis in plants has been reported. We report here that Drosophila melanogaster contains multiple tissue-specific and developmentally-regulated forms of dynamin, which are products of the shibire locus previously implicated in endocytic protein sorting.
Retinal arrestin is the essential protein for the termination of the light response in vertebrate rod outer segments. It plays an important role in quenching the light-induced enzyme cascade by its ability to bind to phosphorylated light-activated rhodopsin (P-Rh*). Arrestins are found in various G-protein-coupled amplification cascades. Here we report on the three-dimensional structure of bovine arrestin (relative molecular mass, 45,300) at 3.3 A resolution. The crystal structure comprises two domains of antiparallel beta-sheets connected through a hinge region and one short alpha-helix on the back of the amino-terminal fold. The binding region for phosphorylated light-activated rhodopsin is located at the N-terminal domain, as indicated by the docking of the photoreceptor to the three-dimensional structure of arrestin. This agrees with the interpretation of binding studies on partially digested and mutated arrestin.
Feline and human mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI or Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) are inherited autosomal recessive deficiencies of lysosomal enzyme arylsulphatase B. Affected cats and children exhibit lesions caused by incompetent degradation, retinal atrophy and excessive urinary excretion of dermatan facial dysmorphia, corneal stromal opacities, leukocyte granulation, retinal atrophy and excessive urinary excretion of dermatan sulphate--and usually die before adulthood. Most attempts to treat humans affected with MPS VI or other mucopolysaccharidoses have been ineffective or logistically prohibitive, but allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) offers promise for cure of certain inborn errors of metabolism. Engraftment of normal donor marrow may endow the enzyme-deficient recipient with a continuous source of enzyme-competent blood cells and tissue macrophages to facilitate degradation of stored substrate and to prevent genesis of further malformations. To test this hypothesis, we performed allogeneic BMT in a 2-year-old male Siamese cat with advanced MPS VI. Here we describe BMT-induced correction of this hereditary enzyme deficiency.
Macrophages are aptly positioned to function as the primary line of defence against invading pathogens in many organs, including the lung and peritoneum. Their ability to phagocytose and clear microorganisms has been well documented. Macrophages possess several substances with which they can kill bacteria, including reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide, and antimicrobial proteins. We proposed that macrophage-derived proteinases may contribute to the antimicrobial properties of macrophages. Macrophage elastase (also known as matrix metalloproteinase 12 or MMP12) is an enzyme predominantly expressed in mature tissue macrophages and is implicated in several disease processes, including emphysema. Physiological functions for MMP12 have not been described. Here we show that Mmp12(-/-) mice exhibit impaired bacterial clearance and increased mortality when challenged with both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria at macrophage-rich portals of entry, such as the peritoneum and lung. Intracellular stores of MMP12 are mobilized to macrophage phagolysosomes after the ingestion of bacterial pathogens. Once inside phagolysosomes, MMP12 adheres to bacterial cell walls where it disrupts cellular membranes resulting in bacterial death. The antimicrobial properties of MMP12 do not reside within its catalytic domain, but rather within the carboxy-terminal domain. This domain contains a unique four amino acid sequence on an exposed beta loop of the protein that is required for the observed antimicrobial activity. The present study represents, to our knowledge, the first report of direct antimicrobial activity by a matrix metallopeptidase, and describes a new antimicrobial peptide that is sequentially and structurally unique in nature.
One of the most commonly found transforming ras oncogenes in human tumours has a valine codon replacing the glycine codon at position 12 of the normal c-Ha-ras gene. To understand the structural reasons behind cell transformation arising from this single amino acid substitution, we have determined the crystal structure of the GDP-bound form of the mutant protein, p21(Val-12), encoded by this oncogene. We report here the overall structure of p21(Val-12) at 2.2 A resolution and compare it with the structure of the normal c-Ha-ras protein. One of the major differences is that the loop of the transforming ras protein that binds the beta-phosphate of the guanine nucleotide is enlarged. Such a change in the 'catalytic site' conformation could explain the reduced GTPase activity of the mutant, which keeps the protein in the GTP bound 'signal on' state for a prolonged period time, ultimately causing cell transformation.
The nucleotide sequence of the 948,061 base pairs of chromosome XVI has been determined, completing the sequence of the yeast genome. Chromosome XVI was the last yeast chromosome identified, and some of the genes mapped early to it, such as GAL4, PEP4 and RAD1 (ref. 2) have played important roles in the development of yeast biology. The architecture of this final chromosome seems to be typical of the large yeast chromosomes, and shows large duplications with other yeast chromosomes. Chromosome XVI contains 487 potential protein-encoding genes, 17 tRNA genes and two small nuclear RNA genes; 27% of the genes have significant similarities to human gene products, and 48% are new and of unknown biological function. Systematic efforts to explore gene function have begun.
Autophagy is a process of self-cannibalization. Cells capture their own cytoplasm and organelles and consume them in lysosomes. The resulting breakdown products are inputs to cellular metabolism, through which they are used to generate energy and to build new proteins and membranes. Autophagy preserves the health of cells and tissues by replacing outdated and damaged cellular components with fresh ones. In starvation, it provides an internal source of nutrients for energy generation and, thus, survival. A powerful promoter of metabolic homeostasis at both the cellular and whole-animal level, autophagy prevents degenerative diseases. It does have a downside, however--cancer cells exploit it to survive in nutrient-poor tumors.
Apoptosis is a form of programmed cell death that is controlled by aspartate-specific cysteine proteases called caspases. In the immune system, apoptosis counters the proliferation of lymphocytes to achieve a homeostatic balance, which allows potent responses to pathogens but avoids autoimmunity. The CD95 (Fas, Apo-1) receptor triggers lymphocyte apoptosis by recruiting Fas-associated death domain (FADD), caspase-8 and caspase-10 proteins into a death-inducing signalling complex. Heterozygous mutations in CD95, CD95 ligand or caspase-10 underlie most cases of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), a human disorder that is characterized by defective lymphocyte apoptosis, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly and autoimmunity. Mutations in caspase-8 have not been described in ALPS, and homozygous caspase-8 deficiency causes embryonic lethality in mice. Here we describe a human kindred with an inherited genetic deficiency of caspase-8. Homozygous individuals manifest defective lymphocyte apoptosis and homeostasis but, unlike individuals affected with ALPS, also have defects in their activation of T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes and natural killer cells, which leads to immunodeficiency. Thus, caspase-8 deficiency in humans is compatible with normal development and shows that caspase-8 has a postnatal role in immune activation of naive lymphocytes.
Guanylate cyclase has been strongly implicated as a cell-surface receptor on spermatozoa for a chemotactic peptide, and on various other cells as a receptor for atrial natriuretic peptides. Resact (Cys-Val-Thr-Gly-Ala-Pro-Gly-Cys-Val-Gly-Gly-Gly-Arg-Leu-NH2), the chemotactic peptide released by sea urchin Arbacia punctulata eggs, is specifically crosslinked to A. punctulata spermatozoan guanylate cyclase. After the binding of the peptide the state of guanylate cyclase phosphorylation modulates enzyme activity. We report here that the deduced amino-acid sequence of the spermatozoan membrane form of guanylate cyclase predicts an intrinsic membrane protein of 986 amino acids with an amino-terminal signal sequence. A single transmembrane domain separates the protein into putative extracellular and cytoplasmic-catalytic domains. The cytoplasmic carboxyl-terminal 95 amino acids contain 20% serine, the likely regulatory sites for phosphorylation. Unexpectedly, the enzyme is homologous to the protein kinase family.
The corepressor CtBP (carboxyl-terminal binding protein) is involved in transcriptional pathways important for development, cell cycle regulation, and transformation. We demonstrate that CtBP binding to cellular and viral transcriptional repressors is regulated by the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides NAD+ and NADH, with NADH being two to three orders of magnitude more effective. Levels of free nuclear nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides, determined using two-photon microscopy, correspond to the levels required for half-maximal CtBP binding and are considerably lower than those previously reported. Agents capable of increasing NADH levels stimulate CtBP binding to its partners in vivo and potentiate CtBP-mediated repression. We propose that this ability to detect changes in nuclear NAD+/NADH ratio allows CtBP to serve as a redox sensor for transcription.
In many cell systems the interaction of ligands with their receptors causes rapid breakdown and resynthesis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2). Recent work has focused on the role of the degradation products of PtdIns(4,5)P2 as intermediates in the activation of cell function and growth: inositol trisphosphate (InsP3) can release Ca2+ from intracellular stores and diacylglycerol is thought to activate protein kinase C. This enzyme is also activated by phorbol esters (for example, 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate, TPA) and this is assumed to account for the pleiotropic effects of TPA on cell function and growth. Mouse thymocytes are not mitogenically stimulated by TPA alone, but it is a potent co-mitogen in combination with either concanavalin A (Con A) or A23187 (A. N. Corps and J.C.M., unpublished observations). Here we show that mitogenic concentrations of TPA, A23187 and Con A each cause an increase in the net phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) to PtdIns(4,5)P2 in mouse thymocytes. This is consistent with simulation by the mitogens of the same phosphoinositide phosphorylations in intact cells as recently demonstrated for the isolated products of the src and ros viral oncogenes in a cell-free system.
Heterotrimeric guanine-nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are signal transducers that relay messages from many receptors on the cell surface to modulate various cellular processes. The direct downstream effectors of G proteins consist of the signalling molecules that are activated by their physical interactions with a G alpha or Gbetagamma subunit. Effectors that interact directly with G alpha12 G proteins have yet to be identified. Here we show that G alpha12 binds directly to, and stimulates the activity of, Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) and a Ras GTPase-activating protein, Gap1m, in vitro and in vivo. G alpha12 interacts with a conserved domain, composed of the pleckstrin-homology domain and the adjacent Btk motif, that is present in both Btk and Gap1m. Our results are, to our knowledge, the first to identify direct effectors for G alpha12 and to show that there is a direct link between heterotrimeric and monomeric G proteins.
Cytotoxic T (Tc) lymphocytes recognize and lyse target cells and are thought to serve as an important defence against viral infections and possibly against neoplasms. The nature of the receptors responsible for antigen recognition by these cells is becoming clearer, but the molecular mechanisms responsible for their cytolytic activity remain largely unknown. The possibility that proteases are involved in this process has been suggested by the effects of certain inhibitors. Here we demonstrate that clones of murine Tc cells possess considerable trypsin-like esterase activity when assayed by a sensitive colorimetric assay. This activity was blocked completely by two serine esterase inhibitors, diisopropylfluorophosphoridate (DFP) and phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF), but not by N alpha-tosyl lysyl chloromethyl ketone (TLCK). The use of 3H-DFP as an affinity-labelling reagent demonstrated that the esterase activity resides in a protein of relative molecular mass (Mr) 28,000 (28K). A wide variety of other lymphocytes, including those from thymus, spleen and lymph node, established lines of B cells and noncytotoxic T cells, and clones of T helper cells, had about 300-fold less esterase activity than the Tc-cell clones and far smaller amounts of the DFP-reactive 28K protein. However, in thymocytes the esterase activity increased 20-50-fold and the 28K protein became more prominent 4 days after these cells had been stimulated in vitro to generate Tc cells.
A leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES) allows rapid export of proteins from cell nuclei. Microinjection studies revealed a role for the guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) Ran in NES-mediated export. Nuclear injection of a Ran mutant (Thr24 --> Asn) blocked protein export but not import, whereas depletion of the Ran nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 blocked protein import but not export. However, injection of Ran GTPase-activating protein (RanGAP) into RCC1-depleted cell nuclei inhibited export. Coinjection with Ran mutants insensitive to RanGAP prevented this inhibition. Therefore, NES-mediated protein export appears to require a Ran-GTP complex but does not require Ran-dependent GTP hydrolysis.
The long-arm and short-arm genes of fibroin light chain (L-chain) of silkworm, Bombyx Mori L., and the gene of human acidic fibroblast growth factor were cloned respectively and subsequently inserted into a transfer vector pVL1392 used as a tool to target the L-chain region of the silkworm genome. Genomic DNA from their offsprings was extracted and the expected targeting was detected using polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing, as well as protein analysis. The results showed that positive events occurred and that the FGF gene was integrated into the L-chain locus through homologous recombination.
Sulfoxidation of thiocarbamates yields a new class of chemicals having increased herbicidal activity along with greater tolerance of corn and soybeans in greenhouse tests. However, their thermal stability is not favorable. These sulfoxides are intermediates in the mammalian metabolism of thiocarbamates, being formed by liver microsomal oxidases and cleaved in a system consisting of glutathione and a soluble enzyme from liver.
Polyketides, the ubiquitous products of secondary metabolism in microorganisms, are made by a process resembling fatty acid biosynthesis that allows the suppression of reduction or dehydration reactions at specific biosynthetic steps, giving rise to a wide range of often medically useful products. The lovastatin biosynthesis cluster contains two type I polyketide synthase genes. Synthesis of the main nonaketide-derived skeleton was found to require the previously known iterative lovastatin nonaketide synthase (LNKS), plus at least one additional protein (LovC) that interacts with LNKS and is necessary for the correct processing of the growing polyketide chain and production of dihydromonacolin L. The noniterative lovastatin diketide synthase (LDKS) enzyme specifies formation of 2-methylbutyrate and interacts closely with an additional transesterase (LovD) responsible for assembling lovastatin from this polyketide and monacolin J.
Haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) change location during development and circulate in mammals throughout life, moving into and out of the bloodstream to engage bone marrow niches in sequential steps of homing, engraftment and retention. Here we show that HSPC engraftment of bone marrow in fetal development is dependent on the guanine-nucleotide-binding protein stimulatory alpha subunit (Galpha(s)). HSPCs from adult mice deficient in Galpha(s) (Galpha(s)(-/-)) differentiate and undergo chemotaxis, but also do not home to or engraft in the bone marrow in adult mice and demonstrate a marked inability to engage the marrow microvasculature. If deleted after engraftment, Galpha(s) deficiency did not lead to lack of retention in the marrow, rather cytokine-induced mobilization into the blood was impaired. Testing whether activation of Galpha(s) affects HSPCs, pharmacological activators enhanced homing and engraftment in vivo. Galpha(s) governs specific aspects of HSPC localization under physiological conditions in vivo and may be pharmacologically targeted to improve transplantation efficiency.
To intercept invading microbes that threaten growth and reproduction, plants evolved a sophisticated innate immune system. Recognition of specialized pathogens is mediated by resistance proteins that function as molecular switches. Pathogen perception by these multidomain proteins seems to trigger a series of conformational changes dependent on nucleotide exchange. The activated resistance protein switches on host defenses, often culminating in the death of infected cells. Given their control over life and death, activity of these proteins requires tight regulation that involves intramolecular interactions between the various domains.
Tyrosinase inhibitor (molecular weight less than 5000; extracted from various melanomas) fully inhibits soluble tyrosinase but only partially inhibits tyrosinase "aggregated" into melanosomes; the inhibitor can be inactivated by ultraviolet light. S91 Albinotyrosinase Type B apparently cannot "aggregate" into melanosomes because its protein carrier is genetically altered. Therefore, albinotyrosinase remains vulnerable to its inhibitor and cannot produce melanin, even though the enzyme has a functioning active center.
Twisted gastrulation (TSG) is involved in specifying the dorsal-most cell fate in Drosophila embryos, but its mechanism of action is poorly understood. TSG has been proposed to modify the action of Short gastrulation (SOG), thereby increasing signalling by the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) Decapentaplegic. SOG, an inhibitor of BMP signalling, is in turn inactivated by the protease Tolloid. Here we identify Tsg gene products from human, mouse, Xenopus, zebrafish and chick. Expression patterns in mouse and Xenopus embryos are consistent with in vivo interactions between Tsg, BMPs and the vertebrate SOG orthologue, chordin. We show that Tsg binds both the vertebrate Decapentaplegic orthologue BMP4 and chordin, and that these interactions have multiple effects. Tsg increases chordin's binding of BMP4, potentiates chordin's ability to induce secondary axes in Xenopus embryos, and enhances chordin cleavage by vertebrate tolloid-related proteases at a site poorly used in Tsg's absence; also, the presence of Tsg enhances the secondary axis-inducing activity of two products of chordin cleavage. We conclude that Tsg acts as a cofactor in chordin's antagonism of BMP signalling.
Ribonucleotide reductase is an essential enzyme for DNA synthesis in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells; it catalyses the reductive conversion of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides. Several herpesviruses including herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), HSV-2, pseudorabies virus (PRV), equine herpesvirus type 1 (EHV-1) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) have been found to induce novel ribonucleotide reductase activities. There is evidence that the HSV-1 ribonucleotide reductase activity is virus-encoded and essential for virus replication. This makes herpesvirus ribonucleotide reductases potential targets for antiviral chemotherapy. The HSV-1-encoded enzyme consists of two subunits: V136, the large subunit of relative molecular mass (Mr) 136,000 (136K) (RR1), which has been shown to be essential for enzyme activity, and V38, the small subunit (RR2) which forms a complex with the large subunit and is also likely to be essential for enzyme activity. Two particular features of the enzyme make it an attractive antiviral target. First, there is evidence for a common, highly conserved herpesvirus ribonucleotide reductase and second, the interaction between the large and small subunits may itself be exploitable. Here we identify a synthetic peptide which specifically inhibits the activity of virus-induced enzyme. We deduce that the mechanism of inhibition involves interference with the normal interaction between the two types of subunit.
The protease responsible for the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and necessary for apoptosis has been purified and characterized. This enzyme, named apopain, is composed of two subunits of relative molecular mass (M(r)) 17K and 12K that are derived from a common proenzyme identified as CPP32. This proenzyme is related to interleukin-1 beta-converting enzyme (ICE) and CED-3, the product of a gene required for programmed cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans. A potent peptide aldehyde inhibitor has been developed and shown to prevent apoptotic events in vitro, suggesting that apopain/CPP32 is important for the initiation of apoptotic cell death.
Indomethacin, an inhibitor of prostaglandin biosynthesis, is useful in studies aimed at understanding the metabolism and physiological function of prostaglandins. A recent report showing that indomethacin at 10(-7) M potently inhibits the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinases (cAMP-PrK) from ileal mucosa in the presence or absence of cyclic AMP, suggests how indomethacin may antagonize prostaglandin action on ileal mucosa. It also suggests that indomethacin might be useful in studying the properties and functions of protein kinase reactions. Inhibitors of prostaglandin biosynthesis, such as sodium salicylate and acetylsalicylate, at concentrations near 10(-2) M, have been shown to inhibit bovine diaphragm protein kinase only in the presence of cAMP, while stimulating it in the absence of cAMP. We report here that complete inhibition of cAMP-PrKs by indomethacin requires a concentration of 10(-3) M and is not tissue-specific, and that the effect of indomethacin is concentration dependent above 2 x 10(-4) M for the cAMP-dependent, and above 10(-3) M for cAMP-independent PrKs. These results contrast previous ones.
The C. elegans heterochronic gene pathway consists of a cascade of regulatory genes that are temporally controlled to specify the timing of developmental events. Mutations in heterochronic genes cause temporal transformations in cell fates in which stage-specific events are omitted or reiterated. Here we show that let-7 is a heterochronic switch gene. Loss of let-7 gene activity causes reiteration of larval cell fates during the adult stage, whereas increased let-7 gene dosage causes precocious expression of adult fates during larval stages. let-7 encodes a temporally regulated 21-nucleotide RNA that is complementary to elements in the 3' untranslated regions of the heterochronic genes lin-14, lin-28, lin-41, lin-42 and daf-12, indicating that expression of these genes may be directly controlled by let-7. A reporter gene bearing the lin-41 3' untranslated region is temporally regulated in a let-7-dependent manner. A second regulatory RNA, lin-4, negatively regulates lin-14 and lin-28 through RNA-RNA interactions with their 3' untranslated regions. We propose that the sequential stage-specific expression of the lin-4 and let-7 regulatory RNAs triggers transitions in the complement of heterochronic regulatory proteins to coordinate developmental timing.
The activity of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase has been measured in liver nuclei from suckling rats nursed by zinc-deficient dams, or by controls that were either pair-fed or given free access to the diet. In the zinc-deficient pups, the activity of the enzyme did not increase; it fell after the tenth day of life.
Humans with the complementation group G form of the inherited syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) are hypersensitive to solar ultraviolet light because of a defect in nucleotide-excision repair of DNA. Some individuals are also affected with Cockayne's syndrome, and have neurological abnormalities. Here we report that the DNA repair deficiency of XP-G cell extracts can be corrected by addition of protein fractions from normal cells. Repair proficiency can also be restored by mixing XP-G cell extracts with extracts from different repair-defective cell lines, with one exception. Extracts from cells representing group 5 of a set of ultraviolet-sensitive rodent mutants fail to complement XP-G extracts. XP-G and group 5 correcting activities co-elute after approximately 1,000-fold purification from HeLa cells. An antibody directed against a recombinant fragment of the XP-G complementing protein (XPGC) inhibits excision repair by normal cell extracts, and activity can be restored with an XP-G/group 5 complementing fraction. These data strongly suggest that the XPGC and group 5 correcting (ERCC5) proteins are identical.
In autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), autoantibodies are generated against a variety of macromolecules. Myositis is a human autoimmune disease characterized by weakness and wasting of muscle. In American studies, antibodies directed against soluble cellular constituents were detected by immunodiffusion in about 60% of cases; the commonest of these, found in 25% of patients, was antibody to the Jo-1 antigen. An antibody system referred to as PL-1 was recognized at a similar frequency in a series of patients studied at Hammersmith Hospital, London. We show here that this system is identical with the Jo-1 system and demonstrate that the antigen is a polypeptide of molecular weight (Mr) 50,000. The protein is immunoprecipitated with tRNA His and appears to be histidyl-tRNA synthetase. The identity of the Jo-1 antigen, the first of the RNA-associated antigens familiar in autoimmune disease to be characterized as a specific enzyme, suggests a model for virus involvement in autoantibody generation.
Broken chromosomes arising from DNA double-strand breaks result from endogenous events such as the production of reactive oxygen species during cellular metabolism, as well as from exogenous sources such as ionizing radiation. Left unrepaired or incorrectly repaired they can lead to genomic changes that may result in cell death or cancer. DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), a holoenzyme that comprises the DNA-PK catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) and the heterodimer Ku70/Ku80, has a major role in non-homologous end joining-the main pathway in mammals used to repair double-strand breaks. DNA-PKcs is a serine/threonine protein kinase comprising a single polypeptide chain of 4,128 amino acids and belonging to the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K)-related protein family. DNA-PKcs is involved in the sensing and transmission of DNA damage signals to proteins such as p53, setting off events that lead to cell cycle arrest. It phosphorylates a wide range of substrates in vitro, including Ku70/Ku80, which is translocated along DNA. Here we present the crystal structure of human DNA-PKcs at 6.6 A resolution, in which the overall fold is clearly visible, to our knowledge, for the first time. The many alpha-helical HEAT repeats (helix-turn-helix motifs) facilitate bending and allow the polypeptide chain to fold into a hollow circular structure. The carboxy-terminal kinase domain is located on top of this structure, and a small HEAT repeat domain that probably binds DNA is inside. The structure provides a flexible cradle to promote DNA double-strand-break repair.
Type II topoisomerases are required for the management of DNA tangles and supercoils, and are targets of clinical antibiotics and anti-cancer agents. These enzymes catalyse the ATP-dependent passage of one DNA duplex (the transport or T-segment) through a transient, double-stranded break in another (the gate or G-segment), navigating DNA through the protein using a set of dissociable internal interfaces, or 'gates'. For more than 20 years, it has been established that a pair of dimer-related tyrosines, together with divalent cations, catalyse G-segment cleavage. Recent efforts have proposed that strand scission relies on a 'two-metal mechanism', a ubiquitous biochemical strategy that supports vital cellular processes ranging from DNA synthesis to RNA self-splicing. Here we present the structure of the DNA-binding and cleavage core of Saccharomyces cerevisiae topoisomerase II covalently linked to DNA through its active-site tyrosine at 2.5A resolution, revealing for the first time the organization of a cleavage-competent type II topoisomerase configuration. Unexpectedly, metal-soaking experiments indicate that cleavage is catalysed by a novel variation of the classic two-metal approach. Comparative analyses extend this scheme to explain how distantly-related type IA topoisomerases cleave single-stranded DNA, unifying the cleavage mechanisms for these two essential enzyme families. The structure also highlights a hitherto undiscovered allosteric relay that actuates a molecular 'trapdoor' to prevent subunit dissociation during cleavage. This connection illustrates how an indispensable chromosome-disentangling machine auto-regulates DNA breakage to prevent the aberrant formation of mutagenic and cytotoxic genomic lesions.
The polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB) is a 58-kilodalton RNA binding protein involved in multiple aspects of messenger RNA metabolism, including the repression of alternative exons. We have determined the solution structures of the four RNA binding domains (RBDs) of PTB, each bound to a CUCUCU oligonucleotide. Each RBD binds RNA with a different binding specificity. RBD3 and RBD4 interact, resulting in an antiparallel orientation of their bound RNAs. Thus, PTB will induce RNA looping when bound to two separated pyrimidine tracts within the same RNA. This leads to structural models for how PTB functions as an alternative-splicing repressor.
Guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs) promote the exchange of GDP for GTP in Ras GTPases, and thereby positively regulate their functions. Members of the Sec4/Ypt1/Rab branch of the Ras superfamily are essential for vesicular transport. A GEF for a subset of Rab proteins, termed mammalian suppressor of Sec4 (Mss4), has been identified. Here we use multidimensional NMR to determine the structure of human Mss4 (hMss4), which is the first tertiary structure established for a protein with GEF activity. Mss4 contains a central beta-sheet sandwiched between two small sheets. It also binds a Zn2+ ion through Cys 23, Cys 26, Cys 94 and Cys 97. The Rab-binding surface of hMss4 has subsequently been delineated using chemical-shift perturbation experiments and site-directed mutagenesis. The active site of hMss4 involves the Zn(2+)-binding region and a neighbouring loop.
Calcineurin is the only protein phosphatase known to be under the control of Ca2+ and calmodulin. It is targeted by immunosuppressive drugs and has a critical role in T-cell activation. It is specifically inhibited by immunosuppressant immunophilin complexes, which enabled its function in regulating a wide range of cellular responses to Ca2+-mobilizing signals to be identified. Calcineurin in situ is 10-20 times more active than in the purified form and is subject to a time- and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent reversible inactivation that is facilitated by small, heat-stable molecules. Here we identify a factor that prevents the inactivation of calcineurin in vitro and in vivo as the enzyme superoxide dismutase, which indicates that inactivation may be the result of oxidative damage to the Fe-Zn active centre of calcineurin. The redox state of iron provides a mechanism to regulate calcineurin activity by desensitizing the enzyme and coupling Ca2+-dependent protein dephosphorylation to the redox state of the cell. The protection of calcineurin against inactivation by superoxide dismutase constitutes a new physiological role for this enzyme which enables the Ca2+-dependent regulation of cellular processes to be modulated by the redox potential.
Malarial parasites growing inside erythrocytes digest up to 80% of the host cell's haemoglobin within a lysosomal organelle, the digestive vacuole. They sequester the potentially toxic haem (Fe (II) protohaematoporphyrin) that is released during this process into an insoluble pigment called haemozoin, which consists of polymerized Fe (III) protohaematoporphyrin subunits. We have studied this process of haem polymerization, which was previously reported to be enzyme-mediated and the target of the quinoline antimalarial drugs chloroquine and quinine. Here we show that, rather than being enzyme-mediated, haem polymerization is actually a chemical process, dependent only on the presence of haem-derived material associated with haemozoin and not on protein. This discovery does not invalidate haem polymerization as a target for drug intervention and the mechanism by which haemozoin formation is initiated is still not understood, but our view of this process and of the action of choroquine must be reconsidered.
The large subunit of RNA polymerase II contains a highly conserved and essential heptapeptide repeat (Pro-Thr-Ser-Pro-Ser-Tyr-Ser) at its carboxy terminus. Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells are inviable if their RNA polymerase II large subunit genes encode fewer than 10 complete heptapeptide repeats; if they encode 10 to 12 complete repeats cells are temperature-sensitive and cold-sensitive, but 13 or more complete repeats will allow wild-type growth at all temperatures. Cells containing C-terminal domains (CTDs) of 10 to 12 complete repeats are also inositol auxotrophs. The phenotypes associated with these CTD mutations are not a consequence of an instability of the large subunit; rather, they seem to reflect a functional deficiency of the mutant enzyme. We show here that partial deletion mutations in RNA polymerase II CTD affect the ability of the enzyme to respond to signals from upstream activating sequences in a subset of promoters in yeast. The number of heptapeptide repeats required for maximal response to signals from these sequences differs from one upstream activating sequence to another. One of the upstream elements that is sensitive to truncations of the CTD is the 17-base-pair site bound by the GAL4 transactivating factor.
Rab1 is a GTPase that regulates the transport of endoplasmic-reticulum-derived vesicles in eukaryotic cells. The intracellular pathogen Legionella pneumophila subverts Rab1 function to create a vacuole that supports bacterial replication by a mechanism that is not well understood. Here we describe L. pneumophila proteins that control Rab1 activity directly. We show that a region in the DrrA (defect in Rab1 recruitment A) protein required for recruitment of Rab1 to membranes functions as a guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor displacement factor. A second region of the DrrA protein stimulated Rab1 activation by functioning as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor. The LepB protein was found to inactivate Rab1 by stimulating GTP hydrolysis, indicating that LepB has GTPase-activating protein activity that regulates removal of Rab proteins from membranes. Thus, L. pneumophila encodes proteins that regulate three distinct biochemical reactions critical for Rab GTPase membrane cycling to redirect Rab1 to the pathogen-occupied vacuole and to control Rab1 function.
Associated with some plant viruses are small satellite RNA's that depend on the plant virus to provide protective coat protein and presumably at least some of the proteins necessary for satellite RNA replication. Multimeric forms of the satellite RNA of tobacco ringspot virus are probable in vivo precursors of the monomeric satellite RNA. Evidence is presented for the in vitro autolytic processing of dimeric and trimeric forms of this satellite RNA. The reaction generates biologically active monomeric satellite RNA, apparently is reversible to form dimeric RNA from monomeric RNA, and does not require an enzyme for its catalysis.
TRAF6 is a ubiquitin ligase that is essential for the activation of NF-kappaB and MAP kinases in several signalling pathways, including those emanating from the interleukin 1 and Toll-like receptors. TRAF6 functions together with a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme complex consisting of UBC13 (also known as UBE2N) and UEV1A (UBE2V1) to catalyse Lys 63-linked polyubiquitination, which activates the TAK1 (also known as MAP3K7) kinase complex. TAK1 in turn phosphorylates and activates IkappaB kinase (IKK), leading to the activation of NF-kappaB. Although several proteins are known to be polyubiquitinated in the IL1R and Toll-like receptor pathways, it is not clear whether ubiquitination of any of these proteins is important for TAK1 or IKK activation. By reconstituting TAK1 activation in vitro using purified proteins, here we show that free Lys 63 polyubiquitin chains, which are not conjugated to any target protein, directly activate TAK1 by binding to the ubiquitin receptor TAB2 (also known as MAP3K7IP2). This binding leads to autophosphorylation and activation of TAK1. Furthermore, we found that unanchored polyubiquitin chains synthesized by TRAF6 and UBCH5C (also known as UBE2D3) activate the IKK complex. Disassembly of the polyubiquitin chains by deubiquitination enzymes prevented TAK1 and IKK activation. These results indicate that unanchored polyubiquitin chains directly activate TAK1 and IKK, suggesting a new mechanism of protein kinase regulation.
The androgen receptor (AR) mediates the actions of male sex steroids. Human AR genomic DNA was cloned from a flow-sorted human X chromosome library by using a consensus nucleotide sequence from the DNA-binding domain of the family of nuclear receptors. The AR gene was localized on the human X chromosome between the centromere and q13. Cloned complementary DNA, selected with an AR-specific oligonucleotide probe, was expressed in monkey kidney (COS) cells and yielded a high-affinity androgen-binding protein with steroid-binding specificity corresponding to that of native AR. A predominant messenger RNA species of 9.6 kilobases was identified in human, rat, and mouse tissues known to contain AR and was undetectable in tissues lacking AR androgen-binding activity, including kidney and liver from androgen-insensitive mice. The deduced amino acid sequence of AR within the DNA-binding domain has highest sequence identity with the progesterone receptor.
The DNA glycosylase pathway, which requires the sequential action of two enzymes for the incision of DNA, presents a serious problem for the efficient repair of oxidative DNA damage, because it generates genotoxic intermediates such as abasic sites and/or blocking 3'-end groups that must be eliminated by additional steps before DNA repair synthesis can be initiated. Besides the logistical problems, biological evidence hints at the existence of an alternative repair pathway. Mutants of Escherichia coli and mice (ref. 4 and M. Takao et al., personal communication) that are deficient in DNA glycosylases that remove oxidized bases are not sensitive to reactive oxygen species, and the E. coli triple mutant nei, nth, fpg is more radioresistant than the wild-type strain. Here we show that Nfo-like endonucleases nick DNA on the 5' side of various oxidatively damaged bases, generating 3'-hydroxyl and 5'-phosphate termini. Nfo-like endonucleases function next to each of the modified bases that we tested, including 5,6-dihydrothymine, 5,6-dihydrouracil, 5-hydroxyuracil and 2,6-diamino-4-hydroxy-5-N-methylformamidopyrimidine residues. The 3'-hydroxyl terminus provides the proper end for DNA repair synthesis; the dangling damaged nucleotide on the 5' side is then a good substrate for human flap-structure endonuclease and for DNA polymerase I of E. coli.
The crystal structure of the ribonuclease (RNase) H domain of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) has been determined at a resolution of 2.4 A and refined to a crystallographic R factor of 0.20. The protein folds into a five-stranded mixed beta sheet flanked by an asymmetric distribution of four alpha helices. Two divalent metal cations bind in the active site surrounded by a cluster of four conserved acidic amino acid residues. The overall structure is similar in most respects to the RNase H from Escherichia coli. Structural features characteristic of the retroviral protein suggest how it may interface with the DNA polymerase domain of p66 in the mature RT heterodimer. These features also offer insights into why the isolated RNase H domain is catalytically inactive but when combined in vitro with the isolated p51 domain of RT RNase H activity can be reconstituted. Surprisingly, the peptide bond cleaved by HIV-1 protease near the polymerase-RNase H junction of p66 is completely inaccessible to solvent in the structure reported here. This suggests that the homodimeric p66-p66 precursor of mature RT is asymmetric with one of the two RNase H domains at least partially unfolded.
Regulation of ribosomal RNA genes is a fundamental process that supports the growth of cells and is tightly coupled with cell differentiation. Although rRNA transcriptional control by RNA polymerase I (Pol I) and associated factors is well studied, the lineage-specific mechanisms governing rRNA expression remain elusive. Runt-related transcription factors Runx1, Runx2 and Runx3 establish and maintain cell identity, and convey phenotypic information through successive cell divisions for regulatory events that determine cell cycle progression or exit in progeny cells. Here we establish that mammalian Runx2 not only controls lineage commitment and cell proliferation by regulating genes transcribed by RNA Pol II, but also acts as a repressor of RNA Pol I mediated rRNA synthesis. Within the condensed mitotic chromosomes we find that Runx2 is retained in large discrete foci at nucleolar organizing regions where rRNA genes reside. These Runx2 chromosomal foci are associated with open chromatin, co-localize with the RNA Pol I transcription factor UBF1, and undergo transition into nucleoli at sites of rRNA synthesis during interphase. Ribosomal RNA transcription and protein synthesis are enhanced by Runx2 deficiency that results from gene ablation or RNA interference, whereas induction of Runx2 specifically and directly represses rDNA promoter activity. Runx2 forms complexes containing the RNA Pol I transcription factors UBF1 and SL1, co-occupies the rRNA gene promoter with these factors in vivo, and affects local chromatin histone modifications at rDNA regulatory regions. Thus Runx2 is a critical mechanistic link between cell fate, proliferation and growth control. Our results suggest that lineage-specific control of ribosomal biogenesis may be a fundamental function of transcription factors that govern cell fate.
How plants recognize pathogens and activate defense is still mysterious. Direct interaction between pathogen avirulence (Avr) proteins and plant disease resistance proteins is the exception rather than the rule. During infection, Cladosporium fulvum secretes Avr2 protein into the apoplast of tomato leaves and, in the presence of the extracellular leucine-rich repeat receptor-like Cf-2 protein, triggers a hypersensitive response (HR) that also requires the extracellular tomato cysteine protease Rcr3. We show here that Avr2 binds and inhibits Rcr3 and propose that the Rcr3-Avr2 complex enables the Cf-2 protein to activate an HR.
The Bacillus subtilis ribonuclease P consists of a protein and an RNA. At high ionic strength the reaction is protein-independent; the RNA alone is capable of cleaving precursor transfer RNA, but the turnover is slow. Kinetic analyses show that high salt concentrations facilitate substrate binding in the absence of the protein, probably by decreasing the repulsion between the polyanionic enzyme and substrate RNAs, and also slow product release and enzyme turnover. It is proposed that the ribonuclease P protein, which is small and basic, provides a local pool of counter-ions that facilitates substrate binding without interfering with rapid product release.
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is a polypeptide hormone whose effects include the induction of diuresis, natriuresis and vasorelaxation. One of the earliest events following binding of ANP to receptors on target cells is an increase in cyclic GMP concentration, indicating that this nucleotide might act as a mediator of the physiological effects of the hormone. Guanylate cyclase exists in at least two different molecular forms: a soluble haem-containing enzyme consisting of two subunits and a non-haem-containing transmembrane protein having a single subunit. It is the membrane form of guanylate cyclase that is activated following binding of ANP to target cells. We report here the isolation, sequence and expression of a complementary DNA clone encoding the membrane form of guanylate cyclase from rat brain. Transfection of this cDNA into cultured mammalian cells results in expression of guanylate cyclase activity and ANP-binding activity. The ANP receptor/guanylate cyclase represents a new class of mammalian cell-surface receptors which contain an extracellular ligand-binding domain and an intracellular guanylate cyclase catalytic domain.
Newly synthesized proteins to be exported out of the cytoplasm of bacterial cells have to pass across the inner membrane. In Gram-negative bacteria ATP, a membrane potential, the products of the sec genes and leader peptidases (enzymes which cleave the N-terminal signal peptides of the precursor proteins) are required. The mechanism of translocation, however, remains elusive. Important additional roles for membrane lipids have been repeatedly suggested both on theoretical grounds and on the basis of experiments with model systems but no direct evidence had been obtained. We demonstrate here, using mutants of Escherichia coli defective in the synthesis of the major anionic membrane phospholipids, that phosphatidylglycerol is involved in the translocation of newly synthesized outer-membrane proteins across the inner membrane.
Genome-wide screens were performed in yeast to identify genes that enhance the toxicity of a mutant huntingtin fragment or of alpha-synuclein. Of 4850 haploid mutants containing deletions of nonessential genes, 52 were identified that were sensitive to a mutant huntingtin fragment, 86 that were sensitive to alpha-synuclein, and only one mutant that was sensitive to both. Genes that enhanced toxicity of the mutant huntingtin fragment clustered in the functionally related cellular processes of response to stress, protein folding, and ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolism, whereas genes that modified alpha-synuclein toxicity clustered in the processes of lipid metabolism and vesicle-mediated transport. Genes with human orthologs were overrepresented in our screens, suggesting that we may have discovered conserved and nonoverlapping sets of cell-autonomous genes and pathways that are relevant to Huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease.
Post-translational modification of proteins by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation regulates many cellular pathways that are critical for genome stability, including DNA repair, chromatin structure, mitosis and apoptosis. Poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) is composed of repeating ADP-ribose units linked via a unique glycosidic ribose-ribose bond, and is synthesized from NAD by PAR polymerases. PAR glycohydrolase (PARG) is the only protein capable of specific hydrolysis of the ribose-ribose bonds present in PAR chains; its deficiency leads to cell death. Here we show that filamentous fungi and a number of bacteria possess a divergent form of PARG that has all the main characteristics of the human PARG enzyme. We present the first PARG crystal structure (derived from the bacterium Thermomonospora curvata), which reveals that the PARG catalytic domain is a distant member of the ubiquitous ADP-ribose-binding macrodomain family. High-resolution structures of T. curvata PARG in complexes with ADP-ribose and the PARG inhibitor ADP-HPD, complemented by biochemical studies, allow us to propose a model for PAR binding and catalysis by PARG. The insights into the PARG structure and catalytic mechanism should greatly improve our understanding of how PARG activity controls reversible protein poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and potentially of how the defects in this regulation are linked to human disease.
In the multifunctional fungal fatty acid synthase (FAS), the acyl carrier protein (ACP) domain shuttles reaction intermediates covalently attached to its prosthetic phosphopantetheine group between the different enzymatic centers of the reaction cycle. Here, we report the structure of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae FAS determined at 3.1 angstrom resolution with its ACP stalled at the active site of ketoacyl synthase. The ACP contacts the base of the reaction chamber through conserved, charge-complementary surfaces, which optimally position the ACP toward the catalytic cleft of ketoacyl synthase. The conformation of the prosthetic group suggests a switchblade mechanism for acyl chain delivery to the active site of the enzyme.
Simian virus 40 (SV40) replicates in nuclei of human and monkey cells. One viral protein, large tumour (T) antigen, is required for the initiation of DNA replication. The development of in vitro replication systems which retain this property has facilitated the identification of the cellular components required for replication. T antigen recognizes the pentanucleotide 5'-GAGGC-3' which is present in four copies within the 64 base-pairs (bp) of the core origin. In the presence of ATP it binds with increased affinity forming a distinctive, bilobed structure visible in electron micrographs. As a helicase, it unwinds SV40 DNA bidirectionally from the origin. We report here that in vitro and in the presence of ATP, T antigen assembles a double hexamer, centred on the core origin and extending beyond it by 12 bp in each direction. The assembly of this dodecamer initiates an untwisting of the duplex by 2-3 turns. In the absence of ATP, a tetrameric structure is the largest found at the core origin. In the absence of DNA, but in the presence of ATP or its non-hydrolysable analogues, T antigen assembles into hexamers. This suggests that ATP effects an allosteric change in the monomer. The change alters protein-protein interactions and allows the assembly of a double hexamer, which initiates replication at the core origin.
Ethylene gas is used as a hormone by plants, in which it acts as a critical growth regulator. Its synthesis is also rapidly evoked in response to a variety of biotic and abiotic stresses. The Arabidopsis ethylene-overproducer mutants eto2 and eto3 have previously been identified as having mutations in two genes, ACS5 and ACS9, respectively; these encode isozymes of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid synthase (ACS), which catalyse the rate-limiting step in ethylene biosynthesis. Here we report that another ethylene-overproducer mutation, eto1, is in a gene that negatively regulates ACS activity and ethylene production. The ETO1 protein directly interacts with and inhibits the enzyme activity of full-length ACS5 but not of a truncated form of the enzyme, resulting in a marked accumulation of ACS5 protein and ethylene. Overexpression of ETO1 inhibited induction of ethylene production by the plant growth regulator cytokinin, and promoted ACS5 degradation by a proteasome-dependent pathway. ETO1 also interacts with CUL3, a constituent of ubiquitin ligase complexes in which we propose that ETO1 serves as a substrate-specific adaptor protein. ETO1 thus has a dual mechanism, inhibiting ACS enzyme activity and targeting it for protein degradation. This permits rapid modulation of the concentration of ethylene.
The herpes simplex virus 1 genome consists of one long and one short stretch of unique sequences flanked by inverted repeat sequences. The nucleotide sequence and RNA map predict 12 open reading frames designated as US1 through US12 within the short stretch of unique sequences. This paper reports the construction of virus mutants from which US2, US3, or US4 had been deleted that are capable of growth in cell culture. One of the three deleted genes, US4, specifies the viral envelope glycoprotein G. Mutants with deletions in US1, US8, US9, US10, US11, and US12 have been previously reported. The nine genes deleted from this region form two clusters, US1 through US4 and US8 through US12, and encode at least two and possibly more structural proteins. The presence of so many genes dispensable for growth in cell culture suggests several hypotheses regarding their function and evolution.
The Vibrio cholerae bacterium causes devastating diarrhea when it infects the human intestine. The key event is adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosylation of the human signaling protein GSalpha, catalyzed by the cholera toxin A1 subunit (CTA1). This reaction is allosterically activated by human ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs), a family of essential and ubiquitous G proteins. Crystal structures of a CTA1:ARF6-GTP (guanosine triphosphate) complex reveal that binding of the human activator elicits dramatic changes in CTA1 loop regions that allow nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) to bind to the active site. The extensive toxin:ARF-GTP interface surface mimics ARF-GTP recognition of normal cellular protein partners, which suggests that the toxin has evolved to exploit promiscuous binding properties of ARFs.
A specific label for voltage-dependent calcium channels is essential for the isolation and purification of the membrane protein that constitutes the calcium channel and for a better understanding of its function. A fraction of Crotalus atrox that increases voltage-dependent calcium currents in single, dispersed guinea pig ventricular cells was isolated. In the doses used, neither sodium nor potassium currents were changed. The fraction was active in the absence of detectable phospholipase or protease activity, and the active component, designated atrotoxin, produced its effect rapidly and reversibly. The effect was produced by extracellular but not intracellular application of the agent. The increase in Ca2+ current was blocked by the Ca2+ channel blockers cobalt and nitrendipine. The active fraction completely blocked specific [3H]nitrendipine binding to guinea pig ventricular membrane preparations. The inhibition of nitrendipine binding by atrotoxin was apparently via an allosteric mechanism. Thus atrotoxin was shown to bind to the Ca2+ channel and to act as a specific Ca2+ channel agonist.
Receptor-mediated activation of both adenylate cyclase and phosphatidylinositide hydrolysis systems occurs through guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins and ultimately leads to specific activation of either cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A or Ca2+/phospholipid-dependent protein kinase C. Given the remarkable diversity of agents that influence cellular metabolism through these pathways and the similarities of their components, interactions between the two signalling systems could occur. In fact, stimulation of cells with 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA), a phorbol ester that activates protein kinase C, influences hormone-sensitive adenylate cyclase. In some cells TPA induces desensitization of receptor-mediated stimulation of adenylate cyclase, whereas in others, such as frog erythrocytes, phorbol ester treatment results in increased agonist-stimulated as well as basal, guanine nucleotide- and fluoride ion-stimulated adenylate cyclase activities. We show here that TPA produces phosphorylation of the catalytic unit of adenylate cyclase in frog erythrocytes. Moreover, purified protein kinase C can directly phosphorylate in vitro the catalytic unit of adenylate cyclase purified from bovine brain. These results suggest that phosphorylation of the catalytic unit of adenylate cyclase by protein kinase C may be involved in the phorbol ester-induced enhancement of adenylate cyclase activity. In addition to providing the first direct demonstration of a covalent modification of the catalytic unit of adenylate cyclase, these results provide a potential biochemical mechanism for a regulatory link between the two major transmembrane signalling systems.
In both starfish and amphibian oocytes, the activity of a major protein kinase which is independent of Ca2+ and cyclic nucleotides increases dramatically at meiotic and mitotic nuclear divisions. The in vivo substrates of this kinase are unknown, but phosphorylation of H1 histone can be used as an in vitro assay. We have purified this kinase from starfish oocytes. The major band in the most highly purified preparation contained a polypeptide of relative molecular mass (Mr) 34,000 (34K). This is the same size as the protein kinase encoded by cdc2+, which regulates entry into mitosis in fission yeast and is a component of MPF purified from Xenopus. Here, we show that antibodies against p34 recognize the starfish 34K protein and propose that entry into meiotic and mitotic nuclear divisions involves activation of the protein kinase encoded by a homologue of cdc2+. Given the wide occurrence of cdc2+ homologues from budding yeast to Xenopus and human cells, this activation may act as a common mechanism controlling entry into mitosis in eukaryotic cells.
Various receptors coupled to the heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein Gq/11 stimulate formation of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3). Activation of these receptors also induces protein tyrosine phosphorylation. Formation of IP3 in response to stimulated receptors that couple to Gq/11 was blocked by protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors. These inhibitors appeared to act before activation of Gq/11. Moreover, stimulation of receptors coupled to Gq/11 induced phosphorylation on a tyrosine residue (Tyr356) of the Galphaq/11 subunit, and this tyrosine phosphorylation event was essential for Gq/11 activation. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Galphaq/11 induced changes in its interaction with receptors. Therefore, tyrosine phosphorylation of Galphaq/11 appears to regulate the activation of Gq/11 protein.
DNA methylation is one of the best-characterized epigenetic modifications. Although the enzymes that catalyse DNA methylation have been characterized, enzymes responsible for demethylation have been elusive. A recent study indicates that the human TET1 protein could catalyse the conversion of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) of DNA to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), raising the possibility that DNA demethylation may be a Tet1-mediated process. Here we extend this study by demonstrating that all three mouse Tet proteins (Tet1, Tet2 and Tet3) can also catalyse a similar reaction. Tet1 has an important role in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cell maintenance through maintaining the expression of Nanog in ES cells. Downregulation of Nanog via Tet1 knockdown correlates with methylation of the Nanog promoter, supporting a role for Tet1 in regulating DNA methylation status. Furthermore, knockdown of Tet1 in pre-implantation embryos results in a bias towards trophectoderm differentiation. Thus, our studies not only uncover the enzymatic activity of the Tet proteins, but also demonstrate a role for Tet1 in ES cell maintenance and inner cell mass cell specification.
Apolipoprotein (apo) B-100, the major protein component in low density lipoprotein (LDL), is the ligand that binds to the LDL receptor. It is important in the metabolism of LDL and elevated plasma levels of LDL-apo B are strongly associated with increased risk of coronary artery disease. Although apo B-100 is of great clinical and biological importance its primary structure has defied chemical elucidation, mainly because of its enormous size, insolubility, and tendency to aggregate. Less than 5% of the apo B-100 sequence has been reported, despite the efforts of many laboratories over the past twenty years. Here we report the complete amino acid sequence of human apo B-100 as deducted by sequence analysis of complementary DNA clones; 2,366 of the 4,536 residues were also confirmed by direct sequencing of apo B-100 tryptic peptides. The distribution of trypsin-accessible and -inaccessible peptides of the protein on LDL is non-random and they can be grouped into 5 hypothetical domains. Of 20 potential N-glycosylation sites identified in the sequence, 13 were found by direct peptide sequencing to be glycosylated, and 4 unglycosylated. Examination of the primary structure of apo B-100 reveals that it contains a large number of long (greater than 70 residues) internal repeats and an even larger number of shorter ones, suggesting that the apo B-100 sequence was derived largely from internal duplications. Finally, using synthetic peptides of a specific region of apo B-100, we have identified a potential LDL receptor-binding domain (residues 3,345-3,381) which can bind to the LDL receptor and suppress 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase activities in cultured human fibroblasts.
In vertebrates all iron is taken up via the carrier protein transferrin. The carrier first binds its receptor and the receptor-ligand complex is then internalized via coated pits. The transferrin receptor is a transmembrane glycoprotein (apparent molecular weight (MW) 180,000) composed of two disulphide-bonded sub-units (each of apparent MW 90,000) It contains three N-linked glycan units and is post-translationally modified with both phosphate and fatty acyl groups. Here we have determined the nucleotide sequence of the coding region of the human transferrin receptor mRNA and from this deduced the amino acid sequence of the protein. The receptor does not contain an N-terminal signal peptide but there is a membrane-spanning segment 62 amino acids from the N-terminus. It therefore has a somewhat unusual configuration with a small N-terminal cytoplasmic domain and a C-terminal extracellular domain of 672 amino acids.
Genomic expansions of simple tandem repeats can give rise to toxic RNAs that contain expanded repeats. In myotonic dystrophy, the expression of expanded CUG repeats (CUGexp) causes abnormal regulation of alternative splicing and neuromuscular dysfunction. We used a transgenic mouse model to show that derangements of myotonic dystrophy are reversed by a morpholino antisense oligonucleotide, CAG25, that binds to CUGexp RNA and blocks its interaction with muscleblind-like 1 (MBNL1), a CUGexp-binding protein. CAG25 disperses nuclear foci of CUGexp RNA and reduces the overall burden of this toxic RNA. As MBNL1 is released from sequestration, the defect of alternative splicing regulation is corrected, thereby restoring ion channel function. These findings suggest an alternative use of antisense methods, to inhibit deleterious interactions of proteins with pathogenic RNAs.
The 'RNA world' hypothesis proposes that early life developed by making use of RNA molecules, rather than proteins, to catalyse the synthesis of important biological molecules. It is thought, however, that the nucleotides constituting RNA were scarce on early Earth. RNA-based life must therefore have acquired the ability to synthesize RNA nucleotides from simpler and more readily available precursors, such as sugars and bases. Plausible prebiotic synthesis routes have been proposed for sugars, sugar phosphates and the four RNA bases, but the coupling of these molecules into nucleotides, specifically pyrimidine nucleotides, poses a challenge to the RNA world hypothesis. Here we report the application of in vitro selection to isolate RNA molecules that catalyse the synthesis of a pyrimidine nucleotide at their 3' terminus. The finding that RNA can catalyse this type of reaction, which is modelled after pyrimidine synthesis in contemporary metabolism, supports the idea of an RNA world that included nucleotide synthesis and other metabolic pathways mediated by ribozymes.
The folding pathways of large, highly structured RNA molecules are largely unexplored. Insight into both the kinetics of folding and the presence of intermediates was provided in a study of the Mg(2+)-induced folding of the Tetrahymena ribozyme by hybridization of complementary oligodeoxynucleotide probes. This RNA folds via a complex mechanism involving both Mg(2+)-dependent and Mg(2+)-independent steps. A hierarchical model for the folding pathway is proposed in which formation of one helical domain (P4-P6) precedes that of a second helical domain (P3-P7). The overall rate-limiting step is formation of P3-P7, and takes place with an observed rate constant of 0.72 +/- 0.14 minute-1. The folding mechanism of large RNAs appears similar to that of many multidomain proteins in that formation of independently stable substructures precedes their association into the final conformation.
Astacin, a digestive zinc-endopeptidase from the crayfish Astacus astacus L., is the prototype for the 'astacin family', which includes mammalian metallo-endopeptidases and developmentally regulated proteins of man, fruitfly, frog and sea urchin. Here we report the X-ray crystal structure of astacin, which reveals a deep active-site cleft, with the zinc at its bottom ligated by three histidines, a water molecule and a more remote tyrosine. The third histidine (His 102) forms part of a consensus sequence, shared not only by the members of the astacin family, but also by otherwise sequentially unrelated proteinases, such as vertebrate collagenases. It may therefore represent the elusive 'third' zinc ligand in these enzymes. The amino terminus of astacin is buried forming an internal salt-bridge with Glu 103, adjacent to His 102. Astacin pro-forms extended at the N terminus, as observed for some 'latent' mammalian astacin homologues, did not exhibit this 'active' conformation, indicating an activation mechanism reminiscent of trypsin-like serine proteinases.
The inhibitor-of-apoptosis (IAP) family of proteins, originally identified in baculoviruses, regulate programmed cell death in a variety of organisms. IAPs inhibit specific enzymes (caspases) in the death cascade and contain one to three modules of a common 70-amino-acid motif called the BIR domain. Here we describe the nuclear magnetic resonance structure of a region encompassing the second BIR domain (BIR2) of a human IAP family member, XIAP (also called hILP or MIHA). The structure of the BIR domain consists of a three-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet and four alpha-helices and resembles a classical zinc finger. Unexpectedly, conserved amino acids within the linker region between the BIR1 and BIR2 domains were found to be critical for inhibiting caspase-3. The absence or presence of these residues may explain the differences in caspase inhibition observed for different truncated and full-length IAPs. Our data further indicate that these residues may bind to the active site and that the BIR domain may interact with an adjacent site on the enzyme.
Biota can be described in terms of elemental composition, expressed as an atomic ratio of carbon:nitrogen:phosphorus (refs 1-3). The elemental stoichiometry of microoorganisms is fundamental for understanding the production dynamics and biogeochemical cycles of ecosystems because microbial biomass is the trophic base of detrital food webs. Here we show that heterotrophic microbial communities of diverse composition from terrestrial soils and freshwater sediments share a common functional stoichiometry in relation to organic nutrient acquisition. The activities of four enzymes that catalyse the hydrolysis of assimilable products from the principal environmental sources of C, N and P show similar scaling relationships over several orders of magnitude, with a mean ratio for C:N:P activities near 1:1:1 in all habitats. We suggest that these ecoenzymatic ratios reflect the equilibria between the elemental composition of microbial biomass and detrital organic matter and the efficiencies of microbial nutrient assimilation and growth. Because ecoenzymatic activities intersect the stoichiometric and metabolic theories of ecology, they provide a functional measure of the threshold at which control of community metabolism shifts from nutrient to energy flow.
The histidine-containing phosphocarrier protein (HPr) is a central component of the phosphoenolpyruvate: sugar phosphotransferase system that transports carbohydrates across the cell membrane of bacteria. A typical phosphotransfer sequence is phosphoenolpyruvate-->enzyme I-->HPr-->enzyme II/IIIsugar-->sugar. This is thermodynamically favourable owing to the participation of the high-energy phosphoenolpyruvate. We report here the structure of HPr from Streptococcus faecalis determined at 1.6 A resolution. Remarkable disallowed Ramachandran torsion angles at the active centre, revealed by the X-ray structure, demonstrate a unique example of torsion-angle strain that is probably directly involved in protein function. During phosphorylation, the active-centre torsion-angle strain should facilitate the phosphotransfer reaction by lowering the activation-energy barrier. A recently reported Bacillus subtilis HPr structure, which represents the phosphorylated state of HPr with no torsion-angle strain, provides direct evidence supporting our hypothesis that torsion-angle strain plays a direct part in the function of HPr. An HPr phosphotransfer cycling mechanism is proposed, based primarily on the structures of HPr and other phosphotransferase system proteins.
Although several ion channels have been reported to be directly modulated by calcium-calmodulin, they have not been conclusively shown to bind calmodulin, nor are the modulatory mechanisms understood. Study of the olfactory cyclic nucleotide-activated cation channel, which is modulated by calcium-calmodulin, indicates that calcium-calmodulin directly binds to a specific domain on the amino terminus of the channel. This binding reduces the effective affinity of the channel for cyclic nucleotides, apparently by acting on channel gating, which is tightly coupled to ligand binding. The data reveal a control mechanism that resembles those underlying the regulation of enzymes by calmodulin. The results also point to the amino-terminal part of the olfactory channel as an element for gating, which may have general significance in the operation of ion channels with similar overall structures.
A shortened form of the Tetrahymena self-splicing ribosomal RNA intervening sequence acts as an endoribonuclease, catalysing the cleavage of large RNA molecules by a mechanism involving guanosine transfer. The sequence specificity approaches that of the DNA restriction endonucleases. Site-specific mutagenesis of the enzyme active site alters the substrate sequence specificity in a predictable manner, so that endoribonucleases can be synthesized to cut at a variety of tetranucleotide sequences.
Elucidating the transcribed regions of the genome constitutes a fundamental aspect of human biology, yet this remains an outstanding problem. To comprehensively identify coding sequences, we constructed a series of high-density oligonucleotide tiling arrays representing sense and antisense strands of the entire nonrepetitive sequence of the human genome. Transcribed sequences were located across the genome via hybridization to complementary DNA samples, reverse-transcribed from polyadenylated RNA obtained from human liver tissue. In addition to identifying many known and predicted genes, we found 10,595 transcribed sequences not detected by other methods. A large fraction of these are located in intergenic regions distal from previously annotated genes and exhibit significant homology to other mammalian proteins.
The low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) receptor is a cell-surface protein that plays an important part in the metabolism of cholesterol by mediating the uptake of LDL from plasma into cells. Although LDL particles bind to the LDL receptor through their apolipoprotein B (apo B) and apolipoprotein E (apo E) moieties, other apo E-containing particles, like chylomicron remnants, are not dependent on the LDL receptor for uptake into cells. Chylomicrons formed in the intestinal mucosa during the absorption of the products of digestion, are processed by the peripheral circulation by lipoprotein lipase, which catalyses the breakdown of triglycerides in chylomicrons to free fatty acids and glycerol. The resulting chylomicron remnants, which are cholesterol-rich lipoproteins, are subsequently taken up in the liver. A second distinct protein that binds to apo E-containing lipoproteins, but not to LDL, has been proposed to be the receptor mediating the clearance of chylomicron remnants from the plasma. This protein has a relative molecular mass (Mr) of 56,000 (56K). More recent studies have failed, however, to establish whether this protein is a cell-surface receptor. Here we describe crosslinking experiments in which apo E liposomes were found to bind specifically to the cell surface of hepG2 cells and to human liver membranes. The size and immunological cross-reactivity of the protein to which the liposomes bound was indistinguishable from that of the recently cloned and sequenced LDL-receptor-related protein, LRP. We therefore conclude that the LRP might function as an apo E receptor.
Glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors have recently been identified as alternatives to hydrophobic amino acid sequences for the attachment of a variety of eukaryotic cell surface molecules to the lipid bilayer. In single cell eukaryotes the GPI group appears to be the predominant form of membrane attachment, and in vertebrates a substantial minority of molecules have this anchor including cell surface hydrolytic enzymes, antigens and cell adhesion molecules. Analysis of different GPI anchors suggests they share common structural features including linkage to the COOH group of the terminal amino acid via ethanolamine phosphate, the presence of phosphatidylinositol lipid and a glycan between the bridging ethanolamine phosphate and the lipid. In the case of the Trypanosoma brucie variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) the full structure of the GPI anchor has been determined and this provides a prototype for comparison with other molecules. We now report the structure of the GPI anchor of rat brain Thy-1 glycoprotein. It has an identical backbone to the VSG anchor but shows significant differences in side chain moieties.
The gene responsible for cystic fibrosis (CF) has recently been identified and is predicted to encode a protein of 1,480 amino acids called the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Several functional regions are thought to exist in the CFTR protein, including two areas for ATP-binding, termed nucleotide-binding folds (NBFs), a regulatory (R) region that has many possible sites for phosphorylation by protein kinases A and C, and two hydrophobic regions that probably interact with cell membranes. The most common CF gene mutation leads to omission of phenylalanine residue 508 in the putative first NBF, indicating that this region is functionally important. To determine whether other mutations occur in the NBFs of CFTR, we determined the nucleotide sequences of exons 9, 10, 11 and 12 (encoding the first NBF) and exons 20, 21 and 22 (encoding most of the second NBF) from 20 Caucasian and 18 American-black CF patients. One cluster of four mutations was discovered in a 30-base-pair region of exon 11. Three of these mutations cause amino-acid substitutions at residues that are highly conserved among the CFTR protein, the multiple-drug-resistance proteins and ATP-binding membrane-associated transport proteins. The fourth mutation creates a premature termination signal. These mutations reveal a functionally important region in the CFTR protein and provide further evidence that CFTR is a member of the family of ATP-dependent transport proteins.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) strains can be separated into two types: HIV and HIV-related West African viruses. Site-directed serology using synthetic peptides offers possibilities for the determination of type-specific antibodies. A 22-amino-acid peptide with the sequence Ala-Ile-Glu-Lys-Tyr-Leu-Glu-Asp-Gln-Ala-Gln-Leu-Asn-Ala-Trp-Cys-Ala-Phe-Arg-Gln - Val-Cys representing a conserved region of the transmembranous protein of simian T-cell lymphotropic virus-type III (STLV-III; related to West African HIV) was used as antigen in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In parallel, tests were performed with a pair of previously described peptides, including the homologous region of the glycoprotein (gp) 41 of the HIV strain HTLV-IIIB. In tests with three groups of 20 sera it was shown that the different peptide ELISAs allowed a categorical distinction of antibodies to the two types of HIV. Tests using peptide antigens may provide excellent opportunities for large-scale testing for type-specific antibodies against HIV. The tests are simple, sensitive and specific and are readily standardized.
Afg3p and Rca1p are adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent metalloproteases in yeast mitochondria. Cells lacking both proteins exhibit defects in respiration-dependent growth, degradation of mitochondrially synthesized proteins, and assembly of inner-membrane complexes. Defects in growth and protein assembly, but not in degradation, were suppressed by overproduction of yeast mitochondrial Lon, an ATP-dependent serine protease. Suppression by Lon was enhanced by inactivation of the proteolytic site and was prevented by mutation of the ATP-binding site. It is suggested that the mitochondrial proteases Lon, Afg3p, and Rca1p can also serve a chaperone-like function in the assembly of mitochondrial protein complexes.
Kinesins are microtubule-based motor proteins that power intracellular transport. Most kinesin motors, exemplified by Kinesin-1, move towards the microtubule plus end, and the structural changes that govern this directional preference have been described. By contrast, the nature and timing of the structural changes underlying the minus-end-directed motility of Kinesin-14 motors (such as Drosophila Ncd) are less well understood. Using cryo-electron microscopy, here we demonstrate that a coiled-coil mechanical element of microtubule-bound Ncd rotates approximately 70 degrees towards the minus end upon ATP binding. Extending or shortening this coiled coil increases or decreases velocity, respectively, without affecting ATPase activity. An unusual Ncd mutant that lacks directional preference shows unstable nucleotide-dependent conformations of its coiled coil, underscoring the role of this mechanical element in motility. These results show that the force-producing conformational change in Ncd occurs on ATP binding, as in other kinesins, but involves the swing of a lever-arm mechanical element similar to that described for myosins.
An iterative in vitro selection procedure was used to isolate a new class of catalytic RNAs (ribozymes) from a large pool of random-sequence RNA molecules. These ribozymes ligate two RNA molecules that are aligned on a template by catalyzing the attack of a 3'-hydroxyl on an adjacent 5'-triphosphate--a reaction similar to that employed by the familiar protein enzymes that synthesize RNA. The corresponding uncatalyzed reaction also yields a 3',5'-phosphodiester bond. In vitro evolution of the population of new ribozymes led to improvement of the average ligation activity and the emergence of ribozymes with reaction rates 7 million times faster than the uncatalyzed reaction rate.
Adipsin, a serine protease homolog, is synthesized and secreted by adipose cells and is found in the bloodstream. The expression of adipsin messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein was analyzed in rodents during metabolic perturbations and in several experimental models of obesity. Adipsin mRNA abundance is increased in adipose tissue during fasting in normal rats and in diabetes due to streptozotocin-induced insulin deficiency. Adipsin mRNA abundance decreased during the continuous infusion of glucose, which induces a hyperglycemic, hyperinsulinemic state that is accompanied by an increased adipose mass; it is suppressed (greater than 100-fold) in two strains of genetically obese mice (db/db and ob/ob), compared to their congenic counterparts, and is also reduced when obesity is induced chemically by injection of monosodium glutamate into newborn mice. Circulating adipsin protein is decreased in these animal models of obesity, as determined by immunoblotting with antisera to adipsin. Little change in adipsin expression is observed in a model of obesity obtained by pure overfeeding of normal rats (cafeteria model). These data suggest a possible role for adipsin in the above-mentioned disordered metabolic states, and raise the possibility that adipsin expression may be used to distinguish obesities that arise from certain genetic or metabolic defects from those that result from pure overfeeding.
Multicellular organisms have three well-characterized subfamilies of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) that control a vast array of physiological processes. These enzymes are regulated by a characteristic phosphorelay system in which a series of three protein kinases phosphorylate and activate one another. The extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) function in the control of cell division, and inhibitors of these enzymes are being explored as anticancer agents. The c-Jun amino-terminal kinases (JNKs) are critical regulators of transcription, and JNK inhibitors may be effective in control of rheumatoid arthritis. The p38 MAPKs are activated by inflammatory cytokines and environmental stresses and may contribute to diseases like asthma and autoimmunity.
The biochemical basis for the regulation of fibre-type determination in skeletal muscle is not well understood. In addition to the expression of particular myofibrillar proteins, type I (slow-twitch) fibres are much higher in mitochondrial content and are more dependent on oxidative metabolism than type II (fast-twitch) fibres. We have previously identified a transcriptional co-activator, peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-gamma co-activator-1 (PGC-1 alpha), which is expressed in several tissues including brown fat and skeletal muscle, and that activates mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative metabolism. We show here that PGC-1 alpha is expressed preferentially in muscle enriched in type I fibres. When PGC-1 alpha is expressed at physiological levels in transgenic mice driven by a muscle creatine kinase (MCK) promoter, a fibre type conversion is observed: muscles normally rich in type II fibres are redder and activate genes of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism. Notably, putative type II muscles from PGC-1 alpha transgenic mice also express proteins characteristic of type I fibres, such as troponin I (slow) and myoglobin, and show a much greater resistance to electrically stimulated fatigue. Using fibre-type-specific promoters, we show in cultured muscle cells that PGC-1 alpha activates transcription in cooperation with Mef2 proteins and serves as a target for calcineurin signalling, which has been implicated in slow fibre gene expression. These data indicate that PGC-1 alpha is a principal factor regulating muscle fibre type determination.
The Myc oncogene regulates the expression of several components of the protein synthetic machinery, including ribosomal proteins, initiation factors of translation, RNA polymerase III and ribosomal DNA. Whether and how increasing the cellular protein synthesis capacity affects the multistep process leading to cancer remains to be addressed. Here we use ribosomal protein heterozygote mice as a genetic tool to restore increased protein synthesis in Emu-Myc/+ transgenic mice to normal levels, and show that the oncogenic potential of Myc in this context is suppressed. Our findings demonstrate that the ability of Myc to increase protein synthesis directly augments cell size and is sufficient to accelerate cell cycle progression independently of known cell cycle targets transcriptionally regulated by Myc. In addition, when protein synthesis is restored to normal levels, Myc-overexpressing precancerous cells are more efficiently eliminated by programmed cell death. Our findings reveal a new mechanism that links increases in general protein synthesis rates downstream of an oncogenic signal to a specific molecular impairment in the modality of translation initiation used to regulate the expression of selective messenger RNAs. We show that an aberrant increase in cap-dependent translation downstream of Myc hyperactivation specifically impairs the translational switch to internal ribosomal entry site (IRES)-dependent translation that is required for accurate mitotic progression. Failure of this translational switch results in reduced mitotic-specific expression of the endogenous IRES-dependent form of Cdk11 (also known as Cdc2l and PITSLRE), which leads to cytokinesis defects and is associated with increased centrosome numbers and genome instability in Emu-Myc/+ mice. When accurate translational control is re-established in Emu-Myc/+ mice, genome instability is suppressed. Our findings demonstrate how perturbations in translational control provide a highly specific outcome for gene expression, genome stability and cancer initiation that have important implications for understanding the molecular mechanism of cancer formation at the post-genomic level.
Pertussis toxin is produced by the causative agent of whooping cough, Bordetella pertussis, and is an adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosyltransferase capable of covalently modifying and thereby inactivating many eukaryotic G proteins involved in cellular metabolism. The toxin is a principal determinant of virulence in whooping cough and is a primary candidate for an acellular pertussis vaccine, yet it is unclear whether the ADP-ribosyltransferase activity is required for both pathogenic and immunoprotective activities. A B. pertussis strain that produced an assembled pertussis holotoxin with only 1 percent of the ADP-ribosyltransferase activity of the native toxin was constructed and was found to be deficient in pathogenic activities associated with B. pertussis including induction of leukocytosis, potentiation of anaphylaxis, and stimulation of histamine sensitivity. Moreover, this mutant strain failed to function as an adjuvant and was less effective in protecting mice from intracerebral challenge infection. These data suggest that the ADP-ribosyltransferase activity is necessary for both pathogenicity and optimum immunoprotection. These findings bear directly on the design of a nontoxic pertussis vaccine.
Slow protein-folding reactions are accelerated by a prolyl cis/trans isomerase isolated from porcine kidney which is identical to cyclophilin, a protein that is probably the cellular receptor for the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A. Catalysis probably involves the isomerization of prolyl peptide bonds in the folding protein chains. Cyclosporin A inhibits folding catalysis by cyclophilin. Here we report the isolation, cloning, sequencing and expression of another protein with prolyl isomerase activity from Neurospora crassa which is unrelated to cyclophilin and which also catalyses slow steps in protein folding. This protein does, however, show sequence similarity to a human protein that binds to another, recently discovered immunosuppressive drug, FK506. Moreover, it shares 39% identity with the carboxy-terminal 114 residues of a cell-surface protein from the bacterium Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaires' disease. Catalysis of folding by the FK506-binding protein from N. crassa is inhibited by FK506, but not by cyclosporin A. Thus, at least two different classes of conformationally active enzymes (conformases) exist that catalyse slow steps in protein folding. Both occur in a wide variety of cells and are inhibited by immunosuppressive drugs.
The production of recombinant retroviruses is an important episode in the natural history of thymic leukaemia in AKR and HRS/J (hr/hr) mices. These viruses apparently originate from ecotropic and xenotropic precursors in the late preleukaemic stage of the disease. Analyses of their structural proteins and genomic oligonucleotides indicate that they arise by recombination of env genes of the precursor viruses. This event leads to a viral envelope glycoprotein (gp70) with some peptides that have features of the gp70 glycoproteins of ecotropic and xenotropic viruses, and others that are unique for each recombinant virus. The former property explains the broad host range of recombinant viruses, and hence their designation as dual tropic or polytropic viruses. It has been postulated that the unique aspect of each recombinant's gp70 determines the phenotypes of leukaemic cells. Polytropic viruses may be highly thymotropic. Their systemic administration results in an infection that confines itself virtually to the thymus. Moreover, these viruses are leukaemogenic whereas their precursors are not, or only weakly so. The leukaemogenicity of polytropic viruses is, however, restricted to certain inbred strains of mice. The HRS/J isolate PTV-1 is leukaemogenic in HRS/J and CBA/J mice, but not in SWR/J or NIH/Swiss mice. The experiments described here demonstrate that a single dominant gene permits infection by thymocytes by a leukaemogenic polytrophic virus. CBA/J mice, which develop thymic leukaemia after infection by this virus, posesses this gene, whereas leukaemia-resistant NFS mice lack it.
The life-span of sperm may be short but it is certainly busy. The three principal molecular events that prepare sperm for fertilization are all controlled by the intracellular nucleotide adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP). One of these, capacitation, is also regulated by bicarbonate ions. The elusive connection between cAMP and bicarbonate ions now appears to be solved as Kaupp and Weyand explain in their Perspective. Bicarbonate ions enter sperm through the anion transporter in the sperm plasma membrane and activate the soluble form of adenylyl cyclase, the enzyme that synthesizes cAMP (Chen et al.)
A bovine retinal complementary DNA clone encoding the alpha subunit of transducin (T alpha) was isolated with the use of synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides as probes, and the complete nucleotide sequence of the insert was determined. THe predicted protein sequence of 354 amino acids includes the known sequences of four tryptic peptides and sequences adjacent to the residues that undergo adenosine diphosphate ribosylation by cholera toxin and pertussis toxin. On the basis of homologies to other proteins, such as the elongation factors of protein synthesis and the ras oncogene proteins, regions are identified that are predicted to be acylated and involved in guanine nucleotide binding and hydrolysis. Amino acid sequence similarity between T alpha and ras is confined to these regions of the molecules.
Many recent studies have shown that chromosomal translocation breakpoints frequently occur near cellular proto-oncogenes (reviewed in ref. 1). In both mouse plasmacytomas and Burkitt lymphomas, the c-myc oncogene becomes joined to an immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene in a head-to-head configuration. Within c-myc, the breaks frequently occur near the first exon-intron boundary, while within the immunoglobulin gene the breaks usually involve sequences directing heavy-chain switching. It has been assumed that the translocations represent abortive immunoglobulin switching events which have activated the c-myc gene for a role in tumour formation. However, sequence analysis of the c-myc gene does not reveal any apparent similarity to the immunoglobulin switch signals. With these results in mind, we have determined the precise breakpoints within c-myc for two plasmacytoma lines in order to search for any common features that may shed some light on the mechanism of chromosomal translocation. We report here that the tetranucleotide sequence GAGG occurs close to the breakpoint in five out of six translocations, and so may be a sequence recognized by either the enzymes that catalyse immunoglobulin heavy-chain switching, or some other DNA-cleaving activity.
The synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate required in both arginine and pyrimidine biosyntheses is carried out by a single enzyme in Escherichia coli. Opposed effects of pyrimidine nucleotides and of ornithine on the activity of the enzyme ensure a proper supply of carbamoyl phosphate according to the needs of the two biosynthetic sequences.
Coronaviruses, like many animal viruses, are characterized by a restricted host range and tissue tropism. Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), a major pathogen causing a fatal diarrhoea in newborn pig, replicates selectively in the differentiated enterocytes covering the villi of the small intestine. To investigate the molecular determinants of the infection, we characterized the surface molecule used by the virus for binding and entry into host cells. Here we report that aminopeptidase N, an ectoenzyme abundantly expressed at the apical membrane of the enterocytes, serves as a receptor for TGEV. Monoclonal antibodies were selected for their ability to block infection by TGEV of porcine cell lines. They recognized a brush-border membrane protein of M(r) 150K, which was identified as aminopeptidase N by amino-terminal sequencing. Two lines of evidence supported the view that the peptidase itself acts as a receptor. First, virions bound specifically to aminopeptidase N that was purified to homogeneity. Second, recombinant expression of aminopeptidase N conferred infectivity by TGEV to an otherwise non-permissive cell line.
The triplets of nucleotides which apparently specify the detailed structure of proteins fall into a regular pattern: the 64 combinations of four nucleotides taken three at a time, are resolved into 32 pairs. The second member of each pair is identical with the first, except that in one position a purine is replaced by the other purine or a pyrimidine by the other pyrimidine. Almost all of the reported triplets fit into this pattern, and from it one can predict which amino acids will be found to correspond to the remaining 19 unidentified triplets. This pattern accounts for several of the observations concerning regularities in the data, partially determines the order of the nucleotides in each triplet, and suggests a structural basis for transfer RNA specificity.
The genetic structure of the indigenous hunter-gatherer peoples of southern Africa, the oldest known lineage of modern human, is important for understanding human diversity. Studies based on mitochondrial and small sets of nuclear markers have shown that these hunter-gatherers, known as Khoisan, San, or Bushmen, are genetically divergent from other humans. However, until now, fully sequenced human genomes have been limited to recently diverged populations. Here we present the complete genome sequences of an indigenous hunter-gatherer from the Kalahari Desert and a Bantu from southern Africa, as well as protein-coding regions from an additional three hunter-gatherers from disparate regions of the Kalahari. We characterize the extent of whole-genome and exome diversity among the five men, reporting 1.3 million novel DNA differences genome-wide, including 13,146 novel amino acid variants. In terms of nucleotide substitutions, the Bushmen seem to be, on average, more different from each other than, for example, a European and an Asian. Observed genomic differences between the hunter-gatherers and others may help to pinpoint genetic adaptations to an agricultural lifestyle. Adding the described variants to current databases will facilitate inclusion of southern Africans in medical research efforts, particularly when family and medical histories can be correlated with genome-wide data.
The crystal structure of the RNA-binding domain of the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein U1A bound to a 21-nucleotide RNA hairpin has been determined at 1.92 A resolution. The ten-nucleotide RNA loop binds to the surface of the beta-sheet as an open structure, and the AUUGCAC sequence of the loop interacts extensively with the conserved RNP1 and RNP2 motifs and the C-terminal extension of the RNP domain. These interactions include stacking of RNA bases with aromatic side chains of proteins and many direct and water-mediated hydrogen bonds. The structure reveals the stereochemical basis for sequence-specific RNA recognition by the RNP domain.
Two independent cytochemical techniques were used to demonstrate that a trypsin-like protease is bound to the acrosomal tubule of the sea urchin sperm. The enzyme is associated with binding on the reacted acrosome and presumably functions in the early phases of fertilization.
The crystal structure of human H-Ras complexed with the Ras guanine-nucleotide-exchange-factor region of the Son of sevenless (Sos) protein has been determined at 2.8 A resolution. The normally tight interaction of nucleotides with Ras is disrupted by Sos in two ways. First, the insertion into Ras of an alpha-helix from Sos results in the displacement of the Switch 1 region of Ras, opening up the nucleotide-binding site. Second, side chains presented by this helix and by a distorted conformation of the Switch 2 region of Ras alter the chemical environment of the binding site for the phosphate groups of the nucleotide and the associated magnesium ion, so that their binding is no longer favoured. Sos does not impede the binding sites for the base and the ribose of GTP or GDP, so the Ras-Sos complex adopts a structure that allows nucleotide release and rebinding.
The nuclear envelope (NE) forms a controlled boundary between the cytoplasm and the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. To facilitate investigation of mechanisms controlling NE assembly, we developed a cell-free system made from Xenopus laevis eggs to study the process in the absence of chromatin. NEs incorporating nuclear pores were assembled around beads coated with the guanosine triphosphatase Ran, forming pseudo-nuclei that actively imported nuclear proteins. NE assembly required the cycling of guanine nucleotides on Ran and was promoted by RCC1, a nucleotide exchange factor recruited to beads by Ran-guanosine diphosphate (Ran-GDP). Thus, concentration of Ran-GDP followed by generation of Ran-GTP is sufficient to induce NE assembly.
The sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2 (SREBP-2), a nuclear transcription factor that is essential for cholesterol metabolism, enters the nucleus through a direct interaction of its helix-loop-helix leucine zipper domain with importin-beta. We show the crystal structure of importin-beta complexed with the active form of SREBP-2. Importin-beta uses characteristic long helices like a pair of chopsticks to interact with an SREBP-2 dimer. Importin-beta changes its conformation to reveal a pseudo-twofold symmetry on its surface structure so that it can accommodate a symmetric dimer molecule. Importin-beta may use a similar strategy to recognize other dimeric cargoes.
MicroRNAs are endogenous approximately 23-nucleotide RNAs that can pair to sites in the messenger RNAs of protein-coding genes to downregulate the expression from these messages. MicroRNAs are known to influence the evolution and stability of many mRNAs, but their global impact on protein output had not been examined. Here we use quantitative mass spectrometry to measure the response of thousands of proteins after introducing microRNAs into cultured cells and after deleting mir-223 in mouse neutrophils. The identities of the responsive proteins indicate that targeting is primarily through seed-matched sites located within favourable predicted contexts in 3' untranslated regions. Hundreds of genes were directly repressed, albeit each to a modest degree, by individual microRNAs. Although some targets were repressed without detectable changes in mRNA levels, those translationally repressed by more than a third also displayed detectable mRNA destabilization, and, for the more highly repressed targets, mRNA destabilization usually comprised the major component of repression. The impact of microRNAs on the proteome indicated that for most interactions microRNAs act as rheostats to make fine-scale adjustments to protein output.
There is convincing evidence that cellular prooxidant states--that is, increased concentrations of active oxygen and organic peroxides and radicals--can promote initiated cells to neoplastic growth. Prooxidant states can be caused by different classes of agents, including hyperbaric oxygen, radiation, xenobiotic metabolites and Fenton-type reagents, modulators of the cytochrome P-450 electron-transport chain, peroxisome proliferators, inhibitors of the antioxidant defense, and membrane-active agents. Many of these agents are promoters or complete carcinogens. They cause chromosomal damage by indirect action, but the role of this damage in carcinogenesis remains unclear. Prooxidant states can be prevented or suppressed by the enzymes of the cellular antioxidant defense and low molecular weight scavenger molecules, and many antioxidants are antipromoters and anticarcinogens. Finally, prooxidant states may modulate the expression of a family of prooxidant genes, which are related to cell growth and differentiation, by inducing alterations in DNA structure or by epigenetic mechanisms, for example, by polyadenosine diphosphate-ribosylation of chromosomal proteins.
Despite knowledge of the physiological significance and regulation of protein degradation in bacteria, the pathway of proteolysis and the responsible enzymes are still not known. Degradation of cell proteins in bacterial and animal cells requires continuous ATP production, inhibition of which in Escherichia coli prevents the degradation of normal proteins in growing cells, accelerated breakdown of such proteins in starving cultures and the very rapid breakdown of abnormal proteins. Intracellular proteolysis proceeds by repeated endoproteolytic steps and ATP is required for the initial cleavages of the substrate. We have recently demonstrated ATP stimulation of proteolysis in extracts of bacterial and animal cells. These ATP-stimulated systems seem to be responsible for the rapid degradation of abnormal proteins in vivo, but they may also be involved in the catabolism of normal cell proteins, limited proteolysis, such as the processing of precursors for secreted or membrane proteins, and the selective inactivation of specific proteins, as occurs in the ATP-dependent cleavage of the lambda repressor by the recA protein. We report here that membrane fragments contain an ATP-stimulated protease that degrades cell proteins to large peptides (of molecular weight (MW) 71,500) which are then rapidly hydrolysed to amino acids by soluble ATP-independent enzymes.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a well-established diagnostic tool that provides detailed information about macroscopic structure and anatomy. Recent advances in MRI allow the noninvasive spatial evaluation of various biophysical and biochemical processes in living systems. Specifically, the motion of water can be measured in processes such as vascular flow, capillary flow, diffusion, and exchange. In addition, the concentrations of various metabolites can be determined for the assessment of regional regulation of metabolism. Examples are given that demonstrate the use of functional MRI for clinical and research purposes. This development adds a new dimension to the application of magnetic resonance to medicine and physiology.
RNA silencing (also known as RNA interference) is a conserved biological response to double-stranded RNA that regulates gene expression, and has evolved in plants as a defence against viruses. The response is mediated by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), which guide the sequence-specific degradation of cognate messenger RNAs. As a counter-defence, many viruses encode proteins that specifically inhibit the silencing machinery. The p19 protein from the tombusvirus is such a viral suppressor of RNA silencing and has been shown to bind specifically to siRNA. Here, we report the 1.85-A crystal structure of p19 bound to a 21-nucleotide siRNA, where the 19-base-pair RNA duplex is cradled within the concave face of a continuous eight-stranded beta-sheet, formed across the p19 homodimer interface. Direct and water-mediated intermolecular contacts are restricted to the backbone phosphates and sugar 2'-OH groups, consistent with sequence-independent p19-siRNA recognition. Two alpha-helical 'reading heads' project from opposite ends of the p19 homodimer and position pairs of tryptophans for stacking over the terminal base pairs, thereby measuring and bracketing both ends of the siRNA duplex. Our structure provides an illustration of siRNA sequestering by a viral protein.
The gene that is abnormal in the X-linked form of the phagocytic disorder chronic granulomatous disease has been cloned without reference to a specific protein by relying on its chromosomal map position. The transcript of the gene is expressed in the phagocytic lineage of haematopoietic cells and is absent or structurally abnormal in four patients with the disorder. The nucleotide sequence of complementary DNA clones predicts a polypeptide of at least 468 amino acids with no homology to proteins described previously.
Creatine kinase catalyses the conversion of ADP and phosphoryl creatine into ATP and creatine. In skeletal muscle a non-mitochondrial isoenzyme of creatine kinase has a major role in regulating the energy supply for muscle contraction by maintaining the ATP pools at relatively constant levels. Recently, this enzyme has been localized by immunofluorescence techniques on intermediate filaments and stress fibres in interphase cells and in mitotic spindles of dividing tissue culture cell lines, including the PtK1 cell line, and has been found to co-purify with spindles isolated from dividing sea urchin eggs and with muscle cell nuclei. Here I have used permeabilized PtK1 cells to investigate the possibility that creatine kinase may be involved in regulation of spindle energy metabolism by lysing cells in medium containing phosphoryl creatine. I find that spindle elongation will continue in these conditions, provided ADP is also present in the lysis medium. This finding is consistent with my previous demonstration that spindle elongation is the ATP-requiring step during anaphase and is a direct demonstration that creatine kinase may have a role in mitosis analogous to that observed during skeletal muscle contraction.
An extracellular cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase was isolated from either growing cultures or aggregating amoebas of Dictyostelium discoideum. The enzyme is released in a form with a low Michaelis constant (15 micromolar) and spontaneously undergoes a slow conversion to a less active form with a high Michaelis constant (2 mnillimolar). Inactivation was prevented or reversed by use of Cleland's reagent, dithiothreitol. The two enzyme forms may be part of a mechanism for control of concentration of cyclic adenosine monophosphate.
In protein synthesis initiation, the eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF) 2 (a G protein) functions in its GTP-bound state to deliver initiator methionyl-tRNA (tRNA(i)(Met)) to the small ribosomal subunit and is necessary for protein synthesis in all cells. Phosphorylation of eIF2 [eIF2(alphaP)] is critical for translational control in diverse settings including nutrient deprivation, viral infection and memory formation. eIF5 functions in start site selection as a GTPase accelerating protein (GAP) for the eIF2.GTP.tRNA(i)(Met) ternary complex within the ribosome-bound pre-initiation complex. Here we define new regulatory functions of eIF5 in the recycling of eIF2 from its inactive eIF2.GDP state between successive rounds of translation initiation. First we show that eIF5 stabilizes the binding of GDP to eIF2 and is therefore a bi-functional protein that acts as a GDP dissociation inhibitor (GDI). We find that this activity is independent of the GAP function and identify conserved residues within eIF5 that are necessary for this role. Second we show that eIF5 is a critical component of the eIF2(alphaP) regulatory complex that inhibits the activity of the guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) eIF2B. Together our studies define a new step in the translation initiation pathway, one that is critical for normal translational controls.
The Ku heterodimer (Ku70 and Ku80 subunits) contributes to genomic integrity through its ability to bind DNA double-strand breaks and facilitate repair by the non-homologous end-joining pathway. The crystal structure of the human Ku heterodimer was determined both alone and bound to a 55-nucleotide DNA element at 2.7 and 2.5 A resolution, respectively. Ku70 and Ku80 share a common topology and form a dyad-symmetrical molecule with a preformed ring that encircles duplex DNA. The binding site can cradle two full turns of DNA while encircling only the central 3-4 base pairs (bp). Ku makes no contacts with DNA bases and few with the sugar-phosphate backbone, but it fits sterically to major and minor groove contours so as to position the DNA helix in a defined path through the protein ring. These features seem well designed to structurally support broken DNA ends and to bring the DNA helix into phase across the junction during end processing and ligation.
Chemical evidence is needed in both insect endocrinology and sensory physiology to understand hormone and pheromone action at the molecular level. Radiolabeled pheromones and hormones have been synthesized and used to identify binding and catabolic proteins from insect tissues. Chemically modified analogs, including photoaffinity labels and enzyme inhibitors, are among the tools used to covalently modify the specific acceptor or catalytic sites. Such targeted agents can also provide leads for the design of growth and mating disruptants by allowing manipulation of the physiologically important interactions of the chemical signals with macromolecules.
Trypanosomes which parasitize mammals have evolved mechanisms to evade immune attack, such as the occupation of 'safe' intracellular sites (for example, Trypanosoma cruzi), or antigenic variation, exemplified by the salivarian trypanosomes (for example, Trypanosoma brucei). Antigenic variation is mediated by sequential expression of single variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) genes, and often involves transposition of the active gene. Every VSG transcript examined shares the same 5' terminal 35-nucleotide leader sequence. In T. brucei, this leader is encoded within a 1.4-kilobase unit tandemly reiterated to form a large array. It is hypothesized that this array is distantly linked to the expressed VSG gene and functions as a multiple promoter of VSG gene transcription, restricting transcription to that gene which, through genomic rearrangement, is placed downstream from the array. Leader and structural gene sequences are presumably juxtaposed by RNA splicing. Here we show that several trypanosomatids, both those which undergo antigenic variation (Trypanosoma congolense and Trypanosoma vivax) and those which do not (T. cruzi and Leptomonas collosoma), contain reiterated sequences homologous to the T. brucei spliced leader (SL). These results suggest that the SL, although utilized in VSG gene expression, is an ancestral sequence also used in the expression of other trypanosomatid genes.
Septins are GTP-binding proteins that assemble into homo- and hetero-oligomers and filaments. Although they have key roles in various cellular processes, little is known concerning the structure of septin subunits or the organization and polarity of septin complexes. Here we present the structures of the human SEPT2 G domain and the heterotrimeric human SEPT2-SEPT6-SEPT7 complex. The structures reveal a universal bipolar polymer building block, composed of an extended G domain, which forms oligomers and filaments by conserved interactions between adjacent nucleotide-binding sites and/or the amino- and carboxy-terminal extensions. Unexpectedly, X-ray crystallography and electron microscopy showed that the predicted coiled coils are not involved in or required for complex and/or filament formation. The asymmetrical heterotrimers associate head-to-head to form a hexameric unit that is nonpolarized along the filament axis but is rotationally asymmetrical. The architecture of septin filaments differs fundamentally from that of other cytoskeletal structures.
The human Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is a rare neurological and behavioural disorder, affecting only males, which is caused by an inherited deficiency in the level of activity of the purine salvage enzyme hypoxanthine-guanosine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT). How the resulting alterations in purine metabolism lead to the severe symptoms characteristic of Lesch-Nyhan patients is still not understood. No mutations at the Hprt locus leading to loss of activity have been described in laboratory animals. To derive an animal model for the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, we have used cultured mouse embryonic stem cells, mutagenized by retroviral insertion and selected for loss of HPRT activity, to construct chimaeric mice. Two clonal lines carrying different mutant Hprt alleles have given rise to germ cells in chimaeras, allowing the derivation of strains of mutant mice having the same biochemical defect as Lesch-Nyhan patients. Male mice carrying the mutant alleles are viable and analysis of their cells shows a total lack of HPRT activity.
U RNAs are highly abundant small nuclear RNAs involved in the processing of messenger RNA. Most U RNA genes are thought to be transcribed by RNA polymerase II (pol II). However, evidence has recently been presented that U6 RNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase III (pol III). In the light of these results it was surprising to find that the 5' flanking region of a mouse U6 RNA gene includes a perfect copy of the octamer sequence motif, ATTTGCAT, found in many RNA polymerase II transcription enhancer elements. In the present study we show that deletion of mouse U6 gene sequences upstream of nucleotide position -217, including the octanucleotide motif, reduces U6 transcription by 90% when assayed in Xenopus laevis oocytes, suggesting the presence of a distant control element. DNase I footprinting of the 5' flanking region of the U6 gene shows protection of the octanucleotide sequence. Moreover, the 5' flanking sequence from -217 to -315 can replace the enhancer of a human U2 RNA gene. We therefore conclude that although U6 RNA genes appear to be transcribed by pol III, they are preceeded by an enhancer-like element which can functionally substitute for the enhancer of a pol II-transcribed U RNA gene.
The interactions of protein kinases and phosphatases with their regulatory subunits and substrates underpin cellular regulation. We identified a kinase and phosphatase interaction (KPI) network of 1844 interactions in budding yeast by mass spectrometric analysis of protein complexes. The KPI network contained many dense local regions of interactions that suggested new functions. Notably, the cell cycle phosphatase Cdc14 associated with multiple kinases that revealed roles for Cdc14 in mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, the DNA damage response, and metabolism, whereas interactions of the target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) uncovered new effector kinases in nitrogen and carbon metabolism. An extensive backbone of kinase-kinase interactions cross-connects the proteome and may serve to coordinate diverse cellular responses.
Bacillus subtilis is the best-characterized member of the Gram-positive bacteria. Its genome of 4,214,810 base pairs comprises 4,100 protein-coding genes. Of these protein-coding genes, 53% are represented once, while a quarter of the genome corresponds to several gene families that have been greatly expanded by gene duplication, the largest family containing 77 putative ATP-binding transport proteins. In addition, a large proportion of the genetic capacity is devoted to the utilization of a variety of carbon sources, including many plant-derived molecules. The identification of five signal peptidase genes, as well as several genes for components of the secretion apparatus, is important given the capacity of Bacillus strains to secrete large amounts of industrially important enzymes. Many of the genes are involved in the synthesis of secondary metabolites, including antibiotics, that are more typically associated with Streptomyces species. The genome contains at least ten prophages or remnants of prophages, indicating that bacteriophage infection has played an important evolutionary role in horizontal gene transfer, in particular in the propagation of bacterial pathogenesis.
The study of genetic regulatory mechanisms operating in plants and animals is of paramount importance in contemporary biology. A precise understanding of the mechanisms that underlie normal cellular differentiation is a prerequisite for understanding neoplastic transformation and genetic disease. At present, we are not aware of a single assay system that can give answers to all questions we are already able to pose. Studies of RNA synthesis are valuable because they provide a direct measurement of transcriptional activity. But these studies remain incomplete until we succeed in unraveling the metabolic roles of the molecules whose synthesis we study. In this respect, the study of enzyme synthesis represents a better defined assay system, although the interpretation of observed fluctuations in synthetic rates is made difficult by the many steps that intervene between the genes and their finished protein products. We propose that a combination of protein biosynthetic and cytogenetic analysis is a promising assay system for further investigation.
RNA interference and related RNA silencing phenomena use short antisense guide RNA molecules to repress the expression of target genes. Argonaute proteins, containing amino-terminal PAZ (for PIWI/Argonaute/Zwille) domains and carboxy-terminal PIWI domains, are core components of these mechanisms. Here we show the crystal structure of a Piwi protein from Archaeoglobus fulgidus (AfPiwi) in complex with a small interfering RNA (siRNA)-like duplex, which mimics the 5' end of a guide RNA strand bound to an overhanging target messenger RNA. The structure contains a highly conserved metal-binding site that anchors the 5' nucleotide of the guide RNA. The first base pair of the duplex is unwound, separating the 5' nucleotide of the guide from the complementary nucleotide on the target strand, which exits with the 3' overhang through a short channel. The remaining base-paired nucleotides assume an A-form helix, accommodated within a channel in the PIWI domain, which can be extended to place the scissile phosphate of the target strand adjacent to the putative slicer catalytic site. This study provides insights into mechanisms of target mRNA recognition and cleavage by an Argonaute-siRNA guide complex.
The influenza A viral heterotrimeric polymerase complex (PA, PB1, PB2) is known to be involved in many aspects of viral replication and to interact with host factors, thereby having a role in host specificity. The polymerase protein sequences from the 1918 human influenza virus differ from avian consensus sequences at only a small number of amino acids, consistent with the hypothesis that they were derived from an avian source shortly before the pandemic. However, when compared to avian sequences, the nucleotide sequences of the 1918 polymerase genes have more synonymous differences than expected, suggesting evolutionary distance from known avian strains. Here we present sequence and phylogenetic analyses of the complete genome of the 1918 influenza virus, and propose that the 1918 virus was not a reassortant virus (like those of the 1957 and 1968 pandemics), but more likely an entirely avian-like virus that adapted to humans. These data support prior phylogenetic studies suggesting that the 1918 virus was derived from an avian source. A total of ten amino acid changes in the polymerase proteins consistently differentiate the 1918 and subsequent human influenza virus sequences from avian virus sequences. Notably, a number of the same changes have been found in recently circulating, highly pathogenic H5N1 viruses that have caused illness and death in humans and are feared to be the precursors of a new influenza pandemic. The sequence changes identified here may be important in the adaptation of influenza viruses to humans.
The sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase, a P-type ATPase, has a critical role in muscle function and metabolism. Here we present functional studies and three new crystal structures of the rabbit skeletal muscle Ca2+-ATPase, representing the phosphoenzyme intermediates associated with Ca2+ binding, Ca2+ translocation and dephosphorylation, that are based on complexes with a functional ATP analogue, beryllium fluoride and aluminium fluoride, respectively. The structures complete the cycle of nucleotide binding and cation transport of Ca2+-ATPase. Phosphorylation of the enzyme triggers the onset of a conformational change that leads to the opening of a luminal exit pathway defined by the transmembrane segments M1 through M6, which represent the canonical membrane domain of P-type pumps. Ca2+ release is promoted by translocation of the M4 helix, exposing Glu 309, Glu 771 and Asn 796 to the lumen. The mechanism explains how P-type ATPases are able to form the steep electrochemical gradients required for key functions in eukaryotic cells.
Human mitochondrial transcription factor 1 (mtTF1) has been sequenced and is a nucleus-encoded DNA binding protein of 204 amino acids (24,400 daltons). Expression of human mtTF1 in bacteria yields a protein with correct physical properties and the ability to activate mitochondrial DNA promoters. Analysis of the protein's sequence reveals no similarities to any other DNA binding proteins except for the existence of two domains that are characteristic of high mobility group (HMG) proteins. Human mtTF1 is most closely related to a DNA binding HMG-box region in hUBF, a human protein known to be important for transcription by RNA polymerase I.
Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in American men. Screening for prostate-specific antigen (PSA) has led to earlier detection of prostate cancer, but elevated serum PSA levels may be present in non-malignant conditions such as benign prostatic hyperlasia (BPH). Characterization of gene-expression profiles that molecularly distinguish prostatic neoplasms may identify genes involved in prostate carcinogenesis, elucidate clinical biomarkers, and lead to an improved classification of prostate cancer. Using microarrays of complementary DNA, we examined gene-expression profiles of more than 50 normal and neoplastic prostate specimens and three common prostate-cancer cell lines. Signature expression profiles of normal adjacent prostate (NAP), BPH, localized prostate cancer, and metastatic, hormone-refractory prostate cancer were determined. Here we establish many associations between genes and prostate cancer. We assessed two of these genes-hepsin, a transmembrane serine protease, and pim-1, a serine/threonine kinase-at the protein level using tissue microarrays consisting of over 700 clinically stratified prostate-cancer specimens. Expression of hepsin and pim-1 proteins was significantly correlated with measures of clinical outcome. Thus, the integration of cDNA microarray, high-density tissue microarray, and linked clinical and pathology data is a powerful approach to molecular profiling of human cancer.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the causative agent of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) a disease which poses a serious challenge to modern medicine. If we are to conquer this disease we will need a protective vaccine or effective drugs able to block the life cycle of the virus. An early stage in the invasion of the host cell is the conversion of the RNA genome of the virus to a double-stranded DNA intermediate which subsequently becomes integrated into the host cell chromosome. The enzyme reverse transcriptase is crucial in this process and is thus an obvious chemotherapeutic target. In this study we have used site-directed mutagenesis of this enzyme expressed in Escherichia coli to reveal several important functional regions of the protein including putative components of the triphosphate binding site and pyrophosphate exchange sites.
The actions of many hormones and neurotransmitters are mediated by the members of a superfamily of receptors coupled to heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins). These receptors are characterized by a highly conserved topographical arrangement in which seven transmembrane domains are connected by intracellular and extracellular loops. The interaction between these receptors and G proteins is mediated in large part by the third intracellular loop of the receptor. Coexpression of the third intracellular loop of the alpha 1B-adrenergic receptor with its parent receptor inhibited receptor-mediated activation of phospholipase C. The inhibition extended to the closely related alpha 1C-adrenergic receptor subtype, but not the phospholipase C-coupled M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor nor the adenylate cyclase-coupled D1A dopamine receptor. These results suggest that the receptor-G protein interface may represent a target for receptor antagonist drugs.
More than thirty small guanine nucleotide-binding proteins related to the ras-encoded oncoprotein, termed Ras or p21ras, are known. They regulate many fundamental processes in all eukaryotic cells, such as growth, vesicle traffic and cytoskeletal organization. GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) accelerate the intrinsic rate of GTP hydrolysis of Ras-related proteins, leading to down-regulation of the active GTP-bound form. For p21ras, two GAP proteins are known, rasGAP and the neurofibromatosis (NF1) gene product. There is evidence that rasGAP may also be a target protein for regulation by Ras and be involved in downstream signalling. We have purified a GAP protein for p21rho, which is involved in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Partial sequencing of rhoGAP reveals significant homology with the product of the bcr (breakpoint cluster region) gene, the translocation breakpoint in Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukaemias. We show here that the carboxy-terminal domains of the bcr-encoded protein (Bcr) and of a Bcr-related protein, n-chimaerin, are both GAP proteins for the Ras-related GTP-binding protein, p21rac. This result suggest that Bcr could be a target for regulation by Rac and has important new implications for the role of bcr translocations in leukaemia.
Production of messenger RNA in eukaryotic cells is a complex, multistep process. mRNA polyadenylation, or 3' processing, requires several protein factors, including cleavage/polyadenylation-specificity factor (CPSF), cleavage-stimulation factor, two cleavage factors and poly(A) polymerase. These proteins seem to be unnecessary for other steps in mRNA synthesis such as transcription and splicing, and factors required for these processes were not considered to be essential for polyadenylation. Nonetheless, these reactions may be linked so that they are effectively coordinated in vivo. For example, the CTD carboxy-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) is required for efficient splicing and polyadenylation in vivo, and CPSF is brought to a promoter by the transcription factor TFIID and transferred to RNAP II at the time of transcription initiation. These findings suggest that polyadenylation factors can be recruited to an RNA 3'-processing signal by RNAP II, where they dissociate from the polymerase and initiate polyadenylation. Here we present results that extend this model by showing that RNAP II is actually required, in the absence of transcription, for 3' processing in vitro.
Rap1A is a low molecular weight guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding protein in human neutrophil membranes whose cellular function is unknown. Rap1A was found to form stoichiometric complexes with the cytochrome b558 component of the phagocyte nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase system. The (guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) (GTP-gamma-S)-bound form of Rap1A bound more tightly to cytochrome b558 than did the guanosine diphosphate-bound form. No complex formation was observed between cytochrome b558 and H-Ras-GTP-gamma-S or Rap1A-GTP-gamma-S that had been heat-inactivated, nor between Rap1A-GTP-gamma-S and hydrophobic proteins serving as controls. Complex formation between Rap1A-GTP-gamma-S and cytochrome b558 was inhibited by phosphorylation of Rap1A with cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase. These observations suggest that Rap1A may participate in the structure or regulation of the NADPH oxidase system and that this function of the Rap1A protein may be altered by phosphorylation.
RNA primers for DNA replication are usually synthesized by specialized enzymes, the primases. However, some replication systems have evolved to use cellular DNA-dependent RNA polymerase for primer synthesis. The main requirement for the replication primer, an exposed RNA 3' end annealed to the DNA template, is not compatible with known conformations of the transcription elongation complex, raising a question of how the priming is achieved. Here we show that a previously unrecognized kind of transcription complex is formed during RNA polymerase-catalysed synthesis of the M13 bacteriophage replication primer. The complex contains an overextended RNA-DNA hybrid bound in the RNA-polymerase trough that is normally occupied by downstream double-stranded DNA, thus leaving the 3' end of the RNA available for interaction with DNA polymerase. Transcription complexes with similar topology may prime the replication of other bacterial mobile elements and may regulate transcription elongation under conditions that favour the formation of an extended RNA-DNA hybrid.
The 11-kD protease (PR) encoded by the human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) is essential for the correct processing of viral polyproteins and the maturation of infectious virus, and is therefore a target for the design of selective acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) therapeutics. To facilitate the identification of novel inhibitors of HIV-1 PR, as well as to permit detailed studies on the enzymology and inhibition of this enzyme, a continuous assay for its activity was developed that was based on intramolecular fluorescence resonance energy transfer (RET). The assay used the quenched fluorogenic substrate 4-(4-dimethylaminophenylazo)benzoic acid (DABCYL)--Ser Gln Asn Tyr Pro Ile Val Gln--5-[(2-aminoethyl)amino]naphthalene-1 sulfonic acid (EDANS), whose peptide sequence is derived from a natural processing site for HIV-1 PR. Incubation of recombinant HIV-1 PR with the fluorogenic substrate resulted in specific cleavage at the Tyr-Pro bond and a time-dependent increase in fluorescence intensity that was linearly related to the extent of substrate hydrolysis. An internally quenched fluorogenic substrate was also designed that was selectively cleaved by the related PR from avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV). The fluorescence quantum yields of the HIV-1 PR and AMV PR substrates in the RET assay increased by 40.0- and 34.4-fold, respectively, per mole of substrate cleaved. Because of its simplicity, rapidity, and precision in the determination of reaction rates required for kinetic analysis, this method offers many advantages over the commonly used high-performance liquid chromatography- or electrophoresis-based assays for peptide substrate hydrolysis by retroviral PRs.
Reactions involving H(2), N(2), CO, CO(2) and CH(4) are likely to have been central to the origin of life. This is indicated by the active-site structures of the enzymes involved, which are often reminiscent of minerals. Through the combined efforts of protein crystallography, various types of spectroscopy, theoretical calculations and model chemistry, it has been possible to put forward plausible mechanisms for gas-based metabolism by extant microorganisms. Although the reactions are based on metal centres, the protein matrix regulates reactivity and substrate and product trafficking through internal pathways, specific ligation and dielectricity.
Tyrosine phosphorylation seems to be a key event in the control of cellular growth. Several viral transforming proteins, including the src protein of Rous sarcoma virus, the p120 protein of Abelson leukaemia virus and the middle T antigen of polyoma virus, are phosphorylated by associated tyrosine kinases. The levels of kinase activity correlate with the transforming efficiency of the virus. The receptors for epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and insulin are also phosphorylated by associated tyrosine kinase activities, which are stimulated by EGF, PDGF and insulin, respectively. The EGF-stimulated kinase and the src protein share similar substrate specificity for tyrosines immediately C-terminal to a sequence of acidic amino acids. Such a sequence is also found adjacent to the phosphotyrosine of middle T antigen, and in the homologous region of the hormone gastrin, adjacent to a tyrosine which is sulphated in approximately half the gastrin isolated from gastric mucosa. Reports that gastrin acts as a growth factor for cells of the gastrointestinal tract suggested that phosphorylation of this tyrosine might be physiologically more relevant than sulphation. We report here that synthetic human gastrin 17 is phosphorylated by the EGF-stimulated tyrosine kinase of A431 cell membranes. The Km values of 53-87 and 223-547 microM obtained in the presence and absence of EGF, respectively, are the lowest reported so far for this enzyme.
Protein phosphorylation may play a critical role in stimulus-coupled secretion of platelets. Some platelet proteins become phosphorylated on exposure to agents such as thrombin and collagen, and the smallest of these phosphoproteins (molecular weight 20,000), has been identified as a light chain of myosin. Phosphorylation of myosin light chain increases the activity of actin-activated myosin ATPase and the resultant contraction of the actomyosin presumably mediates the release reaction. Platelet myosin light chain kinase has been identified as a calcium-dependent enzyme requiring calmodulin for its activity. Calmodulin is a Ca2+-binding protein with a molecular weight of approximately 18,000 which seems to be involved in a wide variety of cellular processes. Although a growing body of evidence suggests that non-muscle actomyosin, such as that isolated from platelets, is regulated by Ca2+-calmodulin-dependent light chain phosphorylation, the precise relationship between the phosphorylation and the function of platelets is not clearly established. We now present pharmacological evidence that a calmodulin-mediated system, such as Ca2+-dependent myosin light chain phosphorylation, also plays an important role in the phenomenon of the release reaction. N-(6-aminohexyl)-5-chloro-1-napthalene-sulphonamide (W-7) (refs 13-15) is shown to bind selectively to calmodulin in vitro and inhibit its biological activity.
Alkanes, the major constituents of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel, are naturally produced by diverse species; however, the genetics and biochemistry behind this biology have remained elusive. Here we describe the discovery of an alkane biosynthesis pathway from cyanobacteria. The pathway consists of an acyl-acyl carrier protein reductase and an aldehyde decarbonylase, which together convert intermediates of fatty acid metabolism to alkanes and alkenes. The aldehyde decarbonylase is related to the broadly functional nonheme diiron enzymes. Heterologous expression of the alkane operon in Escherichia coli leads to the production and secretion of C13 to C17 mixtures of alkanes and alkenes. These genes and enzymes can now be leveraged for the simple and direct conversion of renewable raw materials to fungible hydrocarbon fuels.
Seven-transmembrane receptor (7TMR) signaling is transduced by second messengers such as diacylglycerol (DAG) generated in response to the heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein Gq and is terminated by receptor desensitization and degradation of the second messengers. We show that beta-arrestins coordinate both processes for the Gq-coupled M1 muscarinic receptor. beta-Arrestins physically interact with diacylglycerol kinases (DGKs), enzymes that degrade DAG. Moreover, beta-arrestins are essential for conversion of DAG to phosphatidic acid after agonist stimulation, and this activity requires recruitment of the beta-arrestin-DGK complex to activated 7TMRs. The dual function of beta-arrestins, limiting production of diacylglycerol (by receptor desensitization) while enhancing its rate of degradation, is analogous to their ability to recruit adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate phosphodiesterases to Gs-coupled beta2-adrenergic receptors. Thus, beta-arrestins can serve similar regulatory functions for disparate classes of 7TMRs through structurally dissimilar enzymes that degrade chemically distinct second messengers.
Sequence analysis of the 330-kilobase genome of the virus PBCV-1 that infects a chlorella-like green algae revealed an open reading frame, A98R, with similarity to several hyaluronan synthases. Hyaluronan is an essential polysaccharide found in higher animals as well as in a few pathogenic bacteria. Expression of the A98R gene product in Escherichia coli indicated that the recombinant protein is an authentic hyaluronan synthase. A98R is expressed early in PBCV-1 infection and hyaluronan is produced in infected algae. These results demonstrate that a virus can encode an enzyme capable of synthesizing a carbohydrate polymer and that hyaluronan exists outside of animals and their pathogens.
In infected cells, the RNA genomes of RNA tumour viruses are copied into DNA by a virus-encoded reverse transcriptase enzyme. This transfer of information from RNA into DNA was thought to be a unique feature of RNA tumour viruses, but recent results suggest it may be a more general strategy. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) has a double-stranded DNA genome, and it has recently been shown that the minus DNA strand of the HBV genome is copied from a plus-strand RNA template, leading to the suggestion that reverse transcription is central to the life cycle of HBV. More recently it has been suggested that the replication cycle of a plant virus, cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV), includes a reverse transcription step. We report here the existence of amino acid sequence homology between retroviral reverse transcriptase and the putative polymerases of HBV and CaMV.
Calcium mobilization through antigen receptors, including high-affinity IgE receptors (Fc epsilon RI), is thought to be mediated by inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate production (InsP3). Here we show that antigen clustering of Fc epsilon RI on the rat mast-cell line (RBL-2H3) activates a sphingosine kinase (SK) and produces sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), and alternative second messenger for intracellular calcium mobilization. The sphingosine analogue, D-L-threo-dihydrosphingosine (DHS), inhibits the SK enzyme competitively with a dissociation constant, K1, of 5 to 18 microM. This inhibition substantially suppresses the Fc epsilon RI-mediated calcium signal, but leaves intact the syk tyrosine kinase activation and the small InsP3 production. The entire InsP3-dependent pathway activated by a transfected G-protein coupled receptor, used here as a positive control, also remained intact. Thus Fc epsilon RI principally utilizes a SK pathway to mobilize calcium.
A single genetic alteration, a guanine-to-cytosine transversion, is responsible for the acquisition of malignant properties by K-ras genes of two human tumor cell lines established from carcinomas of the bladder (A1698) and lung (A2182). As a consequence, arginine instead of the normal glycine is incorporated into the K-ras-coded p21 proteins at amino acid position 12. This mutation creates a restriction enzyme polymorphism that can be used to screen human cells for transforming K-ras genes. This approach was used to identify the mutational event responsible for the malignant activation of a K-ras oncogene in a squamous cell lung carcinoma of a 66-year-old man; this point mutation was not present in either the normal bronchial or parenchymal tissue or in the blood lymphocytes. Hence, malignant activation of a ras oncogene appears to be specifically associated with the development of a human neoplasm.
Regulated proteolysis by ATP-dependent proteases is universal in all living cells. Bacterial ClpC, a member of the Clp/Hsp100 family of AAA+ proteins (ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities) with two nucleotide-binding domains (D1 and D2), requires the adaptor protein MecA for activation and substrate targeting. The activated, hexameric MecA-ClpC molecular machine harnesses the energy of ATP binding and hydrolysis to unfold specific substrate proteins and translocate the unfolded polypeptide to the ClpP protease for degradation. Here we report three related crystal structures: a heterodimer between MecA and the amino domain of ClpC, a heterododecamer between MecA and D2-deleted ClpC, and a hexameric complex between MecA and full-length ClpC. In conjunction with biochemical analyses, these structures reveal the organizational principles behind the hexameric MecA-ClpC complex, explain the molecular mechanisms for MecA-mediated ClpC activation and provide mechanistic insights into the function of the MecA-ClpC molecular machine. These findings have implications for related Clp/Hsp100 molecular machines.
According to what we term the balance hypothesis, an imbalance in the concentration of the subcomponents of a protein-protein complex can be deleterious. If so, there are two consequences: first, both underexpression and overexpression of protein complex subunits should lower fitness, and second, the accuracy of transcriptional co-regulation of subunits should reflect the deleterious consequences of imbalance. Here we show that all these predictions are upheld in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). This supports the hypothesis that dominance is a by-product of physiology and metabolism rather than the result of selection to mask the deleterious effects of mutations. Beyond this, single-gene duplication of protein subunits is expected to be harmful, as this, too, leads to imbalance. As then expected, we find that members of large gene families are rarely involved in complexes. The balance hypothesis therefore provides a single theoretical framework for understanding components both of dominance and of gene family size.
Accumulation of the amyloid-beta protein (Abeta) in the cerebral cortex is an early and invariant event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. The final step in the generation of Abeta from the beta-amyloid precursor protein is an apparently intramembranous proteolysis by the elusive gamma-secretase(s). The most common cause of familial Alzheimer's disease is mutation of the genes encoding presenilins 1 and 2, which alters gamma-secretase activity to increase the production of the highly amyloidogenic Abeta42 isoform. Moreover, deletion of presenilin-1 in mice greatly reduces gamma-secretase activity, indicating that presenilin-1 mediates most of this proteolytic event. Here we report that mutation of either of two conserved transmembrane (TM) aspartate residues in presenilin-1, Asp 257 (in TM6) and Asp 385 (in TM7), substantially reduces Abeta production and increases the amounts of the carboxy-terminal fragments of beta-amyloid precursor protein that are the substrates of gamma-secretase. We observed these effects in three different cell lines as well as in cell-free microsomes. Either of the Asp --> Ala mutations also prevented the normal endoproteolysis of presenilin-1 in the TM6 --> TM7 cytoplasmic loop. In a functional presenilin-1 variant (carrying a deletion in exon 9) that is associated with familial Alzheimer's disease and which does not require this cleavage, the Asp 385 --> Ala mutation still inhibited gamma-secretase activity. Our results indicate that the two transmembrane aspartate residues are critical for both presenilin-1 endoproteolysis and gamma-secretase activity, and suggest that presenilin 1 is either a unique diaspartyl cofactor for gamma-secretase or is itself gamma-secretase, an autoactivated intramembranous aspartyl protease.
The relative amounts of autoantibodies against defined nucleosomal proteins present in serums from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) have been examined by an enzyme-linked immunoassay. Autoantibodies to nucleosomal proteins were detected in 45 percent of the patients with SLE, 18 percent of the MCTD patients, and none of the RA patients. The results suggest that, in SLE, antibodies are formed against a subset of nucleosomes which contain protein HMG-17.
Cycles of protein phosphorylation are fundamental in regulating the progression of the eukaryotic cell through its division cycle. Here we test the complement of Drosophila protein kinases (kinome) for cell cycle functions after gene silencing by RNA-mediated interference. We observed cell cycle dysfunction upon downregulation of 80 out of 228 protein kinases, including most kinases that are known to regulate the division cycle. We find new enzymes with cell cycle functions; some of these have family members already known to phosphorylate microtubules, actin or their associated proteins. Additionally, depletion of several signalling kinases leads to specific mitotic aberrations, suggesting novel roles for familiar enzymes. The survey reveals the inter-digitation of systems that monitor cellular physiology, cell size, cellular stress and signalling processes with the basic cell cycle regulatory machinery.
Liver nuclei isolated from rats injected with adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate exhibit an increased capacity for RNA synthesis compared with nuclei from control animals. This effect, which is highly specific for the cyclic nucleotide. can be observed within 1 hour after injection in both unoperated and adrenalectomized rats. These findings suggest that induction of enzyme synthesis mediated by way of adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate may be controlled, at least in part, at the level of gene transcription.
Nerve growth is regulated by attractive and repulsive factors in the nervous system. Microscopic gradients of Collapsin-1/Semaphorin III/D (Sema III) and myelin-associated glycoprotein trigger repulsive turning responses by growth cones of cultured Xenopus spinal neurons; the repulsion can be converted to attraction by pharmacological activation of the guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP) and adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate signaling pathways, respectively. Sema III also causes the collapse of cultured rat sensory growth cones, which can be inhibited by activation of the cGMP pathway. Thus cyclic nucleotides can regulate growth cone behaviors and may be targets for designing treatments to alleviate the inhibition of nerve regeneration by repulsive factors.
Linker proteins function as molecular scaffolds to localize enzymes with substrates. In B cells, B cell linker protein (BLNK) links the B cell receptor (BCR)-activated Syk kinase to the phosphoinositide and mitogen-activated kinase pathways. To examine the in vivo role of BLNK, mice deficient in BLNK were generated. B cell development in BLNK-/- mice was blocked at the transition from B220+CD43+ progenitor B to B220+CD43- precursor B cells. Only a small percentage of immunoglobulin M++ (IgM++), but not mature IgMloIgDhi, B cells were detected in the periphery. Hence, BLNK is an essential component of BCR signaling pathways and is required to promote B cell development.
The pathogenesis of candidiasis involves invasion of host tissues by filamentous forms of the opportunistic yeast Candida albicans. Morphology-specific gene products may confer proinvasive properties. A hypha-specific surface protein, Hwp1, with similarities to mammalian small proline-rich proteins was shown to serve as a substrate for mammalian transglutaminases. Candida albicans strains lacking Hwp1 were unable to form stable attachments to human buccal epithelial cells and had a reduced capacity to cause systemic candidiasis in mice. This represents a paradigm for microbial adhesion that implicates essential host enzymes.
Microtubules of the mitotic spindle form the structural basis for chromosome segregation. In metaphase, microtubules show high dynamic instability, which is thought to aid the 'search and capture' of chromosomes for bipolar alignment on the spindle. Microtubules suddenly become more stable at the onset of anaphase, but how this change in microtubule behaviour is regulated and how important it is for the ensuing chromosome segregation are unknown. Here we show that in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, activation of the phosphatase Cdc14 at anaphase onset is both necessary and sufficient for silencing microtubule dynamics. Cdc14 is activated by separase, the protease that triggers sister chromatid separation, linking the onset of anaphase to microtubule stabilization. If sister chromatids separate in the absence of Cdc14 activity, microtubules maintain high dynamic instability; this correlates with defects in both the movement of chromosomes to the spindle poles (anaphase A) and the elongation of the anaphase spindle (anaphase B). Cdc14 promotes localization of microtubule-stabilizing proteins to the anaphase spindle, and dephosphorylation of the kinetochore component Ask1 contributes to both the silencing of microtubule turnover and successful anaphase A.
The application of transition-state theory to enzymatic catalysis provides an approach to understanding enzymatic catalysis in terms of the factors that determine the strength of binding of ligands to proteins. The prediction that the transition state should bind to the enzyme much more tightly than the substrate is supported by the experimental results with stable analogs of transition states. Transition-state analogs have great potential for use in understanding enzymatic catalysis and in inhibiting enzymes. Because of their potency and specificity as enzyme inhibitors, some of them may become very useful chemotherapeutic agents.
Transcriptional regulation of the bacteriophage T4 late genes requires the participation of three DNA polymerase accessory proteins that are encoded by T4 genes 44, 62, and 45, and that act at an enhancer-like site. Transcriptional activation by these DNA replication proteins also requires the function of an RNA polymerase-bound coactivator protein that is encoded by T4 gene 33 and a promoter recognition protein that is encoded by T4 gene 55. Transcriptional activation in DNA constructs, in which the enhancer and a T4 late promoter can be segregated on two rings of a DNA catenane, has now been analyzed. The ability of an interposed DNA-binding protein to affect communication between the enhancer and the promoter was also examined. Together, these experiments demonstrate that this transcription-activating signal is conveyed between its enhancer and a T4 late promoter by a DNA-tracking mechanism. Alternative activation mechanisms relying entirely on through-space interactions of enhancer-bound and promoter-bound proteins are excluded.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) function as initiators of inflammation through their ability to sense pathogen-associated molecular patterns and products of tissue damage. Transcriptional activation of many TLR-responsive genes requires an initial de-repression step in which nuclear receptor co-repressor (NCoR) complexes are actively removed from the promoters of target genes to relieve basal repression. Ligand-dependent SUMOylation of liver X receptors (LXRs) has been found to suppress TLR4-induced transcription potently by preventing the NCoR clearance step, but the underlying mechanisms remain enigmatic. Here we provide evidence that coronin 2A (CORO2A), a component of the NCoR complex of previously unknown function, mediates TLR-induced NCoR turnover by a mechanism involving interaction with oligomeric nuclear actin. SUMOylated LXRs block NCoR turnover by binding to a conserved SUMO2/SUMO3-interaction motif in CORO2A and preventing actin recruitment. Intriguingly, the LXR transrepression pathway can itself be inactivated by inflammatory signals that induce calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIg (CaMKIIg)-dependent phosphorylation of LXRs, leading to their deSUMOylation by the SUMO protease SENP3 and release from CORO2A. These findings uncover a CORO2A-actin-dependent mechanism for the de-repression of inflammatory response genes that can be differentially regulated by phosphorylation and by nuclear receptor signalling pathways that control immunity and homeostasis.
Rhomboid proteins are intramembrane serine proteases that activate epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signalling in Drosophila. Rhomboids are conserved throughout evolution, and even in eukaryotes their existence in species with no EGFRs implies that they must have additional roles. Here we report that Saccharomyces cerevisiae has two rhomboids, which we have named Rbd1p and Rbd2p. RBD1 deletion results in a respiratory defect; consistent with this, Rbd1p is localized in the inner mitochondrial membrane and mutant cells have disrupted mitochondria. We have identified two substrates of Rbd1p: cytochrome c peroxidase (Ccp1p); and a dynamin-like GTPase (Mgm1p), which is involved in mitochondrial membrane fusion. Rbd1p mutants are indistinguishable from Mgm1p mutants, indicating that Mgm1p is a key substrate of Rbd1p and explaining the rbd1Delta mitochondrial phenotype. Our data indicate that mitochondrial membrane remodelling is regulated by cleavage of Mgm1p and show that intramembrane proteolysis by rhomboids controls cellular processes other than signalling. In addition, mitochondrial rhomboids are conserved throughout eukaryotes and the mammalian homologue, PARL, rescues the yeast mutant, suggesting that these proteins represent a functionally conserved subclass of rhomboid proteases.
Tissue factor is a cell-surface glycoprotein receptor which initiates the blood coagulation cascade after vessel injury by interacting with blood clotting factor VII/VIIa and which is implicated in various pathological processes. When bound to tissue factor, factor VII is readily converted to the active protease factor VIIa by trace amounts of factors Xa, IXa or VIIa. Human tissue factor consists of 263 residues, the first 219 of which comprise the extracellular region. We have determined the crystal structure of the extracellular region at a resolution of 2.2 A. Tissue factor consists of two immunoglobulin-like domains associated through an extensive, novel, interdomain interface region. The binding site for factor VII lies at the interface region and involves residues from domain 1 and an extended loop (binding 'finger') of domain 2. This is the first reported structure of a representative of the class 2 cytokine receptor family, which also includes interferon-alpha, interferon-gamma (refs 2, 3) and interleukin-10 (ref. 4) receptors.
In the mammalian host, African trypanosomes generate consecutive waves of parasitaemia by changing their antigenic coat. Because this coat consists of a single type of variant surface glycoprotein (VSG), the question arises of how a trypanosome accomplishes the transcription of only one of a multi-allelic family of VSG expression site loci to display a single VSG type on the surface at any one time. No major differences have been detected between the single active expression site and the cohort of inactive expression sites. Here we identify an extranucleolar body containing RNA polymerase I (pol I) that is transcriptionally active and present only in the bloodstream form of the parasite. Visualization of the active expression site locus by tagging with green fluorescent protein shows that it is specifically located at this unique pol I transcriptional factory. The presence of this transcriptional body in postmitotic nuclei and its stability in the nucleus after DNA digestion provide evidence for a coherent structure. We propose that the recruitment of a single expression site and the concomitant exclusion of inactive loci from a discrete transcriptional body define the mechanism responsible for VSG mono-allelic expression.
In aerobic organisms, cellular respiration involves electron transfer to oxygen through a series of membrane-bound protein complexes. The process maintains a transmembrane electrochemical proton gradient that is used, for example, in the synthesis of ATP. In mitochondria and many bacteria, the last enzyme complex in the electron transfer chain is cytochrome c oxidase (CytcO), which catalyses the four-electron reduction of O2 to H2O using electrons delivered by a water-soluble donor, cytochrome c. The electron transfer through CytcO, accompanied by proton uptake to form H2O drives the physical movement (pumping) of four protons across the membrane per reduced O2. So far, the molecular mechanism of such proton pumping driven by electron transfer has not been determined in any biological system. Here we show that proton pumping in CytcO is mechanistically coupled to proton transfer to O2 at the catalytic site, rather than to internal electron transfer. This scenario suggests a principle by which redox-driven proton pumps might operate and puts considerable constraints on possible molecular mechanisms by which CytcO translocates protons.
The carboxyl-terminal domain of colicin E5 was shown to inhibit protein synthesis of Escherichia coli. Its target, as revealed through in vivo and in vitro experiments, was not ribosomes as in the case of E3, but the transfer RNAs (tRNAs) for Tyr, His, Asn, and Asp, which contain a modified base, queuine, at the wobble position of each anticodon. The E5 carboxyl-terminal domain hydrolyzed these tRNAs just on the 3' side of this nucleotide. Tight correlation was observed between the toxicity of E5 and the cleavage of intracellular tRNAs of this group, implying that these tRNAs are the primary targets of colicin E5.
DNA extracted from hepatitis B virus Dane particles has been cloned in bacteria using a plasmid vector. A full-length clone has been examined by restriction endonuclease analysis, and the nucleotide sequence of an 892-base pair fragment from cloned hepatitis B viral DNA encoding the surface antigen gene is reported. The amino acid sequence deduced from the DNA indicates that the surface antigens is a protein consisting of 226 amino acids and with a molecular weight of 25,398. The portion of the gene coding for this protein apparently contains no intervening sequences.
Interphase cytosol extracts prepared from Xenopus laevis eggs are active in RNA polymerase III (Pol III) transcription. Addition of recombinant B1 cyclin to these extracts activates mitotic protein kinases that repress transcription. Affinity-purified p34cdc2-cyclin B kinase (mitosis-promoting factor) is sufficient to effect this repression in a simplified Pol III transcription system. This mitotic repression involves the direct phosphorylation of a component of the Pol III transcription initiation factor TFIIIB, which consists of the TATA box-binding protein (TBP) and associated Pol III-specific factors. The transcriptional activity of the TFIIIB-TBP fraction can be modulated in vitro by phosphorylation with mitotic kinases and by dephosphorylation with immobilized alkaline phosphatase.
The structure of a heterotrimeric G protein reveals the mechanism of the nucleotide-dependent engagement of the alpha and beta gamma subunits that regulates their interaction with receptor and effector molecules. The interaction involves two distinct interfaces and dramatically alters the conformation of the alpha but not of the beta gamma subunits. The location of the known sites for post-translational modification and receptor coupling suggest a plausible orientation with respect to the membrane surface and an activated heptahelical receptor.
Acyclovir (9-[2-hydroxyethoxymethyl]guanine or ACV) is a nucleoside analogue with considerable potential for the treatment of herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections in man. Two virus-coded enzymes are important in the mechanism of action of this drug: thymidine kinase (TK) which initiates its activation by converting it to the monophosphate and DNA polymerase whose action is inhibited by ACV triphosphate. Changes in either gene may confer resistance, but all reported mutations in the TK gene have resulted in failure of the resistant virus to induce appreciable levels of the enzyme. Such TK- mutants arise readily in tissue culture systems where the enzyme is non-essential for virus replication, but in animals they show considerably reduced pathogenicity and neurovirulence. We now describe the isolation of a resistant mutant which induces a TK of altered substrate specificity and we show that this virus retains pathogenicity for mice with only a slight attenuation of neurovirulence.
Evidence suggests that both alpha and beta gamma subunits of heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins (G proteins) inhibit adenylyl cyclase. Although type I adenylyl cyclase is inhibited directly by exogenous beta gamma, inhibition of adenylyl cyclase by Gi alpha has not been convincingly demonstrated in vitro. Concentration-dependent inhibition of adenylyl cyclases by purified Gi alpha subunits is described. Activated Gi alpha but not G(o) alpha was effective, and myristoylation of Gi alpha was required. The characteristics of the inhibitory effect were dependent on the type of adenylyl cyclase and the nature of the activator of the enzyme. The concentrations of Gi alpha required to inhibit adenylyl cyclase were substantially higher than those normally thought to be relevant physiologically. However, analysis indicates that these concentrations may be relevant and reasonable.
Mitochondria use transport proteins of the eukaryotic mitochondrial carrier family (MCF) to mediate the exchange of diverse substrates, including ATP, with the host cell cytosol. According to classical endosymbiosis theory, insertion of a host-nuclear-encoded MCF transporter into the protomitochondrion was the key step that allowed the host cell to harvest ATP from the enslaved endosymbiont. Notably the genome of the microsporidian Encephalitozoon cuniculi has lost all of its genes for MCF proteins. This raises the question of how the recently discovered microsporidian remnant mitochondrion, called a mitosome, acquires ATP to support protein import and other predicted ATP-dependent activities. The E. cuniculi genome does contain four genes for an unrelated type of nucleotide transporter used by plastids and bacterial intracellular parasites, such as Rickettsia and Chlamydia, to import ATP from the cytosol of their eukaryotic host cells. The inference is that E. cuniculi also uses these proteins to steal ATP from its eukaryotic host to sustain its lifestyle as an obligate intracellular parasite. Here we show that, consistent with this hypothesis, all four E. cuniculi transporters can transport ATP, and three of them are expressed on the surface of the parasite when it is living inside host cells. The fourth transporter co-locates with mitochondrial Hsp70 to the E. cuniculi mitosome. Thus, uniquely among eukaryotes, the traditional relationship between mitochondrion and host has been subverted in E. cuniculi, by reductive evolution and analogous gene replacement. Instead of the mitosome providing the parasite cytosol with ATP, the parasite cytosol now seems to provide ATP for the organelle.
High resolution studies on the crystal structure of glycogen phosphorylase b have identified the catalytic site to which the substrate glucose-1-phosphate binds strongly with some local conformational changes. The site is situated 8 A (phosphate-to-phosphate distance) from pyridoxal phosphate, an essential cofactor of all glycogen phosphorylases. The catalytic site is 33 A from the site in the N-terminal portion of the molecule to which adenine nucleotides bind. In contrast to phosphorylase a (the active form of the enzyme which is phosphorylated at Ser 14), the positions of the first 19 residues of phosphorylase b are not well defined.
Leukotrienes, the biologically active metabolites of arachidonic acid, have been implicated in a variety of inflammatory responses, including asthma, arthritis and psoriasis. Recently a compound, MK-886, has been described that blocks the synthesis of leukotrienes in intact activated leukocytes, but has little or no effect on enzymes involved in leukotriene synthesis, including 5-lipoxygenase, in cell-free systems. A membrane protein with a high affinity for MK-886 and possibly representing the cellular target for MK-886 has been isolated from rat and human leukocytes. Here, we report the isolation of a complementary DNA clone encoding the MK-886-binding protein. We also demonstrate that the expression of both the MK-886-binding protein and 5-lipoxygenase is necessary for leukotriene synthesis in intact cells. Because the MK-886-binding protein seems to play a part in activating this enzyme in cells, it is termed the five-lipoxygenase activating protein (FLAP).
During platelet activation there is a major reorganization in the platelet cytoskeleton that accompanies a rapid change in platelet shape. Many of the events associated with activation are attributed to a rise in calcium concentration within the platelet cytoplasm. One direct consequence of the elevated calcium is the activation of a calcium-dependent protease that cleaves a major platelet protein of relative molecular mass (Mr) approximately 235,000 (235K) to 200K. This protein, P235, has been purified and reported to interact with actin, but the significance of the proteolytic cleavage is unknown. Talin, a cytoskeletal protein in smooth muscle and fibroblasts, binds vinculin and, together with vinculin, is localized in fibroblasts at sites of actin-membrane attachment. Talin and P235 have similar purification procedures, sedimentation coefficients and Stokes' radii (ref. 6 and Molony et al., unpublished observations). Of particular significance, talin is readily cleaved by proteases from approximately 215K to a fragment of approximately 190K. Given these similarities we have investigated the possible relationship between these proteins. Here we demonstrate that platelet P235 is recognized by anti-talin antibody and that it binds vinculin. Both proteins are cleaved in vitro by the calcium-activated protease to yield similar fragments. We conclude that P235 corresponds to the platelet form of talin.
