A dramatic shift in the genetics of host-parasite interaction and balance occurred in the U.S. corn crop in the 1970 growing season. Southern corn leaf blight incited by Helminthosporium maydis Nisikado & Miyake evolved from a minor disease that causes an average annual loss of less than 1 percent, to one that caused more than the 12 percent average expected from all diseases of corn in the United States. In 1970 the losses to corn leaf blight approaches 710 million bushels. Reserves of corn and other grains ease the impact on the economy and food supplies but there are important domestic and foreign effects of the loss. The epidemic illustrates the vulnerability of our food crops to pests. Sources of genetic resistance to the new race of Helminthosporium maydis are available. The seed industry estimates that for 1971 enough resistant and partially resistant seed to plant about one-half of the crop may be available. Adequate supplies are expected in 1972. Sustained research programs are essential in protecting our food supplies from potential losses of catastrophe magnitude. Several professional groups, including the American Phytopathological Society and the Entomological Society of America, have urged that a program and facilities be established for the study of exotic pests that threaten our agriculture so that controls may be found before the pests are here. Such a program would be desirable but covers only one aspect of the problem. What is really needed is an overall strengthening of research on crop pests.
Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes that can be distinguished from T and B cells through their involvement in innate immunity and their lack of rearranged antigen receptors. Although NK cells and their receptors were initially characterized in terms of tumor killing in vitro, we have determined that the NK cell activation receptor, Ly-49H, is critically involved in resistance to murine cytomegalovirus in vivo. Ly-49H requires an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)-containing transmembrane molecule for expression and signal transduction. Thus, NK cells use receptors functionally resembling ITAM-coupled T and B cell antigen receptors to provide vital innate host defense.
This study was designed to test the hypothesis that T-cell effector mechanisms are required for protective immunity to malaria sporozoites. Administration of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against gamma interferon (gamma IFN) to immune hosts, reversed sterile immunity to sporozoite challenge, by allowing the growth of exoerythrocytic forms (EEF) and thus the development of parasitaemia. Immune animals also developed infections when depleted in vivo of their suppressor/cytotoxic T cells expressing the CD8 antigen (CD8+) but not when depleted of helper T cells expressing CD4 antigen (CD4+), before sporozoite challenge. Passive transfer of immune immunoglobin alone, or adoptive transfer of immune T cells alone, conferred partial protection to naive recipients. Transfer of both immune components resulted in significantly greater protection. This transferred immunity was reversed by the in vivo neutralization of gamma IFN. Thus, sterile immunity to sporozoite challenge requires the neutralization of sporozoites by antibodies and the inhibition of EEF development by gamma IFN with the participation of CD8+ cells.
Toxoplasma gondii is a ubiquitous protozoan parasite that is responsible for severe congenital birth defects and fatal toxoplasmic encephalitis in immunocompromized people. Fundamental aspects of obligate intracellular replication and pathogenesis are only now beginning to emerge for protozoan parasites. T. gondii has a fragmented pathway for salvaging pyrimidine nucleobases derived from the parasite or host cell, and this limited pyrimidine salvage capacity is funnelled exclusively through uracil phosphoribosyltransferase. Disrupting the function of this enzyme does not affect the growth of T. gondii tachyzoites, which suggests that the de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway may be necessary for growth. We have examined the virulence of T. gondii mutants that lack carbamoyl phosphate synthetase II (uracil auxotrophs) to determine whether de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis is required in vivo. Here we show that T. gondii uracil auxotrophs are completely avirulent not only in immune-competent BALB/c mice but also in mice that lack interferon-gamma. A single injection of the uracil auxotroph into BALB/c mice induces long-term protective immunity to toxoplasmosis. Our findings indicate the significance of the de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway for the virulence of parasitic protozoa, and suggest routes for developing vaccines and chemotherapy.
Blood-engorged Culex nigripalpus (Theob.) collected throughout the year in two Florida localities were serologically tested to determine the host range of this mosquito in nature. A proportional increase in feeding on mammals occurred in early summer, reached a maximum between July and October, and was followed by a shift back to avian hosts which dominated the feeding pattern during winter and spring. This finding strengthens the hypothesis that a biphasic pattern of feeding is a basic characteristic of an enzootic vector that, in epidemic years, also serves as the primary vector of avian arbovirus to man.
Although some viruses, particularly the herpes viruses, may never be eliminated from the body, others like influenza A, regularly reinfect humans and boost waning crossreactive CD8+ T-cell immunity. Prolonged T-cell memory is found for viruses that are unlikely to be re-encountered and which do not persist in the host genome, indicating that CD8+ T-cell memory might be independent of continued (or sporadic) antigenic exposure. A feature of virus-specific CD8+ T-cell memory is that antigen-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte precursors (CTLp) are greatly increased and remain high throughout life. The idea that persistence of the inducing antigen is essential is based on experiments in which adoptively transferred CD8+ memory T cells could not be detected for more than a few weeks in naive recipient mice without secondary challenge. Here we show that restimulation of such chimaeric mice with an inducing Sendai virus antigen increases the clonal burst size more than 7-fold within 8 days, making memory CTLp easier to detect in the longer term. We find that Sendai-virus-specific CTLp are maintained for > 250 days in irradiated uninfected recipients, including reconstituted beta 2-microglobulin-/- mice. To determine whether a source of viral peptide can persist after primary infection, we gave Sendai-virus-specific Thy1.1+ memory spleen cells to naive mice that had been minimally depleted of Thy1.2+ T cells, or to comparable recipients that had recovered from infection with Sendai virus or influenza virus. Although antibody against Sendai virus was never found in the naive recipients, Sendai-virus-specific CD8+ memory T cells were maintained equally well in each case for > 100 days after cell transfer. We find no evidence for persisting depots of viral protein that might feed into the endogenous processing pathway and maintain virus-specific CD8+ T-cell memory.
The outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza of the H5N1 subtype in Asia, which has subsequently spread to Russia, the Middle East, Europe, and Africa, has put increased focus on the role of wild birds in the persistence of influenza viruses. The ecology, epidemiology, genetics, and evolution of pathogens cannot be fully understood without taking into account the ecology of their hosts. Here, we review our current knowledge on global patterns of influenza virus infections in wild birds, discuss these patterns in the context of host ecology and in particular birds' behavior, and identify some important gaps in our current knowledge.
All humans become infected with multiple herpesviruses during childhood. After clearance of acute infection, herpesviruses enter a dormant state known as latency. Latency persists for the life of the host and is presumed to be parasitic, as it leaves the individual at risk for subsequent viral reactivation and disease. Here we show that herpesvirus latency also confers a surprising benefit to the host. Mice latently infected with either murine gammaherpesvirus 68 or murine cytomegalovirus, which are genetically highly similar to the human pathogens Epstein-Barr virus and human cytomegalovirus, respectively, are resistant to infection with the bacterial pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Yersinia pestis. Latency-induced protection is not antigen specific but involves prolonged production of the antiviral cytokine interferon-gamma and systemic activation of macrophages. Latency thereby upregulates the basal activation state of innate immunity against subsequent infections. We speculate that herpesvirus latency may also sculpt the immune response to self and environmental antigens through establishment of a polarized cytokine environment. Thus, whereas the immune evasion capabilities and lifelong persistence of herpesviruses are commonly viewed as solely pathogenic, our data suggest that latency is a symbiotic relationship with immune benefits for the host.
The factors determining disease severity in malaria are complex and include host polymorphisms, acquired immunity and parasite virulence. Studies in Africa have shown that severe malaria is associated with the ability of erythrocytes infected with the parasite Plasmodium falciparum to bind uninfected erythrocytes and form rosettes. The molecular basis of resetting is not well understood, although a group of low-molecular-mass proteins called rosettins have been described as potential parasite ligands. Infected erythrocytes also bind to endothelial cells, and this interaction is mediated by the parasite-derived variant erythrocyte membrane protein PfEMP1, which is encoded by the var gene family. Here we report that the parasite ligand for rosetting in a P. falciparum clone is PfEMP1, encoded by a specific var gene. We also report that complement-receptor 1 (CR1) on erythrocytes plays a role in the formation of rosettes and that erythrocytes with a common African CR1 polymorphism (S1(a-)) have reduced adhesion to the domain of PfEMP1 that binds normal erythrocytes. Thus we describe a new adhesive function for PfEMP1 and raise the possibility that CR1 polymorphisms in Africans that influence the interaction between erythrocytes and PfEMP1 may protect against severe malaria.
Recent advances have provided substantial insight into the maintenance of mucosal immunity and the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. Cellular programs responsible for intestinal homeostasis use diverse intracellular and intercellular networks to promote immune tolerance, inflammation or epithelial restitution. Complex interfaces integrate local host and microbial signals to activate appropriate effector programs selectively and even drive plasticity between these programs. In addition, genetic studies and mouse models have emphasized the role of genetic predispositions and how they affect interactions with microbial and environmental factors, leading to pro-colitogenic perturbations of the host-commensal relationship.
Innate immunity against bacterial and fungal pathogens is mediated by Toll and immune deficiency (Imd) pathways, but little is known about the antiviral response in Drosophila. Here, we demonstrate that an RNA interference pathway protects adult flies from infection by two evolutionarily diverse viruses. Our work also describes a molecular framework for the viral immunity, in which viral double-stranded RNA produced during infection acts as the pathogen trigger whereas Drosophila Dicer-2 and Argonaute-2 act as host sensor and effector, respectively. These findings establish a Drosophila model for studying the innate immunity against viruses in animals.
Mass mortalities due to disease outbreaks have recently affected major taxa in the oceans. For closely monitored groups like corals and marine mammals, reports of the frequency of epidemics and the number of new diseases have increased recently. A dramatic global increase in the severity of coral bleaching in 1997-98 is coincident with high El Nino temperatures. Such climate-mediated, physiological stresses may compromise host resistance and increase frequency of opportunistic diseases. Where documented, new diseases typically have emerged through host or range shifts of known pathogens. Both climate and human activities may have also accelerated global transport of species, bringing together pathogens and previously unexposed host populations.
Adhesion of parasitized erythrocytes to post-capillary venular endothelium or uninfected red cells is strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Neoantigens at the infected red-cell surface adhere to a variety of host receptors, demonstrate serological diversity in field isolates and may also be a target of the host-protective immune response. Here we use sequential cloning of P. falciparum by micromanipulation to investigate the ability of a parasite to switch antigenic and cytoadherence phenotypes. Our data show that antigens at the parasitized cell surface undergo clonal variation in vitro in the absence of immune pressure at the rate of 2% per generation with concomitant modulations of the adhesive phenotype. A clone has the potential to switch at high frequency to a variety of antigenic and adhesive phenotypes, including a new type of cytoadherence behaviour, 'auto-agglutination' of infected erythrocytes. This rapid appearance of antigenic and functional heterogeneity has important implications for pathogenesis and acquired immunity.
A significant proportion of the genomes of higher plants and vertebrates consists of transposable elements and their derivatives. Autonomous DNA type transposons encode a transposase that enables them to mobilize to a new chromosomal position in the host genome by a cut-and-paste mechanism. As this is potentially mutagenic, the host limits transposition through epigenetic gene silencing and heterochromatin formation. Here we show that a transposase from Arabidopsis thaliana that we named DAYSLEEPER is essential for normal plant growth; it shares several characteristics with the hAT (hobo, Activator, Tam3) family of transposases. DAYSLEEPER was isolated as a factor binding to a motif (Kubox1) present in the upstream region of the Arabidopsis DNA repair gene Ku70. This motif is also present in the upstream regions of many other plant genes. Plants lacking DAYSLEEPER or strongly overexpressing this gene do not develop in a normal manner. Furthermore, DAYSLEEPER overexpression results in the altered expression of many genes. Our data indicate that transposase-like genes can be essential for plant development and can also regulate global gene expression. Thus, transposases can become domesticated by the host to fulfil important cellular functions.
Theory on the evolution of virulence generally predicts selection for an optimal level of virulence determined by trade-offs with transmission and/or recovery. Here we consider the evolution of pathogen virulence in hosts who acquire long-lived immunity and live in a spatially structured population. We show theoretically that large shifts in virulence may occur in pathogen populations as a result of a bistability in evolutionary dynamics caused by the local contact or social population structure of the host. This model provides an explanation for the rapid emergence of the highly virulent strains of rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus.
Intestinal intraepithelial T lymphocytes (IELs) are likely to play a key role in host mucosal immunity and, unlike other T cells, have been proposed to differentiate from local precursors rather than from thymocytes. We show here that IELs expressing the alphabeta T cell receptor are derived from precursors that express RORgammat, an orphan nuclear hormone receptor detected only in immature CD4+CD8+ thymocytes, fetal lymphoid tissue-inducer (LTi) cells, and LTi-like cells in cryptopatches within the adult intestinal lamina propria. Using cell fate mapping, we found that all intestinal alphabeta T cells are progeny of CD4+CD8+ thymocytes, indicating that the adult intestine is not a significant site for alphabeta T cell development. Our results suggest that intestinal RORgammat+ cells are local organizers of mucosal lymphoid tissue.
Tumour-specific antigens (TSA; ref. 1) have been exploited in the diagnosis and imaging of human cancer and anti-TSA antibodies have therapeutic potential. Vaccination with TSA or anti-idiotypic (TSA) antibodies has also been used to control tumour growth in model systems. An effective immune response nevertheless demands copresentation of antigen with host histocompatibility determinants. We therefore examined whether live vaccinia virus recombinants expressing TSA in cells of the vaccinated host might better elicit tumour immunity. Polyoma virus (PY) is tumorigenic in rodents; because killed PY-transformed cells can elicit tumour immunity, a PY-specific TSA has been postulated. Tumorigenesis involves expression of three early PY proteins, large-T (LT), middle-T (MT) and small-T (ST), but their role as TSAs is unclear. We therefore expressed the three T proteins in separate vaccinia recombinants. Rejection of PY tumours was observed in rats immunized with recombinants expressing either LT or MT. Further, tumour-bearing animals could be induced to reject their tumours by inoculation of recombinants.
Human exposure to Pneumocystis carinii is common but, in the absence of acquired or genetic dysfunction of either cellular or humoral immunity, exposure rarely leads to illness. Although alveolar macrophages can degrade P. carinii, macrophage receptors involved in P. carinii recognition have not been clearly defined. Characterization of a predominant surface glycoprotein of the high mannose type led us to investigate the role of the macrophage mannose receptor in this process. We report here that binding and uptake of cultured rat P. carinii by human and rat alveolar macrophages is reduced by 90% in the presence of competitive inhibitors of mannose receptor activity and by adherence of alveolar macrophages to mannan-coated surfaces. Further, only those COS cells transfected with the human macrophage mannose receptor complementary DNA that express surface mannose receptors bind and ingest P. carinii. These studies establish that the macrophage mannose receptor is sufficient for uptake of P. carinii and emphasize the role of the alveolar macrophage in first-line host defence against P. carinii.
Temporal changes in the incidence of measles virus infection within large urban communities in the developed world have been the focus of much discussion in the context of the identification and analysis of nonlinear and chaotic patterns in biological time series. In contrast, the measles records for small isolated island populations are highly irregular, because of frequent fade-outs of infection, and traditional analysis does not yield useful insight. Here we use measurements of the distribution of epidemic sizes and duration to show that regularities in the dynamics of such systems do become apparent. Specifically, these biological systems are characterized by well-defined power laws in a manner reminiscent of other nonlinear, spatially extended dynamical systems in the physical sciences. We further show that the observed power-law exponents are well described by a simple lattice-based model which reflects the social interaction between individual hosts.
Leishmania infections involve an acute phase of replication within macrophages, typically associated with pathology. After recovery parasites persist for long periods, which can lead to severe disease upon reactivation. Unlike the role of host factors, parasite factors affecting persistence are poorly understood. Leishmania major lacking phosphoglycans (lpg2-) were unable to survive in sand flies and macrophages, but retained the ability to persist indefinitely in the mammalian host without inducing disease. The L. major lpg2- thus provides a platform for probing parasite factors implicated in persistence and its role in disease and immunity.
The Pseudomonas syringae protein AvrPtoB is translocated into plant cells, where it inhibits immunity-associated programmed cell death (PCD). The structure of a C-terminal domain of AvrPtoB that is essential for anti-PCD activity reveals an unexpected homology to the U-box and RING-finger components of eukaryotic E3 ubiquitin ligases, and we show that AvrPtoB has ubiquitin ligase activity. Mutation of conserved residues involved in the binding of E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes abolishes this activity in vitro, as well as anti-PCD activity in tomato leaves, which dramatically decreases virulence. These results show that Pseudomonas syringae uses a mimic of host E3 ubiquitin ligases to inactivate plant defenses.
Viruses that are non- or poorly cytopathic have developed various strategies to avoid elimination by the immune system and to persist in the host. Acute infection of adult mice with the noncytopathic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) normally induces a protective cytotoxic T-cell response that also causes immunopathology. But some LCMV strains (such as DOCILE (LCMV-D) or Cl-13 Armstrong (Cl-13)) derived from virus carrier mice tend to persist after acute infection of adult mice without causing lethal immunopathological disease. Tendency to persist correlates with tropism, rapidity of virus spread and virus mutations. We report here that these LCMV isolates may persist because they induce most of the specific antiviral CD8+ cytotoxic T cells so completely that they all disappear within a few days and therefore neither eliminate the virus nor cause lethal immunopathology. The results illustrate that partially and sequentially induced (protective) immunity or complete exhaustion of T-cell immunity (high zone tolerance) are quantitatively different points on the scale of immunity; some viruses exploit the latter possibility to persist in an immunocompetent host.
T helper cells that produce IL-17 (T(H)17 cells) promote autoimmunity in mice and have been implicated in the pathogenesis of human inflammatory diseases. At mucosal surfaces, T(H)17 cells are thought to protect the host from infection, whereas regulatory T (T(reg)) cells control immune responses and inflammation triggered by the resident microflora. Differentiation of both cell types requires transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), but depends on distinct transcription factors: RORgammat (encoded by Rorc(gammat)) for T(H)17 cells and Foxp3 for T(reg) cells. How TGF-beta regulates the differentiation of T cells with opposing activities has been perplexing. Here we demonstrate that, together with pro-inflammatory cytokines, TGF-beta orchestrates T(H)17 cell differentiation in a concentration-dependent manner. At low concentrations, TGF-beta synergizes with interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-21 (refs 9-11) to promote IL-23 receptor (Il23r) expression, favouring T(H)17 cell differentiation. High concentrations of TGF-beta repress IL23r expression and favour Foxp3+ T(reg) cells. RORgammat and Foxp3 are co-expressed in naive CD4+ T cells exposed to TGF-beta and in a subset of T cells in the small intestinal lamina propria of the mouse. In vitro, TGF-beta-induced Foxp3 inhibits RORgammat function, at least in part through their interaction. Accordingly, lamina propria T cells that co-express both transcription factors produce less IL-17 (also known as IL-17a) than those that express RORgammat alone. IL-6, IL-21 and IL-23 relieve Foxp3-mediated inhibition of RORgammat, thereby promoting T(H)17 cell differentiation. Therefore, the decision of antigen-stimulated cells to differentiate into either T(H)17 or T(reg) cells depends on the cytokine-regulated balance of RORgammat and Foxp3.
Spatio-temporal travelling waves are striking manifestations of predator-prey and host-parasite dynamics. However, few systems are well enough documented both to detect repeated waves and to explain their interaction with spatio-temporal variations in population structure and demography. Here, we demonstrate recurrent epidemic travelling waves in an exhaustive spatio-temporal data set for measles in England and Wales. We use wavelet phase analysis, which allows for dynamical non-stationarity--a complication in interpreting spatio-temporal patterns in these and many other ecological time series. In the pre-vaccination era, conspicuous hierarchical waves of infection moved regionally from large cities to small towns; the introduction of measles vaccination restricted but did not eliminate this hierarchical contagion. A mechanistic stochastic model suggests a dynamical explanation for the waves-spread via infective 'sparks' from large 'core' cities to smaller 'satellite' towns. Thus, the spatial hierarchy of host population structure is a prerequisite for these infection waves.
Dengue fever is a mosquito-borne virus that infects 50-100 million people each year. Of these infections, 200,000-500,000 occur as the severe, life-threatening form of the disease, dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF). Large, unanticipated epidemics of DHF often overwhelm health systems. An understanding of the spatial-temporal pattern of DHF incidence would aid the allocation of resources to combat these epidemics. Here we examine the spatial-temporal dynamics of DHF incidence in a data set describing 850,000 infections occurring in 72 provinces of Thailand during the period 1983 to 1997. We use the method of empirical mode decomposition to show the existence of a spatial-temporal travelling wave in the incidence of DHF. We observe this wave in a three-year periodic component of variance, which is thought to reflect host-pathogen population dynamics. The wave emanates from Bangkok, the largest city in Thailand, moving radially at a speed of 148 km per month. This finding provides an important starting point for detecting and characterizing the key processes that contribute to the spatial-temporal dynamics of DHF in Thailand.
Natural killer (NK) cells are a functionally defined subset of non-T, non-B lymphocytes of bone marrow origin, which induce lysis of selected target cells, including neoplastic and virus-infected cells. The NK cell function provides an important mechanism of primary defence against viruses in vivo, as demonstrated by the occurrence of multiple herpesvirus infections in patients congenitally lacking NK cells. Here we show that functionally competent CD3- NK clones can be productively infected by human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), a T-lymphotropic DNA virus that may play a role in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and in the chronic fatigue syndrome, two disorders associated with a defective NK cell activity. The infection is cytopathic and induces de novo expression of CD4, an antigen not expressed within the NK lineage, thereby predisposing NK cells to infection by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). These results provide evidence that a herpesvirus can directly target and kill NK cells, a potential strategy to suppress the natural anti-viral immunity of the host.
Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) provides an essential component of immunity to tuberculosis by activating infected host macrophages to directly inhibit the replication of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). IFN-gamma-inducible nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2) is considered a principal effector mechanism, although other pathways may also exist. Here, we identify one member of a newly emerging 47-kilodalton (p47) guanosine triphosphatase family, LRG-47, that acts independently of NOS2 to protect against disease. Mice lacking LRG-47 failed to control Mtb replication, unlike those missing the related p47 guanosine triphosphatases IRG-47 or IGTP. Defective bacterial killing in IFN-gamma-activated LRG-47-/- macrophages was associated with impaired maturation of Mtb-containing phagosomes, vesicles that otherwise recruited LRG-47 in wild-type cells. Thus, LRG-47 may serve as a critical vacuolar trafficking component used to dispose of intracellular pathogens like Mtb.
Kawasaki syndrome, an acute febrile multisystem illness of young children, is a panvasculitis with prominent rheumatic features. Arthritis and pancarditis are frequent during the acute stage; coronary artery aneurysms occur in 20% of cases and the disease is now the leading cause of acquired heart disease in childhood. A microbial aetiology is suggested by the acute febrile self-limited character of the disease, the regular occurrence of epidemic outbreaks at intervals of 2-3 years, and the virtual restriction to young children, consistent with the early acquisition of immunity. Reports of elevated DNA polymerase activity (assumed to be RNA-dependent reverse transcriptase) in cultured lymphocytes from patients with acute Kawasaki syndrome suggest that a retrovirus might be the causative agent. We have measured supernatant DNA polymerase activity in lymphocyte cultures from 49 Hawaiian patients in acute and convalescent stages of Kawasaki syndrome and have been unable to demonstrate significant reverse transcriptase activity or other evidence of involvement of a retrovirus in the aetiology of the disease.
Most animal species are infected with multiple parasite species; however, the role of interspecific parasite interactions in influencing parasite dynamics and shaping parasite communities has been unclear. Although laboratory studies have found evidence of cross-immunity, immunosuppression and competition, analyses of hosts in the field have generally concluded that parasite communities are little more than random assemblages. Here we present evidence of consistent interspecific interactions in a natural mammalian system, revealed through the analysis of parasite intensity data collected from a free-ranging rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) population, sampled monthly for a period of 23 yr. The wild rabbit plays host to a diverse gut helminth community that reflects the communities seen in other economically important domestic herbivores. These findings suggest that parasite interactions could have profound implications for the dynamics of parasite communities. The efficacy of parasite control programmes could be jeopardized if such interactions are not taken into account. In contrast, a clear understanding of such interactions may provide the basis for the development of more environmentally acceptable methods of parasite control.
It has recently been shown that activation of murine T-cell hybridomas with antigen inhibits their growth in vitro. The "suicide" of these neoplastic T cells upon stimulation with antigen suggested the possibility that activation via the antigen-specific receptor could also inhibit the growth of neoplastic T cells in vivo. To test this, mice were subcutaneously inoculated with antigen-specific T-cell hybridomas and then treated intraperitoneally with antigen. Administration of the appropriate antigen immediately after inoculation with the T-cell hybridoma abrogated tumor formation; antigen administered after tumors had become established decreased the tumor burden and, in a substantial fraction of animals, led to long-term survival. The efficacy of antigen therapy was due to both a direct inhibitory effect on tumor growth and the induction of host immunity. These studies demonstrate the utility of cellular activation as a means of inhibiting neoplastic T-cell growth in vivo and provide a rationale for studying the use of less selective reagents that can mimic the activating properties of antigen, such as monoclonal antibodies, in the treatment of T-cell neoplasms of unknown antigen specificity.
CRISPR/Cas systems constitute a widespread class of immunity systems that protect bacteria and archaea against phages and plasmids, and commonly use repeat/spacer-derived short crRNAs to silence foreign nucleic acids in a sequence-specific manner. Although the maturation of crRNAs represents a key event in CRISPR activation, the responsible endoribonucleases (CasE, Cas6, Csy4) are missing in many CRISPR/Cas subtypes. Here, differential RNA sequencing of the human pathogen Streptococcus pyogenes uncovered tracrRNA, a trans-encoded small RNA with 24-nucleotide complementarity to the repeat regions of crRNA precursor transcripts. We show that tracrRNA directs the maturation of crRNAs by the activities of the widely conserved endogenous RNase III and the CRISPR-associated Csn1 protein; all these components are essential to protect S. pyogenes against prophage-derived DNA. Our study reveals a novel pathway of small guide RNA maturation and the first example of a host factor (RNase III) required for bacterial RNA-mediated immunity against invaders.
Outbreaks of many infectious diseases, including cholera, malaria and dengue, vary over characteristic periods longer than 1 year. Evidence that climate variability drives these interannual cycles has been highly controversial, chiefly because it is difficult to isolate the contribution of environmental forcing while taking into account nonlinear epidemiological dynamics generated by mechanisms such as host immunity. Here we show that a critical interplay of environmental forcing, specifically climate variability, and temporary immunity explains the interannual disease cycles present in a four-decade cholera time series from Matlab, Bangladesh. We reconstruct the transmission rate, the key epidemiological parameter affected by extrinsic forcing, over time for the predominant strain (El Tor) with a nonlinear population model that permits a contributing effect of intrinsic immunity. Transmission shows clear interannual variability with a strong correspondence to climate patterns at long periods (over 7 years, for monsoon rains and Brahmaputra river discharge) and at shorter periods (under 7 years, for flood extent in Bangladesh, sea surface temperatures in the Bay of Bengal and the El Nino-Southern Oscillation). The importance of the interplay between extrinsic and intrinsic factors in determining disease dynamics is illustrated during refractory periods, when population susceptibility levels are low as the result of immunity and the size of cholera outbreaks only weakly reflects climate forcing.
Pounds et al. argue that global warming contributes to amphibian declines by encouraging outbreaks of the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. Although our findings agree with the climate-linked epidemic hypothesis, this pathogen is probably not the only proximate factor in such cases: in the Trasimeno Lake area of Umbria in central Italy, for example, the water frog Rana lessonae first declined in the late 1990s, yet chytridiomycosis was not observed until 2003 (refs 5, 6). Here we show that the chytrid was common there throughout 1999-2002, in a previously unknown form that did not cause disease. We therefore think that the focus by Pounds et al. on a single pathogen is hard to justify because the host-parasite ecology is at present so poorly understood.
The worm Caenorhabditis elegans is a model system for studying many aspects of biology, including host responses to bacterial pathogens, but it is not known to support replication of any virus. Plants and insects encode multiple Dicer enzymes that recognize distinct precursors of small RNAs and may act cooperatively. However, it is not known whether the single Dicer of worms and mammals is able to initiate the small RNA-guided RNA interference (RNAi) antiviral immunity as occurs in plants and insects. Here we show complete replication of the Flock house virus (FHV) bipartite, plus-strand RNA genome in C. elegans. We show that FHV replication in C. elegans triggers potent antiviral silencing that requires RDE-1, an Argonaute protein essential for RNAi mediated by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) but not by microRNAs. This immunity system is capable of rapid virus clearance in the absence of FHV B2 protein, which acts as a broad-spectrum RNAi inhibitor upstream of rde-1 by targeting the siRNA precursor. This work establishes a C. elegans model for genetic studies of animal virus-host interactions and indicates that mammals might use a siRNA pathway as an antiviral response.
The concept of innate immunity refers to the first-line host defense that serves to limit infection in the early hours after exposure to microorganisms. Recent data have highlighted similarities between pathogen recognition, signaling pathways, and effector mechanisms of innate immunity in Drosophila and mammals, pointing to a common ancestry of these defenses. In addition to its role in the early phase of defense, innate immunity in mammals appears to play a key role in stimulating the subsequent, clonal response of adaptive immunity.
Some Toll and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) provide immunity to experimental infections in animal models, but their contribution to host defense in natural ecosystems is unknown. We report a dominant-negative TLR3 allele in otherwise healthy children with herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) encephalitis. TLR3 is expressed in the central nervous system (CNS), where it is required to control HSV-1, which spreads from the epithelium to the CNS via cranial nerves. TLR3 is also expressed in epithelial and dendritic cells, which apparently use TLR3-independent pathways to prevent further dissemination of HSV-1 and to provide resistance to other pathogens in TLR3-deficient patients. Human TLR3 appears to be redundant in host defense to most microbes but is vital for natural immunity to HSV-1 in the CNS, which suggests that neurotropic viruses have contributed to the evolutionary maintenance of TLR3.
Escape from T cell-mediated immune responses affects the ongoing evolution of rapidly evolving viruses such as HIV. By applying statistical approaches that account for phylogenetic relationships among viral sequences, we show that viral lineage effects rather than immune escape often explain apparent human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-mediated immune-escape mutations defined by older analysis methods. Phylogenetically informed methods identified immune-susceptible locations with greatly improved accuracy, and the associations we identified with these methods were experimentally validated. This approach has practical implications for understanding the impact of host immunity on pathogen evolution and for defining relevant variants for inclusion in vaccine antigens.
Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of infectious diarrhoea in hospitals worldwide, because of its virulence, spore-forming ability and persistence. C. difficile-associated diseases are induced by antibiotic treatment or disruption of the normal gastrointestinal flora. Recently, morbidity and mortality resulting from C. difficile-associated diseases have increased significantly due to changes in the virulence of the causative strains and antibiotic usage patterns. Since 2002, epidemic toxinotype III NAP1/027 strains, which produce high levels of the major virulence factors, toxin A and toxin B, have emerged. These toxins have 63% amino acid sequence similarity and are members of the large clostridial glucosylating toxin family, which are monoglucosyltransferases that are pro-inflammatory, cytotoxic and enterotoxic in the human colon. Inside host cells, both toxins catalyse the transfer of glucose onto the Rho family of GTPases, leading to cell death. However, the role of these toxins in the context of a C. difficile infection is unknown. Here we describe the construction of isogenic tcdA and tcdB (encoding toxin A and B, respectively) mutants of a virulent C. difficile strain and their use in the hamster disease model to show that toxin B is a key virulence determinant. Previous studies showed that purified toxin A alone can induce most of the pathology observed after infection of hamsters with C. difficile and that toxin B is not toxic in animals unless it is co-administered with toxin A, suggesting that the toxins act synergistically. Our work provides evidence that toxin B, not toxin A, is essential for virulence. Furthermore, it is clear that the importance of these toxins in the context of infection cannot be predicted exclusively from studies using purified toxins, reinforcing the importance of using the natural infection process to dissect the role of toxins in disease.
Multicellular organisms activate immunity upon recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Chitin is the major component of fungal cell walls, and chitin oligosaccharides act as PAMPs in plant and mammalian cells. Microbial pathogens deliver effector proteins to suppress PAMP-triggered host immunity and to establish infection. Here, we show that the LysM domain-containing effector protein Ecp6 of the fungal plant pathogen Cladosporium fulvum mediates virulence through perturbation of chitin-triggered host immunity. During infection, Ecp6 sequesters chitin oligosaccharides that are released from the cell walls of invading hyphae to prevent elicitation of host immunity. This may represent a common strategy of host immune suppression by fungal pathogens, because LysM effectors are widely conserved in the fungal kingdom.
Plants are constantly exposed to attack by an array of diverse pathogens but lack a somatically adaptive immune system. In spite of this, natural plant populations do not often suffer destructive disease epidemics. Elucidating how allelic diversity within plant genes that function to detect pathogens (resistance genes) counteracts changing structures of pathogen genes required for host invasion (pathogenicity effectors) is critical to our understanding of the dynamics of natural plant populations. The RPP13 resistance gene is the most polymorphic gene analyzed to date in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Here we report the cloning of the avirulence gene, ATR13, that triggers RPP13-mediated resistance, and we show that it too exhibits extreme levels of amino acid polymorphism. Evidence of diversifying selection visible in both components suggests that the host and pathogen may be locked in a coevolutionary conflict at these loci, where attempts to evade host resistance by the pathogen are matched by the development of new detection capabilities by the host.
The evolutionary conservation of T lymphocyte subsets bearing T-cell receptors (TCRs) using invariant alpha-chains is indicative of unique functions. CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NK-T) cells that express an invariant Valpha14 TCRalpha chain have been implicated in microbial and tumour responses, as well as in auto-immunity. Here we show that T cells that express the canonical hValpha7.2-Jalpha33 or mValpha19-Jalpha33 TCR rearrangement are preferentially located in the gut lamina propria of humans and mice, respectively, and are therefore genuine mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells. Selection and/or expansion of this population requires B lymphocytes, as MAIT cells are absent in B-cell-deficient patients and mice. In addition, we show that MAIT cells are selected and/or restricted by MR1, a monomorphic major histocompatibility complex class I-related molecule that is markedly conserved in diverse mammalian species. MAIT cells are not present in germ-free mice, indicating that commensal flora is required for their expansion in the gut lamina propria. This indicates that MAIT cells are probably involved in the host response at the site of pathogen entry, and may regulate intestinal B-cell activity.
Technological advances in DNA recovery and sequencing have drastically expanded the scope of genetic analyses of ancient specimens to the extent that full genomic investigations are now feasible and are quickly becoming standard. This trend has important implications for infectious disease research because genomic data from ancient microbes may help to elucidate mechanisms of pathogen evolution and adaptation for emerging and re-emerging infections. Here we report a reconstructed ancient genome of Yersinia pestis at 30-fold average coverage from Black Death victims securely dated to episodes of pestilence-associated mortality in London, England, 1348-1350. Genetic architecture and phylogenetic analysis indicate that the ancient organism is ancestral to most extant strains and sits very close to the ancestral node of all Y. pestis commonly associated with human infection. Temporal estimates suggest that the Black Death of 1347-1351 was the main historical event responsible for the introduction and widespread dissemination of the ancestor to all currently circulating Y. pestis strains pathogenic to humans, and further indicates that contemporary Y. pestis epidemics have their origins in the medieval era. Comparisons against modern genomes reveal no unique derived positions in the medieval organism, indicating that the perceived increased virulence of the disease during the Black Death may not have been due to bacterial phenotype. These findings support the notion that factors other than microbial genetics, such as environment, vector dynamics and host susceptibility, should be at the forefront of epidemiological discussions regarding emerging Y. pestis infections.
Some individuals infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) experience multiple episodes of acute hepatitis. It is unclear whether these episodes are due to reinfection with HCV or to reactivation of the original virus infection. Markers of viral replication and host immunity were studied in five chimpanzees sequentially inoculated over a period of 3 years with different HCV strains of proven infectivity. Each rechallenge of a convalescent chimpanzee with the same or a different HCV strain resulted in the reappearance of viremia, which was due to infection with the subsequent challenge virus. The evidence indicates that HCV infection does not elicit protective immunity against reinfection with homologous or heterologous strains, which raises concerns for the development of effective vaccines against HCV.
Attachment of Mycoplasma pneumoniae to host cell by means of a specialized terminus initiates infection. Monoclonal antibodies to a surface protein (Pl) inhibit this process, and react with a region of the tip covered with peplomer-like particles. Since antibodies against the Pl protein are generated by natural and experimental infection and by immunization, the substance may be an important determinant of protective immunity.
Segmental duplications in the human genome are selectively enriched for genes involved in immunity, although the phenotypic consequences for host defense are unknown. We show that there are significant interindividual and interpopulation differences in the copy number of a segmental duplication encompassing the gene encoding CCL3L1 (MIP-1alphaP), a potent human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1)-suppressive chemokine and ligand for the HIV coreceptor CCR5. Possession of a CCL3L1 copy number lower than the population average is associated with markedly enhanced HIV/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) susceptibility. This susceptibility is even greater in individuals who also possess disease-accelerating CCR5 genotypes. This relationship between CCL3L1 dose and altered HIV/AIDS susceptibility points to a central role for CCL3L1 in HIV/AIDS pathogenesis and indicates that differences in the dose of immune response genes may constitute a genetic basis for variable responses to infectious diseases.
The models we have discussed in detail demonstrate specific suppression of immune reactivity produced in normal adult animals by antibody and antigen. The mechanism of homeostasis of suppression in these models depends on continued exposure to antigen and on an active response by the host. The active response may include production of antibody directed against specific receptors as well as antibody directed against antigen. Thus, specific regulation of both antibody and cell mediated immunity to an antigen might be achieved by the use of only the biological agents of the response: antigen, antibody, and possibly antibody to receptors. The general implication is that these same biological agents are responsible for autoregulation of immune reactions occurring in nature. Presumably, these agents may be used to suppress or reverse immune responses for appropriate clinical objectives.
Innate immunity represents the first line of defense in animals. We report a genome-wide in vivo Drosophila RNA interference screen to uncover genes involved in susceptibility or resistance to intestinal infection with the bacterium Serratia marcescens. We first employed whole-organism gene suppression, followed by tissue-specific silencing in gut epithelium or hemocytes to identify several hundred genes involved in intestinal antibacterial immunity. Among the pathways identified, we showed that the JAK-STAT signaling pathway controls host defense in the gut by regulating stem cell proliferation and thus epithelial cell homeostasis. Therefore, we revealed multiple genes involved in antibacterial defense and the regulation of innate immunity.
Distinguishing self from non-self is a fundamental biological challenge. Many pathogens exploit the challenge of self discrimination by employing mimicry to subvert key cellular processes including the cell cycle, apoptosis and cytoskeletal dynamics. Other mimics interfere with immunity. Poxviruses encode K3L, a mimic of eIF2alpha, which is the substrate of protein kinase R (PKR), an important component of innate immunity in vertebrates. The PKR-K3L interaction exemplifies the conundrum imposed by viral mimicry. To be effective, PKR must recognize a conserved substrate (eIF2alpha) while avoiding rapidly evolving substrate mimics such as K3L. Using the PKR-K3L system and a combination of phylogenetic and functional analyses, we uncover evolutionary strategies by which host proteins can overcome mimicry. We find that PKR has evolved under intense episodes of positive selection in primates. The ability of PKR to evade viral mimics is partly due to positive selection at sites most intimately involved in eIF2alpha recognition. We also find that adaptive changes on multiple surfaces of PKR produce combinations of substitutions that increase the odds of defeating mimicry. Thus, although it can seem that pathogens gain insurmountable advantages by mimicking cellular components, host factors such as PKR can compete in molecular 'arms races' with mimics because of evolutionary flexibility at protein interaction interfaces challenged by mimicry.
Many intracellular pathogens infect a broad range of host tissues, but the importance of T cells for immunity in these sites is unclear because most of our understanding of antimicrobial T cell responses comes from analyses of lymphoid tissue. Here, we show that in response to viral or bacterial infection, antigen-specific CD8 T cells migrated to nonlymphoid tissues and were present as long-lived memory cells. Strikingly, CD8 memory T cells isolated from nonlymphoid tissues exhibited effector levels of lytic activity directly ex vivo, in contrast to their splenic counterparts. These results point to the existence of a population of extralymphoid effector memory T cells poised for immediate response to infection.
Phagocytes have a critical function in remodelling tissues during embryogenesis and thereafter are central effectors of immune defence. During phagocytosis, particles are internalized into 'phagosomes', organelles from which immune processes such as microbial destruction and antigen presentation are initiated. Certain pathogens have evolved mechanisms to evade the immune system and persist undetected within phagocytes, and it is therefore evident that a detailed knowledge of this process is essential to an understanding of many aspects of innate and adaptive immunity. However, despite the crucial role of phagosomes in immunity, their components and organization are not fully defined. Here we present a systems biology analysis of phagosomes isolated from cells derived from the genetically tractable model organism Drosophila melanogaster and address the complex dynamic interactions between proteins within this organelle and their involvement in particle engulfment. Proteomic analysis identified 617 proteins potentially associated with Drosophila phagosomes; these were organized by protein-protein interactions to generate the 'phagosome interactome', a detailed protein-protein interaction network of this subcellular compartment. These networks predicted both the architecture of the phagosome and putative biomodules. The contribution of each protein and complex to bacterial internalization was tested by RNA-mediated interference and identified known components of the phagocytic machinery. In addition, the prediction and validation of regulators of phagocytosis such as the 'exocyst', a macromolecular complex required for exocytosis but not previously implicated in phagocytosis, validates this strategy. In generating this 'systems-based model', we show the power of applying this approach to the study of complex cellular processes and organelles and expect that this detailed model of the phagosome will provide a new framework for studying host-pathogen interactions and innate immunity.
Drosophila mounts a potent host defence when challenged by various microorganisms. Analysis of this defence by molecular genetics has now provided a global picture of the mechanisms by which this insect senses infection, discriminates between various classes of microorganisms and induces the production of effector molecules, among which antimicrobial peptides are prominent. An unexpected result of these studies was the discovery that most of the genes involved in the Drosophila host defence are homologous or very similar to genes implicated in mammalian innate immune defences. Recent progress in research on Drosophila immune defence provides evidence for similarities and differences between Drosophila immune responses and mammalian innate immunity.
The regulation of natural populations of invertebrate hosts by viral, bacterial, protozoan, or helminth infections is discussed, using models that combine elements of conventional epidemiology (where the host population is assumed constant) with dynamic elements drawn from predator-prey studies; the apparent absence of acquired immunity in invertebrates simplifies the analysis. Highly pathogenic infections, with long-lived infective stages, tend to produce cyclic behavior in their host populations. The models give an explanation of the 9- to 10-year population cycles of the larch bud moth (Zeiraphera diniana) in the European Alps and suggest that microsporidian protozoan and baculovirus infections may be responsible for the 5- to 12-year population cycles observed in many temperate forest insects.
Activated T lymphocytes differentiate into effector cells tailored to meet disparate challenges to host integrity. For example, type 1 and type 2 helper (T(H)1 and T(H)2) cells secrete cytokines that enhance cell-mediated and humoral immunity, respectively. The chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) can stimulate interleukin-4 production and its overexpression is associated with defects in cell-mediated immunity, indicating that it might be involved in T(H)2 polarization. Here we show that MCP-1-deficient mice are unable to mount T(H)2 responses. Lymph node cells from immunized MCP-1(-/-) mice synthesize extremely low levels of interleukin-4, interleukin-5 and interleukin-10, but normal amounts of interferon-gamma and interleukin-2. Consequently, these mice do not accomplish the immunoglobulin subclass switch that is characteristic of T(H)2 responses and are resistant to Leishmania major. These effects are direct rather than due to abnormal cell migration, because the trafficking of naive T cells is undisturbed in MCP-1(-/-) mice despite the presence of MCP-1-expressing cells in secondary lymphoid organs of wild-type mice. Thus, MCP-1 influences both innate immunity, through effects on monocytes, and adaptive immunity, through control of T helper cell polarization.
Seasonal influenza epidemics are a major public health concern, causing tens of millions of respiratory illnesses and 250,000 to 500,000 deaths worldwide each year. In addition to seasonal influenza, a new strain of influenza virus against which no previous immunity exists and that demonstrates human-to-human transmission could result in a pandemic with millions of fatalities. Early detection of disease activity, when followed by a rapid response, can reduce the impact of both seasonal and pandemic influenza. One way to improve early detection is to monitor health-seeking behaviour in the form of queries to online search engines, which are submitted by millions of users around the world each day. Here we present a method of analysing large numbers of Google search queries to track influenza-like illness in a population. Because the relative frequency of certain queries is highly correlated with the percentage of physician visits in which a patient presents with influenza-like symptoms, we can accurately estimate the current level of weekly influenza activity in each region of the United States, with a reporting lag of about one day. This approach may make it possible to use search queries to detect influenza epidemics in areas with a large population of web search users.
The malarial sporozoite, the infective stage found in the salivary gland of the insect vector, bears highly immunogenic surface antigen(s). Repeated exposure to irradiated sporozoites induces protection against malaria in several host species, including man. Further, monoclonal antibodies that confer passive immunity react with the immunogenic surface determinants of different sporozoite species. One approach to prevent malaria, therefore, would be to produce a vaccine that induces high titres of circulating antibodies against the sporozoite surface determinant(s). However, production of such a vaccine has not been possible since sporozoites cannot be cultivated in vitro and, therefore, only limited amounts of surface antigen may be obtained. To overcome this problem, we have prepared mRNA from Plasmodium knowlesi-infected mosquitoes to construct a cDNA library. From this library we have isolated a clone that expresses the sporozoite surface antigen as a beta-lactamase fusion protein in the plasmid pBR322. This is the first potentially protective malarial antigen to be cloned by recombinant DNA technology.
Distinguishing self from non-self is a fundamental biological challenge. Many pathogens exploit the challenge of self discrimination by employing mimicry to subvert key cellular processes including the cell cycle, apoptosis and cytoskeletal dynamics. Other mimics interfere with immunity. Poxviruses encode K3L, a mimic of eIF2alpha, which is the substrate of protein kinase R (PKR), an important component of innate immunity in vertebrates. The PKR-K3L interaction exemplifies the conundrum imposed by viral mimicry. To be effective, PKR must recognize a conserved substrate (eIF2alpha) while avoiding rapidly evolving substrate mimics such as K3L. Using the PKR-K3L system and a combination of phylogenetic and functional analyses, we uncover evolutionary strategies by which host proteins can overcome mimicry. We find that PKR has evolved under intense episodes of positive selection in primates. The ability of PKR to evade viral mimics is partly due to positive selection at sites most intimately involved in eIF2alpha recognition. We also find that adaptive changes on multiple surfaces of PKR produce combinations of substitutions that increase the odds of defeating mimicry. Thus, although it can seem that pathogens gain insurmountable advantages by mimicking cellular components, host factors such as PKR can compete in molecular 'arms races' with mimics because of evolutionary flexibility at protein interaction interfaces challenged by mimicry.
The Malaria's Eve hypothesis, proposing a severe recent population bottleneck (about 3,000-5,000 years ago) of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, has prompted a debate about the origin and evolution of the parasite. The hypothesis implies that the parasite population is relatively homogeneous, favouring malaria control measures. Other studies, however, suggested an ancient origin and large effective population size. To test the hypothesis, we analysed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from 204 genes on chromosome 3 of P. falciparum. We have identified 403 polymorphic sites, including 238 SNPs and 165 microsatellites, from five parasite clones, establishing chromosome-wide haplotypes and a dense map with one polymorphic marker per approximately 2.3 kilobases. On the basis of synonymous SNPs and non-coding SNPs, we estimate the time to the most recent common ancestor to be approximately 100,000-180,000 years, significantly older than the proposed bottleneck. Our estimated divergence time coincides approximately with the start of human population expansion, and is consistent with a genetically complex organism able to evade host immunity and other antimalarial efforts.
Malignant progressor tumors are only weakly immunogenic and can evade host recognition and rejection. One approach to therapy involves activation of the host antitumor cellular effector mechanisms. Since monoclonal antibodies to CD3 (anti-CD3) can activate T cells in vitro, an attempt was made to determine if tumor immunity could be achieved by the administration of anti-CD3 in vivo. T lymphocytes from mice injected with anti-CD3 showed increased interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R) expression, increased proliferation to recombinant IL-2 (rIL-2), and enhanced reactivity in both an allogeneic mixed lymphocyte reaction and a mixed lymphocyte tumor culture. Malignant tumor growth in treated mice was also examined. The anti-CD3 treatment prevented tumor outgrowth that would have killed untreated animals and also stimulated an in vivo response against a malignant progressor tumor providing lasting tumor immunity.
Several human and animal Ebola outbreaks have occurred over the past 4 years in Gabon and the Republic of Congo. The human outbreaks consisted of multiple simultaneous epidemics caused by different viral strains, and each epidemic resulted from the handling of a distinct gorilla, chimpanzee, or duiker carcass. These animal populations declined markedly during human Ebola outbreaks, apparently as a result of Ebola infection. Recovered carcasses were infected by a variety of Ebola strains, suggesting that Ebola outbreaks in great apes result from multiple virus introductions from the natural host. Surveillance of animal mortality may help to predict and prevent human Ebola outbreaks.
The innate immune system represents an ancient host defence mechanism that protects against invading microorganisms. An important class of immune effector molecules to fight pathogen infections are antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) that are produced in plants and animals. In Drosophila, the induction of AMPs in response to infection is regulated through the activation of the evolutionarily conserved Toll and immune deficiency (IMD) pathways. Here we show that AMP activation can be achieved independently of these immunoregulatory pathways by the transcription factor FOXO, a key regulator of stress resistance, metabolism and ageing. In non-infected animals, AMP genes are activated in response to nuclear FOXO activity when induced by starvation, using insulin signalling mutants, or by applying small molecule inhibitors. AMP induction is lost in foxo null mutants but enhanced when FOXO is overexpressed. Expression of AMP genes in response to FOXO activity can also be triggered in animals unable to respond to immune challenges due to defects in both the Toll and IMD pathways. Molecular experiments at the Drosomycin promoter indicate that FOXO directly binds to its regulatory region, thereby inducing its transcription. In vivo studies in Drosophila, but also studies in human lung, gut, kidney and skin cells indicate that a FOXO-dependent regulation of AMPs is evolutionarily conserved. Our results indicate a new mechanism of cross-regulation of metabolism and innate immunity by which AMP genes can be activated under normal physiological conditions in response to the oscillating energy status of cells and tissues. This regulation seems to be independent of the pathogen-responsive innate immunity pathways whose activation is often associated with tissue damage and repair. The sparse production of AMPs in epithelial tissues in response to FOXO may help modulating the defence reaction without harming the host tissues, in particular when animals are suffering from energy shortage or stress.
Viral infection of bacteria can be lytic, causing destruction of the host cell, or lysogenic, in which the viral genome is instead stably maintained as a prophage within its host. Here we show that lysogeny occurs in natural populations of an autotrophic picoplankton (Synechococcus) and that there is a seasonal pattern to this interaction. Because lysogeny confers immunity to infection by related viruses, this process may account for the resistance to viral infection seen in common forms of autotrophic picoplankton.
Lymphocytes derived from the thymus (T cells) take part in the induction of humoral antibody and also effect cell-mediated graft-versus-host reactions. Preliminary treatment of mice with hydrocortisone caused an inhibition of T-cell function in humoral immunity, while enhancing the graft-versus-host reactivity of the same population of spleen cells. This suggests that different types of T cells participate in cellular and humoral immune reactions.
Although microbes have been classically viewed as pathogens, it is now well established that the majority of host-bacterial interactions are symbiotic. During development and into adulthood, gut bacteria shape the tissues, cells, and molecular profile of our gastrointestinal immune system. This partnership, forged over many millennia of coevolution, is based on a molecular exchange involving bacterial signals that are recognized by host receptors to mediate beneficial outcomes for both microbes and humans. We explore how specific aspects of the adaptive immune system are influenced by intestinal commensal bacteria. Understanding the molecular mechanisms that mediate symbiosis between commensal bacteria and humans may redefine how we view the evolution of adaptive immunity and consequently how we approach the treatment of numerous immunologic disorders.
The inhabitants of the mammalian gut are not always relatively benign commensal bacteria but may also include larger and more parasitic organisms, such as worms and protozoa. At some level, all these organisms are capable of interacting with each other. We found that successful establishment of the chronically infecting parasitic nematode Trichuris muris in the large intestine of mice is dependent on microflora and coincident with modulation of the host immune response. By reducing the number of bacteria in the host animal, we significantly reduced the number of hatched T. muris eggs. Critical interactions between bacteria (microflora) and parasites (macrofauna) introduced a new dynamic to the intestinal niche, which has fundamental implications for our current concepts of intestinal homeostasis and regulation of immunity.
The mammalian host defence system can be divided broadly into adaptive and non-adaptive immunity. Adaptive immunity is acquired and is mediated by B and T lymphocytes. Non-adaptive immunity is mediated in part by a small subclass of heterogeneous peripheral blood mononuclear cells. This population, termed null cells, consists of haematopoietic precursors and cells mediating natural killer (NK) activity and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). NK cells are a class of non-adherent, non-phagocytic, rapidly cytotoxic lymphocytes which can efficiently lyse a wide variety of tumour cells, virally infected cells and immature cell types of normal origin. Despite the broad range of targets, only a limited number of specificities are thought to be involved in target-cell recognition. Morphologically, NK cells are large granular lymphocytes, but they have been shown to exhibit cell-surface markers characteristic of both T cells and monocytes, raising doubt over their lineage. The recent cloning of the beta-chain of the T-cell antigen receptor has now allowed us to investigate whether some NK cells are T-cell-related. We have examined rearrangement and expression of the beta-chain of the T-cell receptor in cloned murine NK cell lines and fresh murine NK cell populations, and our results support the hypothesis that a subpopulation of NK cells is related to T cells and provide basis for examining whether some NK activity is mediated by a small number of T-cell receptors.
The bacterial plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae injects effector proteins into host cells through a type III protein secretion system to cause disease. The enzymatic activities of most of P. syringae effectors and their targets remain obscure. Here we show that the type III effector HopU1 is a mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase (ADP-RT). HopU1 suppresses plant innate immunity in a manner dependent on its ADP-RT active site. The HopU1 substrates in Arabidopsis thaliana extracts were RNA-binding proteins that possess RNA-recognition motifs (RRMs). A. thaliana knockout lines defective in the glycine-rich RNA-binding protein GRP7 (also known as AtGRP7), a HopU1 substrate, were more susceptible than wild-type plants to P. syringae. The ADP-ribosylation of GRP7 by HopU1 required two arginines within the RRM, indicating that this modification may interfere with GRP7's ability to bind RNA. Our results suggest a pathogenic strategy where the ADP-ribosylation of RNA-binding proteins quells host immunity by affecting RNA metabolism and the plant defence transcriptome.
Retroviruses can leave a "fossil record" in their hosts' genomes in the form of endogenous retroviruses. Foamy viruses, complex retroviruses that infect mammals, have been notably absent from this record. We have found an endogenous foamy virus within the genomes of sloths and show that foamy viruses were infecting mammals more than 100 million years ago and codiverged with their hosts across an entire geological era. Our analysis highlights the role of evolutionary constraint in maintaining viral genome structure and indicates that accessory genes and mammalian mechanisms of innate immunity are the products of macroevolutionary conflict played out over a geological time scale.
The innate immune system recognizes pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that are expressed on infectious agents, but not on the host. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) recognize PAMPs and mediate the production of cytokines necessary for the development of effective immunity. Flagellin, a principal component of bacterial flagella, is a virulence factor that is recognized by the innate immune system in organisms as diverse as flies, plants and mammals. Here we report that mammalian TLR5 recognizes bacterial flagellin from both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, and that activation of the receptor mobilizes the nuclear factor NF-kappaB and stimulates tumour necrosis factor-alpha production. TLR5-stimulating activity was purified from Listeria monocytogenes culture supernatants and identified as flagellin by tandem mass spectrometry. Expression of L. monocytogenes flagellin in non-flagellated Escherichia coli conferred on the bacterium the ability to activate TLR5, whereas deletion of the flagellin genes from Salmonella typhimurium abrogated TLR5-stimulating activity. All known TLRs signal through the adaptor protein MyD88. Mice challenged with bacterial flagellin rapidly produced systemic interleukin-6, whereas MyD88-null mice did not respond to flagellin. Our data suggest that TLR5, a member of the evolutionarily conserved Toll-like receptor family, has evolved to permit mammals specifically to detect flagellated bacterial pathogens.
T helper (T(H)) cells constitute an important arm of the adaptive immune system because they coordinate defence against specific pathogens, and their unique cytokines and effector functions mediate different types of tissue inflammation. The recently discovered T(H)17 cells, the third subset of effector T helper cells, have been the subject of intense research aimed at understanding their role in immunity and disease. Here we review emerging data suggesting that T(H)17 cells have an important role in host defence against specific pathogens and are potent inducers of autoimmunity and tissue inflammation. In addition, the differentiation factors responsible for their generation have revealed an interesting reciprocal relationship with regulatory T (T(reg)) cells, which prevent tissue inflammation and mediate self-tolerance.
Containment of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic will require an effective human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) vaccine. Accumulating evidence suggests that such a vaccine must efficiently elicit an HIV-1-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response. Nonhuman primate models will continue to provide an important tool for assessing the extent of protective immunity induced by various immunization strategies. Although replication-competent AIDS viruses attenuated for pathogenicity by selective gene deletions have provided protective immunity in nonhuman primate models, the long-term safety of such vaccines in human populations is suspect. Inactivated virus and subunit vaccines have elicited neither CTLs nor antibodies capable of neutralizing a wide array of patient HIV-1 isolates. Considerable effort is now being focused on evaluating live vector-based vaccine and plasmid DNA vaccine approaches for preventing HIV-1 infection both in animal model and human studies. Our growing understanding of the biology of HIV-1 and immune responses to this virus will continue to suggest improved vaccination approaches for exploration.
The origin of cholera has been elusive, even though scientific evidence clearly shows it is a waterborne disease. However, standard bacteriological procedures for isolation of the cholera vibrio from environmental samples, including water, between epidemics generally were unsuccessful. Vibrio cholerae, a marine vibrio, requiring salt for growth, enters into a dormant, viable but nonculturable stage when conditions are unfavorable for growth and reproduction. The association of Vibrio cholerae with plankton, notably copepods, provides further evidence for the environmental origin of cholera, as well as an explanation for the sporadic and erratic occurrence of cholera epidemics. On a global scale, cholera epidemics can now be related to climate and climatic events, such as El Nino, as well as the global distribution of the plankton host. Remote sensing, with the use of satellite imagery, offers the potential for predicting conditions conducive to cholera outbreaks or epidemics.
Infectious diseases can cause rapid population declines or species extinctions. Many pathogens of terrestrial and marine taxa are sensitive to temperature, rainfall, and humidity, creating synergisms that could affect biodiversity. Climate warming can increase pathogen development and survival rates, disease transmission, and host susceptibility. Although most host-parasite systems are predicted to experience more frequent or severe disease impacts with warming, a subset of pathogens might decline with warming, releasing hosts from disease. Recently, changes in El Nino-Southern Oscillation events have had a detectable influence on marine and terrestrial pathogens, including coral diseases, oyster pathogens, crop pathogens, Rift Valley fever, and human cholera. To improve our ability to predict epidemics in wild populations, it will be necessary to separate the independent and interactive effects of multiple climate drivers on disease impact.
Whereas case rates for some childhood diseases (chickenpox) often vary according to an almost regular annual cycle, the incidence of more efficiently transmitted infections such as measles is more variable. Three hypotheses have been proposed to account for such fluctuations. (i) Irregular dynamics result from random shocks to systems with stable equilibria. (ii) The intrinsic dynamics correspond to biennial cycles that are subject to stochastic forcing. (iii) Aperiodic fluctuations are intrinsic to the epidemiology. Comparison of real world data and epidemiological models suggests that measles epidemics are inherently chaotic. Conversely, the extent to which chickenpox outbreaks approximate a yearly cycle depends inversely on the population size.
Plant pathogenic bacteria secrete effector proteins that attack the host signaling machinery to suppress immunity. Effectors can be recognized by hosts leading to immunity. One such effector is AvrPtoB of Pseudomonas syringae, which degrades host protein kinases, such as tomato Fen, through an E3 ligase domain. Pto kinase, which is highly related to Fen, recognizes AvrPtoB in conjunction with the resistance protein Prf. Here we show that Pto is resistant to AvrPtoB-mediated degradation because it inactivates the E3 ligase domain. AvrPtoB ubiquitinated Fen within the catalytic cleft, leading to its breakdown and loss of the associated Prf protein. Pto avoids this by phosphorylating and inactivating the AvrPtoB E3 domain. Thus, inactivation of a pathogen virulence molecule is one mechanism by which plants resist disease.
Prion diseases are transmissible neurodegenerative conditions of humans and animals. Prions consist principally of a post-translationally modified form of prion protein (PrP), PrP(Sc), which is partly protease resistant. Transmission of prion diseases between species is limited by a 'species barrier' determined in part by the degree of sequence homology between host PrP and inoculated PrP(Sc) (ref.3) and by prion strain type. The epidemic of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in the United Kingdom and other countries has led to concerns that transmission to humans may occur by dietary exposure. BSE appears to be caused by a single strain, distinct from those of natural or experimental scrapie, which is also seen in the new prion diseases of cats and ruminants that have presumably arisen from dietary BSE exposure. Here we show that transgenic mice expressing human PrP in addition to mouse PrP can generate human PrP(Sc) and 'human' prions. These mice therefore provide a model to study experimentally the species barrier limiting BSE transmission to humans. Incubation periods to BSE in transgenic mice are not shortened by expression of human PrP, and only mouse PrP(Sc) is produced in response to such challenge.
Infection with Treponema pallidum, the causative agent of human syphilis, gives rise to a complex immune response involving both humoral and cellular components. The exact nature of this response and how it relates to the disease process is a matter of considerable speculation. In recent years, studies have been directed towards defining the role of cell-mediated immunity (CMI) in syphilis. These have been conducted mainly in vitro because the general unavailability of inbred rabbits, the principal animals for experimental syphilis research, has limited the application of in vivo procedures. A prime deterrent to using mice for the study of syphilis has been their failure to exhibit pathology, even in the face of a persistent infection. We report here that on intradermal (i.d.) infection, transient primary lesions, characteristic of those seen in naturally acquired human syphilis, can be produced regularly in some strains of mice but not others, indicating a genetic basis for host susceptibility. Strains of mice which normally fail to develop lesions, do so after exposure to ionising radiation. Evidence is presented for a multiple role of the immune response during local infection.
I have attempted to sketch the ideas forged in a long-term investigation of the possible relationship between host nutrition and resistance to infection. Our endeavor had its origins in the now partially forgotten field of experimental epidemiology, once epitomized in somewhat contrasting schools of thought, English and American. The work of Webster, which showed the importance of host genetic constitution, was an early and decisive influence in the work discussed here, and led to formulation of a new laboratory model of infectious disease, which has been fruitful.
Obligate relationships have evolved many times and can be parasitic or mutualistic. Obligate organisms rely on others to survive and thus coevolve with their host or partner. An important but little explored question is whether obligate status is an evolutionarily terminal condition or whether obligate lineages can evolve back to an autonomous lifestyle. The bacterium Myxococcus xanthus survives starvation by the social development of spore-bearing fruiting bodies. Some M. xanthus genotypes defective at fruiting body development in isolation can nonetheless exploit proficient genotypes in chimaeric groups. Here we report an evolutionary transition from obligate dependence on an altruistic host to an autonomous mode of social cooperation. This restoration of social independence was caused by a single mutation of large effect that confers fitness superiority over both ancestral genotypes, including immunity from exploitation by the ancestral cheater. Thus, a temporary state of obligate cheating served as an evolutionary stepping-stone to a novel state of autonomous social dominance.
Retroviruses have proved to be useful reagents for studying genetic and epigenetic (such as regulatory) changes in eukaryotic cells, for assessing functional and structural relationships between transposable genetic elements, for inducing insertional mutations, including some important in oncogenesis, and for transporting genes into eukaryotic cells, either after natural transduction of putative cellular oncogenes or after experimental construction of recombinant viruses. Many of these properties of retroviruses depend on their capacity to establish a DNA (proviral) form of their RNA genomes as a stable component of host chromosomes, in either somatic or germinal cells.
In their mathematical description of vaccine-induced immunity, Gandon et al. predict that the host's immunity to a microbial toxin will lead to increased virulence of the pathogen without affecting its transmission. However, results obtained using vaccines against two additional bacterial pathogens are not consistent with this prediction. The model proposed by Gandon et al. may therefore be an oversimplification, with the outcome depending on the biological details of both the pathogen and the vaccine.
Several bacterial pathogens of medical importance are able to persist and replicate inside host mononuclear phagocytes. Protective immunity depends on specific T lymphocytes that induce granulomatous lesions at the sites of bacterial multiplication. Listeria monocytogenes is an intracellular pathogen that replicates inside mononuclear phagocytes and hepatocytes of mice. Invasion from the phagosomal compartment into the cytoplasmic compartment is the principal mechanism of intracellular survival. Early in infection, resistance against L. monocytogenes is mediated by polymorphonuclear phagocytes which destroy infected liver cells, followed by natural killer cells which activate macrophages by means of interferon-gamma (refs 6, 7). A specific immune response by T cells then develops which leads to sterile eradication of the microbes. T cells are also responsible for the highly effective protection in vaccinated mice against secondary infections. Although the role of alpha beta T cells has been demonstrated in these immune responses, that of gamma delta T cells is unclear. Here we use mice that selectively lack either alpha beta or gamma delta T cells as a result of targeted germ-line mutations in their T-cell receptor genes to investigate the relative roles of these T-cell populations during experimental infection with L. monocytogenes. We find that in primary listeriosis, either alpha beta or gamma delta T cells are sufficient for early protection. Resistance to secondary infection is mediated mainly by alpha beta T cells but also involves gamma delta T cells. Thus alpha beta T-cell-deficient mice can be rendered partially resistant by vaccination, and gamma delta T cells are shown to be responsible for this protective effect. In infected gamma delta T-cell-deficient mice we noticed the appearance of unusual liver lesions, indicating that gamma delta T cells have a unique regulatory role in this bacterial infection.
Allergic and parasitic worm immunity is characterized by infiltration of tissues with interleukin (IL)-4- and IL-13-expressing cells, including T-helper-2 cells, eosinophils and basophils. Tissue macrophages assume a distinct phenotype, designated alternatively activated macrophages. Relatively little is known about the factors that trigger these host responses. Chitin, a widespread environmental biopolymer of N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosamine, provides structural rigidity to fungi, crustaceans, helminths and insects. Here, we show that chitin induces the accumulation in tissue of IL-4-expressing innate immune cells, including eosinophils and basophils, when given to mice. Tissue infiltration was unaffected by the absence of Toll-like-receptor-mediated lipopolysaccharide recognition but did not occur if the injected chitin was pre-treated with the IL-4- and IL-13-inducible mammalian chitinase, AMCase, or if the chitin was injected into mice that overexpressed AMCase. Chitin mediated alternative macrophage activation in vivo and the production of leukotriene B(4), which was required for optimal immune cell recruitment. Chitin is a recognition element for tissue infiltration by innate cells implicated in allergic and helminth immunity and this process can be negatively regulated by a vertebrate chitinase.
Vaccines rarely provide full protection from disease. Nevertheless, partially effective (imperfect) vaccines may be used to protect both individuals and whole populations. We studied the potential impact of different types of imperfect vaccines on the evolution of pathogen virulence (induced host mortality) and the consequences for public health. Here we show that vaccines designed to reduce pathogen growth rate and/or toxicity diminish selection against virulent pathogens. The subsequent evolution leads to higher levels of intrinsic virulence and hence to more severe disease in unvaccinated individuals. This evolution can erode any population-wide benefits such that overall mortality rates are unaffected, or even increase, with the level of vaccination coverage. In contrast, infection-blocking vaccines induce no such effects, and can even select for lower virulence. These findings have policy implications for the development and use of vaccines that are not expected to provide full immunity, such as candidate vaccines for malaria.
The merozoite stage of the malaria parasite that infects erythrocytes and causes the symptoms of the disease is initially formed inside host hepatocytes. However, the mechanism by which hepatic merozoites reach blood vessels (sinusoids) in the liver and escape the host immune system before invading erythrocytes remains unknown. Here, we show that parasites induce the death and the detachment of their host hepatocytes, followed by the budding of parasite-filled vesicles (merosomes) into the sinusoid lumen. Parasites simultaneously inhibit the exposure of phosphatidylserine on the outer leaflet of host plasma membranes, which act as "eat me" signals to phagocytes. Thus, the hepatocyte-derived merosomes appear to ensure both the migration of parasites into the bloodstream and their protection from host immunity.
Interferons (IFNs) are essential for host defense. Although the antiviral effects of the type 1 IFNs IFN-alpha and IFN-beta (IFN-alpha/beta) have been established, their immunoregulatory functions, especially their ability to regulate IFN-gamma production, are poorly understood. Here we show that IFN-alpha/beta activate STAT4 directly (STAT, signal transducers and activators of transcription) and that this is required for IFN-gamma production during viral infections of mice, in concert with T cell receptor-derived signals. In contrast, STAT1 appears to negatively regulate IFN-alpha/beta induction of IFN-gamma. Thus, type 1 IFNs, in addition to interleukin-12, provide pathways for innate regulation of adaptive immunity, and their immunoregulatory functions are controlled by modulating the activity of individual STATs.
Immunity to malaria has a multicomponent basis which requires the participation of both T- and B-lymphocyte systems. Previous studies have suggested that the T-lymphocyte system has an essential role in 're-infection immunity' to malaria, but that B cells and/or their products are necessary for the host to survive acute infection and to clear the blood of parasites during chronic malaria. Thus, B-cell-deficient mice and chickens died of fulminant malaria when infected with Plasmodium yoelii and Plasmodium gallinaceum, respectively, but when their acute infections were controlled with subcurative chemotherapy, B-cell-deficient host developed chronic low-grade infections and resisted challenge with homologous parasites. In contrast, athymic nude mice failed to control their endogenous P. yoelii infection after the termination of drug therapy unless they had been thymus grafted before initiation of acute infection. We now report that Plasmodium chabaudi adami (556KA) infection in B-cell-deficient mice results in an activation of a T-cell-dependent immune mechanism which terminates acute malaria in a similar way to that seen in immunologically intact mice. Furthermore, these immunized B-cell-deficient mice were resistant to homologous challenge infection as well as infections initiated with Plasmodium vinckei, but not with P. yoelii and Plasmodium berghei.
In pandemic and epidemic forms, influenza causes substantial, sometimes catastrophic, morbidity and mortality. Intense selection from the host immune system drives antigenic change in influenza A and B, resulting in continuous replacement of circulating strains with new variants able to re-infect hosts immune to earlier types. This 'antigenic drift' often requires a new vaccine to be formulated before each annual epidemic. However, given the high transmissibility and mutation rate of influenza, the constancy of genetic diversity within lineages over time is paradoxical. Another enigma is the replacement of existing strains during a global pandemic caused by 'antigenic shift'--the introduction of a new avian influenza A subtype into the human population. Here we explore ecological and immunological factors underlying these patterns using a mathematical model capturing both realistic epidemiological dynamics and viral evolution at the sequence level. By matching model output to phylogenetic patterns seen in sequence data collected through global surveillance, we find that short-lived strain-transcending immunity is essential to restrict viral diversity in the host population and thus to explain key aspects of drift and shift dynamics.
Anthrax poses a clear and present danger as an agent of biological terrorism. Infection with Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax, if untreated can result in rampant bacteraemia, multisystem dysfunction and death. Anthrax lethal toxin (LT) is a critical virulence factor of B. anthracis, which occurs as a complex of protective antigen and lethal factor. Here we demonstrate that LT severely impairs the function of dendritic cells--which are pivotal to the establishment of immunity against pathogens--and host immune responses by disrupting the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase intracellular signalling network. Dendritic cells exposed to LT and then stimulated with lipopolysaccharide do not upregulate co-stimulatory molecules, secrete greatly diminished amounts of proinflammatory cytokines, and do not effectively stimulate antigen-specific T cells in vivo. Furthermore, injections of LT induce a profound impairment of antigen-specific T- and B-cell immunity. These data suggest a role for LT in suppressing host immunity during B. anthracis infections, and represent an immune evasion strategy, where a microbe targets MAP kinases in dendritic cells to disarm the immune response.
Memory CD8 T cells, generated by natural pathogen exposure or intentional vaccination, protect the host against specific viral infections. It has long been proposed that the number of memory CD8 T cells in the host is inflexible, and that individual cells are constantly competing for limited space. Consequently, vaccines that introduce over-abundant quantities of memory CD8 T cells specific for an agent of interest could have catastrophic consequences for the host by displacing memory CD8 T cells specific for all previous infections. To test this paradigm, we developed a vaccination regimen in mice that introduced as many new long-lived memory CD8 T cells specific for a single vaccine antigen as there were memory CD8 T cells in the host before vaccination. Here we show that, in contrast to expectations, the size of the memory CD8 T-cell compartment doubled to accommodate these new cells, a change due solely to the addition of effector memory CD8 T cells. This increase did not affect the number of CD4 T cells, B cells or naive CD8 T cells, and pre-existing memory CD8 T cells specific for a previously encountered infection were largely preserved. Thus, the number of effector memory CD8 T cells in the mammalian host adapts according to immunological experience. Developing vaccines that abundantly introduce new memory CD8 T cells should not necessarily ablate pre-existing immunity to other infections.
Norwalk-like caliciviruses (Noroviruses) cause over 90% of nonbacterial epidemic gastroenteritis worldwide, but the pathogenesis of norovirus infection is poorly understood because these viruses do not grow in cultured cells and there is no small animal model. Here, we report a previously unknown murine norovirus. Analysis of Murine Norovirus 1 infection revealed that signal transducer and activator of transcription 1-dependent innate immunity, but not T and B cell-dependent adaptive immunity, is essential for norovirus resistance. The identification of host molecules essential for murine norovirus resistance may provide targets for prevention or control of an important human disease.
Live vaccines have long been known to trigger far more vigorous immune responses than their killed counterparts. This has been attributed to the ability of live microorganisms to replicate and express specialized virulence factors that facilitate invasion and infection of their hosts. However, protective immunization can often be achieved with a single injection of live, but not dead, attenuated microorganisms stripped of their virulence factors. Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), which are detected by the immune system, are present in both live and killed vaccines, indicating that certain poorly characterized aspects of live microorganisms, not incorporated in dead vaccines, are particularly effective at inducing protective immunity. Here we show that the mammalian innate immune system can directly sense microbial viability through detection of a special class of viability-associated PAMPs (vita-PAMPs). We identify prokaryotic messenger RNA as a vita-PAMP present only in viable bacteria, the recognition of which elicits a unique innate response and a robust adaptive antibody response. Notably, the innate response evoked by viability and prokaryotic mRNA was thus far considered to be reserved for pathogenic bacteria, but we show that even non-pathogenic bacteria in sterile tissues can trigger similar responses, provided that they are alive. Thus, the immune system actively gauges the infectious risk by searching PAMPs for signatures of microbial life and thus infectivity. Detection of vita-PAMPs triggers a state of alert not warranted for dead bacteria. Vaccine formulations that incorporate vita-PAMPs could thus combine the superior protection of live vaccines with the safety of dead vaccines.
Microparasite infections often consist of genetically distinct clonal lineages. Ecological interactions between these lineages within hosts can influence disease severity, epidemiology, and evolution. Many medical and veterinary interventions have an impact on genetic diversity within infections, but there is little understanding of the long-term consequences of such interventions for public and animal health. Indeed, much of the theory in this area is based on assumptions contradicted by the available data.
Although jawless vertebrates are apparently capable of adaptive immune responses, they have not been found to possess the recombinatorial antigen receptors shared by all jawed vertebrates. Our search for the phylogenetic roots of adaptive immunity in the lamprey has instead identified a new type of variable lymphocyte receptors (VLRs) composed of highly diverse leucine-rich repeats (LRR) sandwiched between amino- and carboxy-terminal LRRs. An invariant stalk region tethers the VLRs to the cell surface by means of a glycosyl-phosphatidyl-inositol anchor. To generate rearranged VLR genes of the diversity necessary for an anticipatory immune system, the single lamprey VLR locus contains a large bank of diverse LRR cassettes, available for insertion into an incomplete germline VLR gene. Individual lymphocytes express a uniquely rearranged VLR gene in monoallelic fashion. Different evolutionary strategies were thus used to generate highly diverse lymphocyte receptors through rearrangement of LRR modules in agnathans (jawless fish) and of immunoglobulin gene segments in gnathostomes (jawed vertebrates).
The rapid and extensive spread of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) epidemic provides a rare opportunity to witness host-pathogen co-evolution involving humans. A focal point is the interaction between genes encoding human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and those encoding HIV proteins. HLA molecules present fragments (epitopes) of HIV proteins on the surface of infected cells to enable immune recognition and killing by CD8(+) T cells; particular HLA molecules, such as HLA-B*57, HLA-B*27 and HLA-B*51, are more likely to mediate successful control of HIV infection. Mutation within these epitopes can allow viral escape from CD8(+) T-cell recognition. Here we analysed viral sequences and HLA alleles from >2,800 subjects, drawn from 9 distinct study cohorts spanning 5 continents. Initial analysis of the HLA-B*51-restricted epitope, TAFTIPSI (reverse transcriptase residues 128-135), showed a strong correlation between the frequency of the escape mutation I135X and HLA-B*51 prevalence in the 9 study cohorts (P = 0.0001). Extending these analyses to incorporate other well-defined CD8(+) T-cell epitopes, including those restricted by HLA-B*57 and HLA-B*27, showed that the frequency of these epitope variants (n = 14) was consistently correlated with the prevalence of the restricting HLA allele in the different cohorts (together, P < 0.0001), demonstrating strong evidence of HIV adaptation to HLA at a population level. This process of viral adaptation may dismantle the well-established HLA associations with control of HIV infection that are linked to the availability of key epitopes, and highlights the challenge for a vaccine to keep pace with the changing immunological landscape presented by HIV.
Development of a preventive immunogen for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is a national priority. The complexities associated with HIV host-virus interactions, coupled with the rapid progression of the HIV epidemic worldwide, have necessitated lowering expectations for an HIV vaccine that is 100 percent effective and have raised important scientific and nonscientific issues regarding development and use of preventive and therapeutic HIV vaccines.
Infectious prion diseases-scrapie of sheep and chronic wasting disease (CWD) of several species in the deer family-are transmitted naturally within affected host populations. Although several possible sources of contagion have been identified in excretions and secretions from symptomatic animals, the biological importance of these sources in sustaining epidemics remains unclear. Here we show that asymptomatic CWD-infected mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) excrete CWD prions in their faeces long before they develop clinical signs of prion disease. Intracerebral inoculation of irradiated deer faeces into transgenic mice overexpressing cervid prion protein (PrP) revealed infectivity in 14 of 15 faecal samples collected from five deer at 7-11 months before the onset of neurological disease. Although prion concentrations in deer faeces were considerably lower than in brain tissue from the same deer collected at the end of the disease, the estimated total infectious dose excreted in faeces by an infected deer over the disease course may approximate the total contained in a brain. Prolonged faecal prion excretion by infected deer provides a plausible natural mechanism that might explain the high incidence and efficient horizontal transmission of CWD within deer herds, as well as prion transmission among other susceptible cervids.
Bacteria have developed mechanisms to communicate and compete with one another in diverse environments. A new form of intercellular communication, contact-dependent growth inhibition (CDI), was discovered recently in Escherichia coli. CDI is mediated by the CdiB/CdiA two-partner secretion (TPS) system. CdiB facilitates secretion of the CdiA 'exoprotein' onto the cell surface. An additional small immunity protein (CdiI) protects CDI(+) cells from autoinhibition. The mechanisms by which CDI blocks cell growth and by which CdiI counteracts this growth arrest are unknown. Moreover, the existence of CDI activity in other bacteria has not been explored. Here we show that the CDI growth inhibitory activity resides within the carboxy-terminal region of CdiA (CdiA-CT), and that CdiI binds and inactivates cognate CdiA-CT, but not heterologous CdiA-CT. Bioinformatic and experimental analyses show that multiple bacterial species encode functional CDI systems with high sequence variability in the CdiA-CT and CdiI coding regions. CdiA-CT heterogeneity implies that a range of toxic activities are used during CDI. Indeed, CdiA-CTs from uropathogenic E. coli and the plant pathogen Dickeya dadantii have different nuclease activities, each providing a distinct mechanism of growth inhibition. Finally, we show that bacteria lacking the CdiA-CT and CdiI coding regions are unable to compete with isogenic wild-type CDI(+) cells both in laboratory media and on a eukaryotic host. Taken together, these results suggest that CDI systems constitute an intricate immunity network with an important function in bacterial competition.
The 1918 influenza pandemic killed 20-40 million people worldwide, and is seen as a worst-case scenario for pandemic planning. Like other pandemic influenza strains, the 1918 A/H1N1 strain spread extremely rapidly. A measure of transmissibility and of the stringency of control measures required to stop an epidemic is the reproductive number, which is the number of secondary cases produced by each primary case. Here we obtained an estimate of the reproductive number for 1918 influenza by fitting a deterministic SEIR (susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered) model to pneumonia and influenza death epidemic curves from 45 US cities: the median value is less than three. The estimated proportion of the population with A/H1N1 immunity before September 1918 implies a median basic reproductive number of less than four. These results strongly suggest that the reproductive number for 1918 pandemic influenza is not large relative to many other infectious diseases. In theory, a similar novel influenza subtype could be controlled. But because influenza is frequently transmitted before a specific diagnosis is possible and there is a dearth of global antiviral and vaccine stores, aggressive transmission reducing measures will probably be required.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a leading worldwide cause of liver disease. Here, we use a new model of HCV spread to investigate the epidemic behavior of the virus and to estimate its basic reproductive number from gene sequence data. We find significant differences in epidemic behavior among HCV subtypes and suggest that these differences are largely the result of subtype-specific transmission patterns. Our model builds a bridge between the disciplines of population genetics and mathematical epidemiology by using pathogen gene sequences to infer the population dynamic history of an infectious disease.
Infection of adult mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), a non-cytopathic segmented RNA virus, leads initially to generalized infection, followed by clearance and subsequent life-long immunity. Indirect evidence has suggested that viral antigens may persist in lymphoid tissues during the phase of immunological memory, but viral genomic RNA has not been detected in previous studies. During a search for persistent virus in the spleen, we identified LCMV-specific sequences present as DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in mice over 200 days after infection. In vivo and in vitro studies revealed that reverse transcription of viral RNA into complementary DNA occurred after acute infection of cells of its natural hosts, mouse and hamster, but not of other species and could be inhibited in vitro by azidothymidine (AZT), indicating that this was mediated by endogenous reverse transcriptase activity. These findings reveal a surprising and new pathway of interaction between exogenous RNA viruses and endogenous retroviral, and perhaps other host components, that results in the persistence of virally determined DNA. We speculate that the latter may function in vivo as a form of DNA vaccine.
Memory CD8 T cells, generated by natural pathogen exposure or intentional vaccination, protect the host against specific viral infections. It has long been proposed that the number of memory CD8 T cells in the host is inflexible, and that individual cells are constantly competing for limited space. Consequently, vaccines that introduce over-abundant quantities of memory CD8 T cells specific for an agent of interest could have catastrophic consequences for the host by displacing memory CD8 T cells specific for all previous infections. To test this paradigm, we developed a vaccination regimen in mice that introduced as many new long-lived memory CD8 T cells specific for a single vaccine antigen as there were memory CD8 T cells in the host before vaccination. Here we show that, in contrast to expectations, the size of the memory CD8 T-cell compartment doubled to accommodate these new cells, a change due solely to the addition of effector memory CD8 T cells. This increase did not affect the number of CD4 T cells, B cells or naive CD8 T cells, and pre-existing memory CD8 T cells specific for a previously encountered infection were largely preserved. Thus, the number of effector memory CD8 T cells in the mammalian host adapts according to immunological experience. Developing vaccines that abundantly introduce new memory CD8 T cells should not necessarily ablate pre-existing immunity to other infections.
Protective immunity against malaria is induced by vaccination of hosts with irradiation-attenuated sporozoites. This immunity is mediated in part by neutralizing antibodies that are directed mainly against the repeat domain of the circumsporozoite protein. Early experiments showed, however, that B-cell-depleted mice that are immunized with sporozoites can resist challenge, indicating that T-cell effector mechanisms may also have a role in protection. This idea was supported by the recent observation that protective immunity also requires T-cells expressing the CD8 antigen (CD8+ T cells) whose target is probably the developing liver-stage parasites. Moreover, an oral Salmonella vaccine that expresses the circumsporozoite protein is able to protect against murine malaria in the absence of antibodies. Here we report the identification of an epitope contained within amino acids 249-260 of the Plasmodium berghei circumsporozoite protein that is recognized by H-2Kd-restricted cytotoxic T cells. Passive transfer into mice of cytotoxic-T-cell clones that recognize this epitope conferred a high degree of protection against challenge. These results provide the first direct evidence that CD8+ T cells that are specific for a defined epitope can confer protection against a parasitic infection.
The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-causing lentiviruses human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) effectively evade host immunity and, once established, infections with these viruses are only rarely controlled by immunological mechanisms. However, the initial establishment of infection in the first few days after mucosal exposure, before viral dissemination and massive replication, may be more vulnerable to immune control. Here we report that SIV vaccines that include rhesus cytomegalovirus (RhCMV) vectors establish indefinitely persistent, high-frequency, SIV-specific effector memory T-cell (T(EM)) responses at potential sites of SIV replication in rhesus macaques and stringently control highly pathogenic SIV(MAC239) infection early after mucosal challenge. Thirteen of twenty-four rhesus macaques receiving either RhCMV vectors alone or RhCMV vectors followed by adenovirus 5 (Ad5) vectors (versus 0 of 9 DNA/Ad5-vaccinated rhesus macaques) manifested early complete control of SIV (undetectable plasma virus), and in twelve of these thirteen animals we observed long-term (>=1 year) protection. This was characterized by: occasional blips of plasma viraemia that ultimately waned; predominantly undetectable cell-associated viral load in blood and lymph node mononuclear cells; no depletion of effector-site CD4(+) memory T cells; no induction or boosting of SIV Env-specific antibodies; and induction and then loss of T-cell responses to an SIV protein (Vif) not included in the RhCMV vectors. Protection correlated with the magnitude of the peak SIV-specific CD8(+) T-cell responses in the vaccine phase, and occurred without anamnestic T-cell responses. Remarkably, long-term RhCMV vector-associated SIV control was insensitive to either CD8(+) or CD4(+) lymphocyte depletion and, at necropsy, cell-associated SIV was only occasionally measurable at the limit of detection with ultrasensitive assays, observations that indicate the possibility of eventual viral clearance. Thus, persistent vectors such as CMV and their associated T(EM) responses might significantly contribute to an efficacious HIV/AIDS vaccine.
Malaria is initiated by the inoculation of a susceptible host with sporozoites from an infected mosquito. The sporozoites enter hepatocytes and develop for a period as exoerythrocyte or hepatic stage parasites. Vaccination with irradiated sporozoites can provide protective immunity and a recent study shows that this can also be conferred by immunization with a recombinant salmonella expressing only the circumsporozoite protein that normally covers the sporozoites. Protection against infection is likely to be mediated by cytotoxic CD8+ cells, as depletion of CD8+ T cells in a sporozoite-immunized animal can completely abrogate immunity. Here we demonstrate directly the existence of CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) that recognize the circumsporozoite protein. B10.BR mice immunized with sporozoites or with recombinant vaccinia virus expressing the CS protein of Plasmodium falciparum contain CTL that specifically kill L cell fibroblasts transfected with the gene encoding the same CS protein. The peptide epitope from the CS protein that is recognized by CTL from this strain of mice is from a variant region of the protein.
A colony-inhibition assay, was lused to demonstrate specific immunity in vitro against syngeneic mouse sarcomas induced by mlethlylcholanthrene or implanted Dictabelt plastic discs. An immunity to methylcholanthrene-induced tumors could also be demonstrated with lymphocytes derived from the autologous primary tumor-bearing host 3 to 8 days after removal of the primary tumor.
Multicellular organisms evolved sophisticated defence systems to confer protection against pathogens. An important characteristic of these immune systems is their ability to act both locally at the site of infection and at distal uninfected locations. In insects, such as Drosophila melanogaster, RNA interference (RNAi) mediates antiviral immunity. However, the antiviral RNAi defence in flies seems to be a local, cell-autonomous process, as flies are thought to be unable to generate a systemic RNAi response. Here we show that a recently defined double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) uptake pathway is essential for effective antiviral RNAi immunity in adult flies. Mutant flies defective in this dsRNA uptake pathway were hypersensitive to infection with Drosophila C virus and Sindbis virus. Mortality in dsRNA-uptake-defective flies was accompanied by 100-to 10(5)-fold increases in viral titres and higher levels of viral RNA. Furthermore, inoculating naked dsRNA into flies elicited a sequence-specific antiviral immune response that required an intact dsRNA uptake pathway. These findings suggest that spread of dsRNA to uninfected sites is essential for effective antiviral immunity. Notably, infection with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged Sindbis virus suppressed expression of host-encoded GFP at a distal site. Thus, similar to protein-based immunity in vertebrates, the antiviral RNAi response in flies also relies on the systemic spread of a virus-specific immunity signal.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis claims more human lives each year than any other bacterial pathogen. Infection is maintained in spite of acquired immunity and resists eradication by antimicrobials. Despite an urgent need for new therapies targeting persistent bacteria, our knowledge of bacterial metabolism throughout the course of infection remains rudimentary. Here we report that persistence of M. tuberculosis in mice is facilitated by isocitrate lyase (ICL), an enzyme essential for the metabolism of fatty acids. Disruption of the icl gene attenuated bacterial persistence and virulence in immune-competent mice without affecting bacterial growth during the acute phase of infection. A link between the requirement for ICL and the immune status of the host was established by the restored virulence of delta icl bacteria in interferon-gamma knockout mice. This link was apparent at the level of the infected macrophage: Activation of infected macrophages increased expression of ICL, and the delta icl mutant was markedly attenuated for survival in activated but not resting macrophages. These data suggest that the metabolism of M. tuberculosis in vivo is profoundly influenced by the host response to infection, an observation with important implications for the treatment of chronic tuberculosis.
The Pseudomonas syringae protein AvrPtoB is translocated into plant cells, where it inhibits immunity-associated programmed cell death (PCD). The structure of a C-terminal domain of AvrPtoB that is essential for anti-PCD activity reveals an unexpected homology to the U-box and RING-finger components of eukaryotic E3 ubiquitin ligases, and we show that AvrPtoB has ubiquitin ligase activity. Mutation of conserved residues involved in the binding of E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes abolishes this activity in vitro, as well as anti-PCD activity in tomato leaves, which dramatically decreases virulence. These results show that Pseudomonas syringae uses a mimic of host E3 ubiquitin ligases to inactivate plant defenses.
As is evident from the human immunodeficiency virus epidemic, there is no systematic method for producing a vaccine. Genetic immunization is a new approach to vaccine production that has many of the advantages of live/attenuated pathogens but no risk of infection. It involves introducing DNA encoding a pathogen protein into host cells and has shown promise in several disease models. Here we describe a new method for vaccine development, expression-library immunization, which makes use of the technique of genetic immunization and the fact that all the antigens of a pathogen are encoded in its DNA. An expression library of pathogen DNA is used to immunize a host thereby producing the effects of antigen presentation of a live vaccine without the risk. We show that even partial expression libraries made from the DNA of Mycoplasma pulmonis, a natural pathogen in rodents, provide protection against challenge from the pathogen. Expression library immunization may prove to be a general method for vaccination against any pathogen.
Nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice are a model for type 1 diabetes in humans. Treatment of NOD mice with end-stage disease by injection of donor splenocytes and complete Freund's adjuvant eliminates autoimmunity and permanently restores normoglycemia. The return of endogenous insulin secretion is accompanied by the reappearance of pancreatic beta cells. We now show that live donor male or labeled splenocytes administered to diabetic NOD females contain cells that rapidly differentiate into islet and ductal epithelial cells within the pancreas. Treatment with irradiated splenocytes is also followed by islet regeneration, but at a slower rate. The islets generated in both instances are persistent, functional, and apparent in all NOD hosts with permanent disease reversal.
Jasmonate and related signalling compounds have a crucial role in both host immunity and development in plants, but the molecular details of the signalling mechanism are poorly understood. Here we identify members of the jasmonate ZIM-domain (JAZ) protein family as key regulators of jasmonate signalling. JAZ1 protein acts to repress transcription of jasmonate-responsive genes. Jasmonate treatment causes JAZ1 degradation and this degradation is dependent on activities of the SCF(COI1) ubiquitin ligase and the 26S proteasome. Furthermore, the jasmonoyl-isoleucine (JA-Ile) conjugate, but not other jasmonate-derivatives such as jasmonate, 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid, or methyl-jasmonate, promotes physical interaction between COI1 and JAZ1 proteins in the absence of other plant proteins. Our results suggest a model in which jasmonate ligands promote the binding of the SCF(COI1) ubiquitin ligase to and subsequent degradation of the JAZ1 repressor protein, and implicate the SCF(COI1)-JAZ1 protein complex as a site of perception of the plant hormone JA-Ile.
Influenza A virus, being responsible for seasonal epidemics and reoccurring pandemics, represents a worldwide threat to public health. High mutation rates facilitate the generation of viral escape mutants, rendering vaccines and drugs directed against virus-encoded targets potentially ineffective. In contrast, targeting host cell determinants temporarily dispensable for the host but crucial for virus replication could prevent viral escape. Here we report the discovery of 287 human host cell genes influencing influenza A virus replication in a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen. Using an independent assay we confirmed 168 hits (59%) inhibiting either the endemic H1N1 (119 hits) or the current pandemic swine-origin (121 hits) influenza A virus strains, with an overlap of 60%. Notably, a subset of these common hits was also essential for replication of a highly pathogenic avian H5N1 strain. In-depth analyses of several factors provided insights into their infection stage relevance. Notably, SON DNA binding protein (SON) was found to be important for normal trafficking of influenza virions to late endosomes early in infection. We also show that a small molecule inhibitor of CDC-like kinase 1 (CLK1) reduces influenza virus replication by more than two orders of magnitude, an effect connected with impaired splicing of the viral M2 messenger RNA. Furthermore, influenza-virus-infected p27(-/-) (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B; Cdkn1b) mice accumulated significantly lower viral titres in the lung, providing in vivo evidence for the importance of this gene. Thus, our results highlight the potency of genome-wide RNAi screening for the dissection of virus-host interactions and the identification of drug targets for a broad range of influenza viruses.
Global amphibian declines have often been attributed to disease, but ignorance of the relative importance and mode of action of potential drivers of infection has made it difficult to develop effective remediation. In a field study, here we show that the widely used herbicide, atrazine, was the best predictor (out of more than 240 plausible candidates) of the abundance of larval trematodes (parasitic flatworms) in the declining northern leopard frog Rana pipiens. The effects of atrazine were consistent across trematode taxa. The combination of atrazine and phosphate--principal agrochemicals in global corn and sorghum production--accounted for 74% of the variation in the abundance of these often debilitating larval trematodes (atrazine alone accounted for 51%). Analysis of field data supported a causal mechanism whereby both agrochemicals increase exposure and susceptibility to larval trematodes by augmenting snail intermediate hosts and suppressing amphibian immunity. A mesocosm experiment demonstrated that, relative to control tanks, atrazine tanks had immunosuppressed tadpoles, had significantly more attached algae and snails, and had tadpoles with elevated trematode loads, further supporting a causal relationship between atrazine and elevated trematode infections in amphibians. These results raise concerns about the role of atrazine and phosphate in amphibian declines, and illustrate the value of quantifying the relative importance of several possible drivers of disease risk while determining the mechanisms by which they facilitate disease emergence.
The 17XNL strain of Plasmodium yoelii induces a highly effective and permanent T-cell dependent immunity in mice of the CBA strain; the lethal variant P. yoelii 17XL and P. berghei (ANKA) fail to activate an effective immune response in the same host. These differences in immunogenicity are unexplained. We recently observed that in CBA/CaJ mice the intracellular blood stages of P. yoelii 17XNL were almost exclusively within reticulocytes whereas lethal P. yoelii 17XL and P. berghei (ANKA), at comparable stages of infection, were predominantly erythrocytic. Induction of a reticulocytosis converted the normally lethal P. yoelii 17XL infection into a nonlethal one, and reticulocytic P. yoelii was shown to be more immunogenic than the erythrocytic form. Since one of the differences between reticulocytes and erythrocytes that might have influenced the development of immunity was greater expression of MHC antigens of the former cell type we examined the expression of H-2K, H-2D and Ia on reticulocytes infected with P. yoelii 17XNL. These cells showed a very marked increase in H-2K and D antigen expression compared to normal reticulocytes or erythrocytes. No Ia was detected. Red blood cells (RBC) infected with lethal P. yoelii 17XL or P. berghei showed no increase in H-2K or H-2D antigen expression. Finally, the level of expression of H-2K on P. yoelii 17XNL parasitized red blood cells from different strains of mice correlated closely with the ability of these strains to control the infection.
A key priority for infectious disease research is to clarify how pathogen genetic variation, modulated by host immunity, transmission bottlenecks, and epidemic dynamics, determines the wide variety of pathogen phylogenies observed at scales that range from individual host to population. We call the melding of immunodynamics, epidemiology, and evolutionary biology required to achieve this synthesis pathogen "phylodynamics." We introduce a phylodynamic framework for the dissection of dynamic forces that determine the diversity of epidemiological and phylogenetic patterns observed in RNA viruses of vertebrates. A central pillar of this model is the Evolutionary Infectivity Profile, which captures the relationship between immune selection and pathogen transmission.
The bacterium Bacillus anthracis causes the death of macrophages, which may allow it to avoid detection by the innate immune system. We found that B. anthracis lethal factor (LF) selectively induces apoptosis of activated macrophages by cleaving the amino-terminal extension of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinases (MKKs) that activate p38 MAPKs. Because macrophages that are deficient in transcription factor nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) are also sensitive to activation-induced death and p38 is required for expression of certain NF-kappaB target genes, p38 is probably essential for synergistic induction of those NF-kappaB target genes that prevent apoptosis of activated macrophages. This dismantling of the p38 MAPK module represents a strategy used by B. anthracis to paralyze host innate immunity.
Commensal bacteria in the lower intestine of mammals are 10 times as numerous as the body's cells. We investigated the relative importance of different immune mechanisms in limiting the spread of the intestinal microbiota. Here, we reveal a flexible continuum between innate and adaptive immune function in containing commensal microbes. Mice deficient in critical innate immune functions such as Toll-like receptor signaling or oxidative burst production spontaneously produce high-titer serum antibodies against their commensal microbiota. These antibody responses are functionally essential to maintain host-commensal mutualism in vivo in the face of innate immune deficiency. Spontaneous hyper-activation of adaptive immunity against the intestinal microbiota, secondary to innate immune deficiency, may clarify the underlying mechanisms of inflammatory diseases where immune dysfunction is implicated.
A common viral immune evasion strategy involves mutating viral surface proteins in order to evade host neutralizing antibodies. Such immune evasion tactics have not previously been intentionally applied to the development of novel viral gene delivery vectors that overcome the critical problem of anti-vector immunity. Recombinant, replication-incompetent adenovirus serotype 5 (rAd5) vector-based vaccines for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and other pathogens have proved highly immunogenic in preclinical studies but will probably be limited by the high prevalence of pre-existing anti-Ad5 immunity in human populations, particularly in the developing world. Here we show that rAd5 vectors can be engineered to circumvent anti-Ad5 immunity. We constructed novel chimaeric rAd5 vectors in which the seven short hypervariable regions (HVRs) on the surface of the Ad5 hexon protein were replaced with the corresponding HVRs from the rare adenovirus serotype Ad48. These HVR-chimaeric rAd5 vectors were produced at high titres and were stable through serial passages in vitro. HVR-chimaeric rAd5 vectors expressing simian immunodeficiency virus Gag proved comparably immunogenic to parental rAd5 vectors in naive mice and rhesus monkeys. In the presence of high levels of pre-existing anti-Ad5 immunity, the immunogenicity of HVR-chimaeric rAd5 vectors was not detectably suppressed, whereas the immunogenicity of parental rAd5 vectors was abrogated. These data demonstrate that functionally relevant Ad5-specific neutralizing antibodies are focused on epitopes located within the hexon HVRs. Moreover, these studies show that recombinant viral vectors can be engineered to circumvent pre-existing anti-vector immunity by removing key neutralizing epitopes on the surface of viral capsid proteins. Such chimaeric viral vectors may have important practical implications for vaccination and gene therapy.
Intestinal parasites are common in man and animals and can cause severe disease. Knowledge of immunity to such infections is limited and comes largely from studies using laboratory host-parasite systems. Understanding how immunity can operate, and why it often does not, is not only of intrinsic interest but necessary for the development of immunological methods of control.
Microbes rely on diverse defense mechanisms that allow them to withstand viral predation and exposure to invading nucleic acid. In many Bacteria and most Archaea, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) form peculiar genetic loci, which provide acquired immunity against viruses and plasmids by targeting nucleic acid in a sequence-specific manner. These hypervariable loci take up genetic material from invasive elements and build up inheritable DNA-encoded immunity over time. Conversely, viruses have devised mutational escape strategies that allow them to circumvent the CRISPR/Cas system, albeit at a cost. CRISPR features may be exploited for typing purposes, epidemiological studies, host-virus ecological surveys, building specific immunity against undesirable genetic elements, and enhancing viral resistance in domesticated microbes.
Onchocerciasis, or river blindness, is caused by infection with Onchocerca volvulus, a filarial parasite which infects about 40 million people in Africa and Latin America. Epidemiological, clinical, entomological and serological studies of African onchocerciasis led to the hypothesis that Onchocerca volvulus exists in different forms in the forest and savannah. It is uncertain if these differences are due to genetic differences within O. volvulus itself, or to epigenetic factors, such as differences in the host populations. To date no basic biochemical differences between the forest and savannah populations of O. volvulus has been found, although isoenzyme studies have shown that differences in allele frequency between forest and savannah populations exist. Here we describe the isolation of a DNA sequence that seems to be specific for the forest form of O. volvulus, the first indication of a basic genetic difference between the savannah and forest forms.
Developing a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) vaccine is critical to end the global acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic, but many question whether this goal is achievable. Natural immunity is not protective, and despite immunogenicity of HIV vaccine candidates, human trials have exclusively yielded disappointing results. Nevertheless, there is an indication that success may be possible, but this will be dependent on understanding the antiviral immune response in unprecedented depth to identify and engineer the types of immunity required. Here we outline fundamental immunological questions that need to be answered to develop a protective HIV vaccine, and the immediate need to harness a much broader scientific community to achieve this goal.
Despite the enormous ecological and economic importance of coral reefs, the keystone organisms in their establishment, the scleractinian corals, increasingly face a range of anthropogenic challenges including ocean acidification and seawater temperature rise. To understand better the molecular mechanisms underlying coral biology, here we decoded the approximately 420-megabase genome of Acropora digitifera using next-generation sequencing technology. This genome contains approximately 23,700 gene models. Molecular phylogenetics indicate that the coral and the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis diverged approximately 500 million years ago, considerably earlier than the time over which modern corals are represented in the fossil record (~240 million years ago). Despite the long evolutionary history of the endosymbiosis, no evidence was found for horizontal transfer of genes from symbiont to host. However, unlike several other corals, Acropora seems to lack an enzyme essential for cysteine biosynthesis, implying dependency of this coral on its symbionts for this amino acid. Corals inhabit environments where they are frequently exposed to high levels of solar radiation, and analysis of the Acropora genome data indicates that the coral host can independently carry out de novo synthesis of mycosporine-like amino acids, which are potent ultraviolet-protective compounds. In addition, the coral innate immunity repertoire is notably more complex than that of the sea anemone, indicating that some of these genes may have roles in symbiosis or coloniality. A number of genes with putative roles in calcification were identified, and several of these are restricted to corals. The coral genome provides a platform for understanding the molecular basis of symbiosis and responses to environmental changes.
Macrophages are pivotal effector cells of the innate immune system, which is vital for recognizing and eliminating invasive microbial pathogens. When microbial products bind to pathogen-recognition receptors, macrophages become activated and release a broad array of cytokines that orchestrate the host innate and adaptive immune responses. Initially identified as a T-cell cytokine, macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is also a macrophage cytokine and an important mediator of inflammation and sepsis. Here we report that MIF is an essential regulator of macrophage responses to endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide) and Gram-negative bacteria. Compared with wild-type cells, MIF-deficient macrophages are hyporesponsive to lipopolysaccharide and Gram-negative bacteria, as shown by a profound reduction in the activity of NF-kappaB and the production of tumour-necrosis factor-alpha. This reduction is due to a downregulation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), the signal-transducing molecule of the lipopolysaccharide receptor complex, and is associated with decreased activity of transcription factor PU.1, which is required for optimal expression of the Tlr4 gene in myeloid cells. These findings identify an important role for MIF in innate immunity and provide a molecular basis for the resistance of MIF-deficient mice to endotoxic shock.
Some of the most striking and extreme consequences of rapid, long-distance aerial dispersal involve pathogens of crop plants. Long-distance dispersal of fungal spores by the wind can spread plant diseases across and even between continents and reestablish diseases in areas where host plants are seasonally absent. For such epidemics to occur, hosts that are susceptible to the same pathogen genotypes must be grown over wide areas, as is the case with many modern crops. The strongly stochastic nature of long-distance dispersal causes founder effects in pathogen populations, such that the genotypes that cause epidemics in new territories or on cultivars with previously effective resistance genes may be atypical. Similar but less extreme population dynamics may arise from long-distance aerial dispersal of other organisms, including plants, viruses, and fungal pathogens of humans.
Seasonality is a driving force that has a major effect on the spatio-temporal dynamics of natural systems and their populations. This is especially true for the transmission of common infectious diseases (such as influenza, measles, chickenpox and pertussis), and is of great relevance for host-parasite relationships in general. Here we gain further insights into the nonlinear dynamics of recurrent diseases through the analysis of the classical seasonally forced SIR (susceptible, infectious or recovered) epidemic model. Our analysis differs from other modelling studies in that the focus is more on post-epidemic dynamics than the outbreak itself. Despite the mathematical intractability of the forced SIR model, we identify a new threshold effect and give clear analytical conditions for predicting the occurrence of either a future epidemic outbreak, or a 'skip'-a year in which an epidemic fails to initiate. The threshold is determined by the population's susceptibility measured after the last outbreak and the rate at which new susceptible individuals are recruited into the population. Moreover, the time of occurrence (that is, the phase) of an outbreak proves to be a useful parameter that carries important epidemiological information. In forced systems, seasonal changes can prevent late-peaking diseases (that is, those having high phase) from spreading widely, thereby increasing population susceptibility, and controlling the triggering and intensity of future epidemics. These principles yield forecasting tools that should have relevance for the study of newly emerging and re-emerging diseases controlled by seasonal vectors.
Arachidonic acid is released from membrane phospholipids upon cell stimulation (for example, by immune complexes and calcium ionophores) and converted to leukotrienes by a 5-lipoxygenase that also has leukotriene A4 synthetase activity. Leukotriene A4, an unstable epoxide, is hydrolyzed to leukotriene B4 or conjugated with glutathione to yield leukotriene C4 and its metabolites, leukotriene D4 and leukotriene E4. The leukotrienes participate in host defense reactions and pathophysiological conditions such as immediate hypersensitivity and inflammation. Recent studies also suggest a neuroendocrine role for leukotriene C4 in luteinizing hormone secretion. Lipoxins are formed by the action of 5- and 15-lipoxygenases on arachidonic acid. Lipoxin A causes contraction of guinea pig lung strips and dilation of the microvasculature. Both lipoxin A and B inhibit natural killer cell cytotoxicity. Thus, the multiple interaction of lipoxygenases generates compounds that can regulate specific cellular responses of importance in inflammation and immunity.
Malaria parasites have to survive and transmit within a highly selective and ever-changing host environment. Because immunity to malaria is nonsterilizing and builds up slowly through repeated infections, commonly the parasite invades a host that is immunologically and physiologically different from its previous host. During the course of infection, the parasite must also keep pace with changes in host immune responses and red-blood-cell physiology. Here, we describe the "selection landscape" of the most virulent of the human malaria parasites, Plasmodium falciparum, and the adaptive mechanisms it uses to navigate through that landscape. Taking a cost-benefit view of parasite fitness, we consider the evolutionary outcomes of the most important forces of selection operating on the parasite, namely immunity, host death, drugs, mosquito availability, and coinfection. Given the huge potential for malaria parasite evolution in the context of the recently renewed effort to eradicate malaria, a deeper understanding of P. falciparum adaptation is essential.
Percolation theory is most commonly associated with the slow flow of liquid through a porous medium, with applications to the physical sciences. Epidemiological applications have been anticipated for disease systems where the host is a plant or volume of soil, and hence is fixed in space. However, no natural examples have been reported. The central question of interest in percolation theory, the possibility of an infinite connected cluster, corresponds in infectious disease to a positive probability of an epidemic. Archived records of plague (infection with Yersinia pestis) in populations of great gerbils (Rhombomys opimus) in Kazakhstan have been used to show that epizootics only occur when more than about 0.33 of the burrow systems built by the host are occupied by family groups. The underlying mechanism for this abundance threshold is unknown. Here we present evidence that it is a percolation threshold, which arises from the difference in scale between the movements that transport infectious fleas between family groups and the vast size of contiguous landscapes colonized by gerbils. Conventional theory predicts that abundance thresholds for the spread of infectious disease arise when transmission between hosts is density dependent such that the basic reproduction number (R(0)) increases with abundance, attaining 1 at the threshold. Percolation thresholds, however, are separate, spatially explicit thresholds that indicate long-range connectivity in a system and do not coincide with R(0) = 1. Abundance thresholds are the theoretical basis for attempts to manage infectious disease by reducing the abundance of susceptibles, including vaccination and the culling of wildlife. This first natural example of a percolation threshold in a disease system invites a re-appraisal of other invasion thresholds, such as those for epidemic viral infections in African lions (Panthera leo), and of other disease systems such as bovine tuberculosis (caused by Mycobacterium bovis) in badgers (Meles meles).
The gut immune system has the challenge of responding to pathogens while remaining relatively unresponsive to food antigens and the commensal microflora. In the developed world, this ability appears to be breaking down, with chronic inflammatory diseases of the gut commonplace in the apparent absence of overt infections. In both mouse and man, mutations in genes that control innate immune recognition, adaptive immunity, and epithelial permeability are all associated with gut inflammation. This suggests that perturbing homeostasis between gut antigens and host immunity represents a critical determinant in the development of gut inflammation and allergy.
Escherichia coli K-12 acquired the ability to produce a high titer of Shiga-like toxin after lysogenization by either of two different bacteriophages isolated from a highly toxinogenic Escherichia coli O157:H7 strain that causes hemorrhagic colitis. One of these phages and another Shiga-like toxin-converting phage from an Escherichia coli O26 isolate associated with infantile diarrhea were closely related in terms of morphology, virion polypeptides, DNA restriction fragments, lysogenic immunity, and heat stability, although a difference in host range was noted. These phages are currently the best-characterized representatives from a broader family of Shiga-like toxin-converting phages.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) can superinfect persistently infected hosts despite CMV-specific humoral and cellular immunity; however, how it does so remains undefined. We have demonstrated that superinfection of rhesus CMV-infected rhesus macaques (RM) requires evasion of CD8+ T cell immunity by virally encoded inhibitors of major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) antigen presentation, particularly the homologs of human CMV US2, 3, 6, and 11. In contrast, MHC-I interference was dispensable for primary infection of RM, or for the establishment of a persistent secondary infection in CMV-infected RM transiently depleted of CD8+ lymphocytes. These findings demonstrate that US2-11 glycoproteins promote evasion of CD8+ T cells in vivo, thus supporting viral replication and dissemination during superinfection, a process that complicates the development of preventive CMV vaccines but that can be exploited for CMV-based vector development.
An ideal vaccine does not yet exist to prevent cholera, a significant health problem in many less developed countries. Vibrio cholerae, the agent of epidemic and endemic cholera, colonizes the small bowel and secretes a potent enterotoxin that consists of a single A subunit, which stimulates adenylate cyclase activity, and five identical B subunits which bind to the ganglioside GM1 receptor of intestinal mucosal cells. Previous studies in man indicate that toxoid-derived antitoxic immunity by itself is insufficient to provide effective, long-lasting protection against cholera. Using recombinant DNA techniques we have now constructed a live, attenuated V. cholerae strain by deleting genes encoding the enterotoxin. Restriction enzyme fragments encoding cholera toxin were deleted in vitro from cloned vibrio chromosomal DNA and the resulting mutations introduced into the chromosome of a vibrio strain of proven immunogenicity. Recently, Mekalanos and coworkers have reported attenuated V. cholerae strains constructed by similar methods. It appears that recombinant DNA techniques offer a promising approach to the development of effective cholera vaccines.
Prions are infectious proteins composed of the abnormal disease-causing isoform PrPSc, which induces conformational conversion of the host-encoded normal cellular prion protein PrPC to additional PrPSc. The mechanism underlying prion strain mutation in the absence of nucleic acids remains unresolved. Additionally, the frequency of strains causing chronic wasting disease (CWD), a burgeoning prion epidemic of cervids, is unknown. Using susceptible transgenic mice, we identified two prevalent CWD strains with divergent biological properties but composed of PrPSc with indistinguishable biochemical characteristics. Although CWD transmissions indicated stable, independent strain propagation by elk PrPC, strain coexistence in the brains of deer and transgenic mice demonstrated unstable strain propagation by deer PrPC. The primary structures of deer and elk prion proteins differ at residue 226, which, in concert with PrPSc conformational compatibility, determines prion strain mutation in these cervids.
In the context of this discussion an epidemic is defined as an increase of disease in a field, forest, or other population of host plants. The susceptibility of the host plants, the virulence of the fungus or other pathogen, and the weather and other environmental conditions all affect the relative rate of increase. They do so by affecting the time it takes newly infected tissue to become infectious, the time tissue remains infectious, the infectiousness of infectious tissue, and the susceptibility of healthy tissue to infection. These factors operate throughout the epidemic. Two other factors become increasingly important as the epidemic proceeds: the proportion of healthy susceptible tissue remaining available for infection, and the degree of uniformity of the population of host plants and of their environment.
Retrotransposons are mobile genetic elements that populate chromosomes, where the host largely controls their activities. In plants and mammals, retrotransposons are transcriptionally silenced by DNA methylation, which in Arabidopsis is propagated at CG dinucleotides by METHYLTRANSFERASE 1 (MET1). In met1 mutants, however, mobilization of retrotransposons is not observed, despite their transcriptional activation. A post-transcriptional mechanism therefore seems to be preventing retrotransposition. Here we show that a copia-type retrotransposon (Evade, French for 'fugitive') evaded suppression of its movement during inbreeding of hybrid epigenomes consisting of met1- and wild-type-derived chromosomes. Evade (EVD) reinsertions caused a series of developmental mutations that allowed its identification. Genetic testing of host control of the EVD life cycle showed that transcriptional suppression occurred by CG methylation supported by RNA-directed DNA methylation. On transcriptional reactivation, subsequent steps of the EVD cycle were inhibited by plant-specific RNA polymerase IV/V and the histone methyltransferase KRYPTONITE (KYP). Moreover, genome resequencing demonstrated retrotransposition of EVD but no other potentially active retroelements when this combination of epigenetic mechanisms was compromised. Our results demonstrate that epigenetic control of retrotransposons extends beyond transcriptional suppression and can be individualized for particular elements.
The need for a planned response to a deliberate introduction of smallpox has recently become urgent. We constructed a stochastic simulator of the spread of smallpox in structured communities to compare the effectiveness of mass vaccination versus targeted vaccination of close contacts of cases. Mass vaccination before smallpox introduction or immediately after the first cases was more effective than targeted vaccination in preventing and containing epidemics if there was no prior herd immunity (that is, no prior immunologic protection within the population). The effectiveness of postrelease targeted and mass vaccinations increased if we assumed that there was residual immunity in adults vaccinated before 1972, but the effectiveness of targeted vaccination increased more than that of mass vaccination. Under all scenarios, targeted vaccination prevented more cases per dose of vaccine than did mass vaccination. Although further research with larger-scale structured models is needed, our results suggest that increasing herd immunity, perhaps with a combination of preemptive voluntary vaccination and vaccination of first responders, could enhance the effectiveness of postattack intervention. It could also help targeted vaccination be more competitive with mass vaccination at both preventing and containing a deliberate introduction of smallpox.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) detect microbial infection and have an essential role in the induction of immune responses. TLRs can directly induce innate host defence responses, but the mechanisms of TLR-mediated control of adaptive immunity are not fully understood. Although TLR-induced dendritic cell maturation is required for activation of T-helper (T(H)) cells, the role of TLRs in B-cell activation and antibody production in vivo is not yet known. Here we show that activation and differentiation of T(H) cells is not sufficient for the induction of T-dependent B-cell responses. We find that, in addition to CD4+ T-cell help, generation of T-dependent antigen-specific antibody responses requires activation of TLRs in B cells.
Innate immunity has been considered only to provide rapid, incomplete antimicrobial host defense until the slower, more definitive acquired immune response develops. However, innate immunity may have an additional role in determining which antigens the acquired immune system responds to and the nature of that response. Knowledge of the molecules and pathways involved may create new therapeutic options for infectious and autoimmune diseases.
An insidious increase in features of the 'metabolic syndrome' - obesity, insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia -- has conspired to produce a worldwide epidemic of type 2 insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus. Most current therapies for this disease were developed in the absence of defined molecular targets or an understanding of disease pathogenesis. Emerging knowledge of key pathogenic mechanisms, such as the impairment of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and the role of 'lipotoxicity' as a probable cause of hepatic and muscle resistance to insulin's effects on glucose metabolism, has led to a host of new molecular drug targets. Several have been validated through genetic engineering in mice or the preliminary use of lead compounds and therapeutic agents in animals and humans.
A cure for type 1 diabetes will probably require the provision or elicitation of new pancreatic islet beta cells as well as the reestablishment of immunological tolerance. A 2003 study reported achievement of both advances in the NOD mouse model by coupling injection of Freund's complete adjuvant with infusion of allogeneic spleen cells. It was concluded that the adjuvant eliminated anti-islet autoimmunity and the donor splenocytes differentiated into insulin-producing (presumably beta) cells, culminating in islet regeneration. Here, we provide data indicating that the recovered islets were all of host origin, reflecting that the diabetic NOD mice actually retain substantial beta cell mass, which can be rejuvenated/regenerated to reverse disease upon adjuvant-dependent dampening of autoimmunity.
Pathogens have evolved different strategies to overcome the various barriers that they encounter during infection of their hosts. The rice blast fungus Magnaporthe grisea causes one of the most damaging diseases of cultivated rice and has emerged as a paradigm system for investigation of foliar pathogenicity. This fungus undergoes a series of well-defined developmental steps during leaf infection, including the formation of elaborate penetration structures (appressoria). This process has been studied in great detail, and over thirty M. grisea genes that condition leaf infection have been identified. Here we show a new facet of the M. grisea life cycle: this fungus can undergo a different (and previously uncharacterized) set of programmed developmental events that are typical of root-infecting pathogens. We also show that root colonization can lead to systemic invasion and the development of classical disease symptoms on the aerial parts of the plant. Gene-for-gene type specific disease resistance that is effective against rice blast in leaves also operates in roots. These findings have significant implications for fungal development, epidemiology, plant breeding and disease control.
Plants cannot move to escape environmental challenges. Biotic stresses result from a battery of potential pathogens: fungi, bacteria, nematodes and insects intercept the photosynthate produced by plants, and viruses use replication machinery at the host's expense. Plants, in turn, have evolved sophisticated mechanisms to perceive such attacks, and to translate that perception into an adaptive response. Here, we review the current knowledge of recognition-dependent disease resistance in plants. We include a few crucial concepts to compare and contrast plant innate immunity with that more commonly associated with animals. There are appreciable differences, but also surprising parallels.
The detection and compensatory response to the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), termed the unfolded protein response (UPR), represents a conserved cellular homeostatic mechanism with important roles in normal development and in the pathogenesis of disease. The IRE1-XBP1/Hac1 pathway is a major branch of the UPR that has been conserved from yeast to human. X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is required for the differentiation of the highly secretory plasma cells of the mammalian adaptive immune system, but recent work also points to reciprocal interactions between the UPR and other aspects of immunity and inflammation. We have been studying innate immunity in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, having established a principal role for a conserved PMK-1 p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in mediating resistance to microbial pathogens. Here we show that during C. elegans development, XBP-1 has an essential role in protecting the host during activation of innate immunity. Activation of the PMK-1-mediated response to infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa induces the XBP-1-dependent UPR. Whereas a loss-of-function xbp-1 mutant develops normally in the presence of relatively non-pathogenic bacteria, infection of the xbp-1 mutant with P. aeruginosa leads to disruption of ER morphology and larval lethality. Unexpectedly, the larval lethality phenotype on pathogenic P. aeruginosa is suppressed by loss of PMK-1-mediated immunity. Furthermore, hyperactivation of PMK-1 causes larval lethality in the xbp-1 mutant even in the absence of pathogenic bacteria. Our data establish innate immunity as a physiologically relevant inducer of ER stress during C. elegans development and indicate that an ancient, conserved role for XBP-1 may be to protect the host organism from the detrimental effects of mounting an innate immune response to microbes.
Dendritic cells constitutively sample the tissue microenvironment and phagocytose both microbial and host apoptotic cells. This leads to the induction of immunity against invading pathogens or tolerance to peripheral self antigens, respectively. The outcome of antigen presentation by dendritic cells depends on their activation status, such that Toll-like receptor (TLR)-induced dendritic cell activation makes them immunogenic, whereas steady-state presentation of self antigens leads to tolerance. TLR-inducible expression of co-stimulatory signals is one of the mechanisms of self/non-self discrimination. However, it is unclear whether or how the inducible expression of co-stimulatory signals would distinguish between self antigens and microbial antigens when both are encountered by dendritic cells during infection. Here we describe a new mechanism of antigen selection in dendritic cells for presentation by major histocompatibility complex class II molecules (MHC II) that is based on the origin of the antigen. We show that the efficiency of presenting antigens from phagocytosed cargo is dependent on the presence of TLR ligands within the cargo. Furthermore, we show that the generation of peptide-MHC class II complexes is controlled by TLRs in a strictly phagosome-autonomous manner.
Adaptive immune responses rely on differentiation of CD4 T helper cells into subsets with distinct effector functions best suited for host defence against the invading pathogen. Interleukin (IL)-17-producing T helper cells (T(H)17) are a recently identified subset, separate from the T helper type 1 (T(H)1) and T helper type 2 (T(H)2) subsets. Synergy between the cytokines transforming growth factor-beta and IL-6 in vitro induces development of T(H)17 cells in mouse and human systems, whereas IL-23 supports expansion of these cells. However, it is not known which conditions in vivo would induce this combination of cytokines. Furthermore, it is enigmatic that a combination of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines would be required to generate an effector T(H)17 response. Here we show that the relevant physiological stimulus triggering this combination of cytokines is the recognition and phagocytosis of infected apoptotic cells by dendritic cells. Phagocytosis of infected apoptotic cells uniquely triggers the combination of IL-6 and transforming growth factor-beta through recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns and phosphatidylserine exposed on apoptotic cells, respectively. Conversely, phagocytosis of apoptotic cells in the absence of microbial signals induces differentiation of the closely related regulatory T cells, which are important for controlling autoimmunity. Blocking apoptosis during infection of the mouse intestinal epithelium with the rodent pathogen Citrobacter rodentium, which models human infections with the attaching and effacing enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli, impairs the characteristic T(H)17 response in the lamina propria. Our results demonstrate that infected apoptotic cells are a critical component of the innate immune signals instructing T(H)17 differentiation, and point to pathogens particularly adept at triggering apoptosis that might preferentially induce T(H)17-mediated immunity. Because T(H)17 cells have been correlated with autoimmune diseases, investigation of the pathways of innate recognition of infected apoptotic cells might lead to improved understanding of the causative defects in autoimmunity.
An outbreak of horizontally transmitted malignant lymphoma in an experimental hamster holding facility was previously reported. Retroviridae (oncornavirus) or other conventional oncogenic viruses (oncodnaviruses) could not be detected in these lymphomas by immunological methods, direct isolation procedures or electron microscopy but an infectious agents was clearly involved. The incidence of lymphomas during five recurrent epidemics ranged from 50 to 90% in young, inbred and random-bred Syrian golden hamster exposed. The agent seemed to be resistant to UV inactivation, formaldehyde vapour and other viricidal agents (chlorine and iodine), and stable for long periods in the absence of hamster hosts in the contaminated facility. Associated disease syndromes in exposed hamster included severe enteritis, pyelonephritis, the occasional appearance of warts, poor breeding efficiency and intussusception. We now report the successful, cell-free isolation of an unusual, filterable agent prepared in protamine sulphate buffer from primary and animal-passaged lymphomas, which produces lymphomas with good efficiency when injected subcutaneously (s.c.) into newborn Syrian inbred (LSH) and random-bred (LVG) hamster. The agent could be reisolated from these induced lymphomas and injected into other hamsters to reproduce the neoplastic condition. It showed characteristics suggested for a mammalian viroid (a non-encapsidated, DNase-sensitive low-molecular-weight, disease-causing, self-replicating, naturally infectious nucleic acid).
An important issue in population biology is the dynamic interaction between pathogens. Interest has focused mainly on the indirect interaction of pathogen strains, mediated by cross immunity. However, a mechanism has recently been proposed for 'ecological interference' between pathogens through the removal of individuals from the susceptible pool after an acute infection. To explore this possibility, we have analysed and modelled historical measles and whooping cough records. Here we show that ecological interference is particularly strong when fatal infections permanently remove susceptibles. Disease interference has substantial dynamical consequences, making multi-annual outbreaks of different infections characteristically out of phase. So, when disease prevalence is high and is associated with significant mortality, it might be impossible to understand epidemic patterns by studying pathogens in isolation. This new ecological null model has important consequences for understanding the multi-strain dynamics of pathogens such as dengue and echoviruses.
Extensive antigenic variability and a capricious epidemiology are characteristics of influenza A and B viruses of man. The haemagglutinin (HA) undergoes frequent and progressive antigenic drift as a result of selection, under immunological pressure, of viruses possessing alterations in the amino acid sequences at specific sites in the molecule. Here we present evidence for an additional selection mechanism for antigenic variants of influenza virus that depends on differing host cell tropisms of virus subpopulations. These studies were initiated after earlier observations of the occurrence of a marked degree of antigenic variation during passage of laboratory strains of influenza virus in eggs and cell cultures (J.C.J., in preparation). We have now shown that cultivation of influenza B viruses in eggs selects subpopulations which are antigenically distinct from virus from the same source grown in mammalian cell cultures. As antigenic characterization of influenza virus strains for epidemiological purposes and for the preparation of influenza vaccines conventionally relies on the cultivation of virus in eggs, our findings may have important practical implications for vaccine design and efficacy.
Interest has recently revived in the use of simple models for epidemic diseases. In particular, Anderson et al. have introduced an improved simple differential equation model for diseases such as fox rabies which regulate the population density of their host. Here I describe how such apparently simple models can be dissected into their basic components. This dissection facilitates a structural sensitivity analysis in which we explore the dependence of features of a model's behaviour on the assumptions regarding each component. I report that particular features can be related to particular components, for example, oscillations depend mainly on population growth and the generation gap of the disease, while estimates of the effect of potential control strategies such as vaccination or culling can be related directly to assumptions concerning the infection term and the way it changes with population density. Some features, for example, the level of prevalence of the disease and the period of any oscillations, turn out to be robust, depending mainly on basic ecological parameters. Others, including the crucial estimates regarding control, prove very sensitive to the details of the model. This is unfortunate, as the detailed form of the components is to a large extent chosen, not for ecological reasons, but to keep models simple, for example, the infectious period of a disease is often assumed to have an exponential distribution because this implies a constant death or recovery rate for infectious individuals which is mathematically very convenient for a continuous-time model. Because our dissection is in terms of components with straightforward ecological interpretations, any required improvements in modelling can be related to observational evidence which either exists or for which experiments can be suggested.
CD4(+) T-helper cells that selectively produce interleukin (IL)-17 (T(H)17), are critical for host defence and autoimmunity. Although crucial for T(H)17 cells in vivo, IL-23 has been thought to be incapable of driving initial differentiation. Rather, IL-6 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-b1 have been proposed to be the factors responsible for initiating specification. Here we show that T(H)17 differentiation can occur in the absence of TGF-b signalling. Neither IL-6 nor IL-23 alone efficiently generated T(H)17 cells; however, these cytokines in combination with IL-1b effectively induced IL-17 production in naive precursors, independently of TGF-b. Epigenetic modification of the Il17a, Il17f and Rorc promoters proceeded without TGF-b1, allowing the generation of cells that co-expressed RORgt (encoded by Rorc) and T-bet. T-bet(+)RORgt(+) T(H)17 cells are generated in vivo during experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, and adoptively transferred T(H)17 cells generated with IL-23 without TGF-b1 were pathogenic in this disease model. These data indicate an alternative mode for T(H)17 differentiation. Consistent with genetic data linking IL23R with autoimmunity, our findings re-emphasize the importance of IL-23 and therefore may have therapeutic implications.
Increasing amounts of evidence support the involvement of inflammation and immunity in atherogenesis, but mediators of communication between the major cell types in atherosclerotic plaques are poorly defined. Cells in human atherosclerotic lesions express the immune mediator CD40 and its ligand CD40L (also known as CD154 or gp39). The interaction of CD40 with CD40L figures prominently in both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses. CD40L-positive T cells accumulate in atheroma, and, by virtue of their early appearance, persistence and localization at sites of lesion growth and complication, activated T cells may coordinate important aspects of atherogenesis. Interruption of CD40L-CD40 signalling by administration of an anti-CD40L antibody limits experimental autoimmune diseases such as collagen-induced arthritis, lupus nephritis, acute or chronic graft-versus-host disease, multiple sclerosis and thyroiditis. Ligation of CD40 on atheroma-associated cells in vitro activates functions related to atherogenesis, including induction of proinflammatory cytokines, matrix metalloproteinases, adhesion molecules and tissue factor. However, the role of CD40 signalling in atherogenesis in vivo remains unknown. Here we determine whether interruption of CD40 signalling influences atherogenesis in vivo in hyperlipidaemic mice. Treatment with antibody against mouse CD40L limited atherosclerosis in mice lacking the receptor for low-density lipoprotein that had been fed a high-cholesterol diet for 12 weeks. This antibody reduces the size of aortic atherosclerotic lesions by 59% and their lipid content by 79%. Furthermore, atheroma of mice treated with anti-CD40L antibody contained significantly fewer macrophages (64%) and T lymphocytes (70%), and exhibited decreased expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1. These data support the involvement of inflammatory pathways in atherosclerosis and indicate a role for CD40 signalling during atherogenesis in hyperlipidaemic mice.
The immune system provides very effective host defense against infectious agents. Although many details are known about the cells and molecules involved, a broader "systems engineering" view of this complex system is just beginning to emerge. Here the argument is put forward that stochastic events, potent amplification mechanisms, feedback controls, and heterogeneity arising from spatially dispersed cell interactions give rise to many of the gross properties of the immune system. A better appreciation of these underlying features will not only add to our basic understanding of how immunity develops or goes awry, but also illuminate new directions for manipulating the system in prophylactic and therapeutic settings.
Antigen-specific T cell immunity is HLA-restricted. Human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) mutations that allow escape from host immune responses may therefore be HLA allele-specific. We analyzed HIV-1 reverse transcriptase sequences from a large HLA-diverse population of HIV-1-infected individuals. Polymorphisms in HIV-1 were most evident at sites of least functional or structural constraint and frequently were associated with particular host HLA class I alleles. Absence of polymorphism was also HLA allele-specific. At a population level, the degree of HLA-associated selection in viral sequence was predictive of viral load. These results support a fundamental role for HLA-restricted immune responses in driving and shaping HIV-1 evolution in vivo.
Comparative analysis of the sea urchin genome has broad implications for the primitive state of deuterostome host defense and the genetic underpinnings of immunity in vertebrates. The sea urchin has an unprecedented complexity of innate immune recognition receptors relative to other animal species yet characterized. These receptor genes include a vast repertoire of 222 Toll-like receptors, a superfamily of more than 200 NACHT domain-leucine-rich repeat proteins (similar to nucleotide-binding and oligomerization domain (NOD) and NALP proteins of vertebrates), and a large family of scavenger receptor cysteine-rich proteins. More typical numbers of genes encode other immune recognition factors. Homologs of important immune and hematopoietic regulators, many of which have previously been identified only from chordates, as well as genes that are critical in adaptive immunity of jawed vertebrates, also are present. The findings serve to underscore the dynamic utilization of receptors and the complexity of immune recognition that may be basal for deuterostomes and predicts features of the ancestral bilaterian form.
West Nile virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus closely related to the human epidemic-causing dengue, yellow fever and Japanese encephalitis viruses. In establishing infection these icosahedral viruses undergo endosomal membrane fusion catalysed by envelope glycoprotein rearrangement of the putative receptor-binding domain III (DIII) and exposure of the hydrophobic fusion loop. Humoral immunity has an essential protective function early in the course of West Nile virus infection. Here, we investigate the mechanism of neutralization by the E16 monoclonal antibody that specifically binds DIII. Structurally, the E16 antibody Fab fragment engages 16 residues positioned on four loops of DIII, a consensus neutralizing epitope sequence conserved in West Nile virus and distinct in other flaviviruses. The E16 epitope protrudes from the surface of mature virions in three distinct environments, and docking studies predict Fab binding will leave five-fold clustered epitopes exposed. We also show that E16 inhibits infection primarily at a step after viral attachment, potentially by blocking envelope glycoprotein conformational changes. Collectively, our results suggest that a vaccine strategy targeting the dominant DIII epitope may elicit safe and effective immune responses against flaviviral diseases.
Once inside a host cell, HIV must make its way to the nucleus in order to replicate, but until now, its journey has largely been uncharted territory. As researchers begin to explore this landscape a common theme is emerging: Soon after viruses enter cells, they enlist components of their hosts to assist them in their journey. Now, in what is being called one of the most exciting frontiers in AIDS research, preliminary findings on how HIV enters cell nuclei are giving AIDS researchers new leads on possible drug targets to fight the ever-mounting epidemic.
Retinoic-acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I; also called DDX58) is a cytosolic viral RNA receptor that interacts with MAVS (also called VISA, IPS-1 or Cardif) to induce type I interferon-mediated host protective innate immunity against viral infection. Furthermore, members of the tripartite motif (TRIM) protein family, which contain a cluster of a RING-finger domain, a B box/coiled-coil domain and a SPRY domain, are involved in various cellular processes, including cell proliferation and antiviral activity. Here we report that the amino-terminal caspase recruitment domains (CARDs) of RIG-I undergo robust ubiquitination induced by TRIM25 in mammalian cells. The carboxy-terminal SPRY domain of TRIM25 interacts with the N-terminal CARDs of RIG-I; this interaction effectively delivers the Lys 63-linked ubiquitin moiety to the N-terminal CARDs of RIG-I, resulting in a marked increase in RIG-I downstream signalling activity. The Lys 172 residue of RIG-I is critical for efficient TRIM25-mediated ubiquitination and for MAVS binding, as well as the ability of RIG-I to induce antiviral signal transduction. Furthermore, gene targeting demonstrates that TRIM25 is essential not only for RIG-I ubiquitination but also for RIG-I-mediated interferon- production and antiviral activity in response to RNA virus infection. Thus, we demonstrate that TRIM25 E3 ubiquitin ligase induces the Lys 63-linked ubiquitination of RIG-I, which is crucial for the cytosolic RIG-I signalling pathway to elicit host antiviral innate immunity.
In 1977, a unique event occurred in the epidemiology of influenza when a virus of the influenza A (H1N1) subtype, similar to a virus that had occurred in 1950, reappeared and caused worldwide epidemics but did not replace the prevailing influenza A (H2N2) subtype. Consequently, the two viruses co-circulated throughout the world and mixed infection of some individuals with both virus strains was detected, raising the possiblitity that recombination between the two strains might affect the future epidemiological behaviour of influenza. Serological analysis of virus isolates from influenza outbreaks during the winter of 1978-79, however, failed to detect any antigenic hybrids (H2N1 or H1N2). The investigation described here, was therefore, undertaken to detect recombinants among recent isolates of the H1N1 and H3N1 serotypes, involving genes coding for other than the surface proteins by RNA-RNA hybridisation. We report here the genetic characterisation of recombinants of both antigenic types.
CD4+ regulatory T (Treg) cells have a profound ability to suppress host immune responses, yet little is understood about how these cells are regulated. We describe a mechanism linking Toll-like receptor (TLR) 8 signaling to the control of Treg cell function, in which synthetic and natural ligands for human TLR8 can reverse Treg cell function. This effect was independent of dendritic cells but required functional TLR8-MyD88-IRAK4 signaling in Treg cells. Adoptive transfer of TLR8 ligand-stimulated Treg cells into tumor-bearing mice enhanced anti-tumor immunity. These results suggest that TLR8 signaling could play a critical role in controlling immune responses to cancer and other diseases.
Bacterial, oomycete and fungal plant pathogens establish disease by translocation of effector proteins into host cells, where they may directly manipulate host innate immunity. In bacteria, translocation is through the type III secretion system, but analogous processes for effector delivery are uncharacterized in fungi and oomycetes. Here we report functional analyses of two motifs, RXLR and EER, present in translocated oomycete effectors. We use the Phytophthora infestans RXLR-EER-containing protein Avr3a as a reporter for translocation because it triggers RXLR-EER-independent hypersensitive cell death following recognition within plant cells that contain the R3a resistance protein. We show that Avr3a, with or without RXLR-EER motifs, is secreted from P. infestans biotrophic structures called haustoria, demonstrating that these motifs are not required for targeting to haustoria or for secretion. However, following replacement of Avr3a RXLR-EER motifs with alanine residues, singly or in combination, or with residues KMIK-DDK--representing a change that conserves physicochemical properties of the protein--P. infestans fails to deliver Avr3a or an Avr3a-GUS fusion protein into plant cells, demonstrating that these motifs are required for translocation. We show that RXLR-EER-encoding genes are transcriptionally upregulated during infection. Bioinformatic analysis identifies 425 potential genes encoding secreted RXLR-EER class proteins in the P. infestans genome. Identification of this class of proteins provides unparalleled opportunities to determine how oomycetes manipulate hosts to establish infection.
The capacity of immunity to control and shape cancer, that is, cancer immunoediting, is the result of three processes that function either independently or in sequence: elimination (cancer immunosurveillance, in which immunity functions as an extrinsic tumour suppressor in naive hosts); equilibrium (expansion of transformed cells is held in check by immunity); and escape (tumour cell variants with dampened immunogenicity or the capacity to attenuate immune responses grow into clinically apparent cancers). Extensive experimental support now exists for the elimination and escape processes because immunodeficient mice develop more carcinogen-induced and spontaneous cancers than wild-type mice, and tumour cells from immunodeficient mice are more immunogenic than those from immunocompetent mice. In contrast, the equilibrium process was inferred largely from clinical observations, including reports of transplantation of undetected (occult) cancer from organ donor into immunosuppressed recipients. Herein we use a mouse model of primary chemical carcinogenesis and demonstrate that equilibrium occurs, is mechanistically distinguishable from elimination and escape, and that neoplastic cells in equilibrium are transformed but proliferate poorly in vivo. We also show that tumour cells in equilibrium are unedited but become edited when they spontaneously escape immune control and grow into clinically apparent tumours. These results reveal that, in addition to destroying tumour cells and sculpting tumour immunogenicity, the immune system of a naive mouse can also restrain cancer growth for extended time periods.
Type I diabetes is an autoimmune disease involving an interaction between an epigenetic event (possibly a viral infection), the pancreatic beta cells, and the immune system in a genetically susceptible host. The possibility that the type I interferons could mediate this interaction was tested with transgenic mice in which the insulin-producing beta cells expressed an interferon-alpha. These mice developed a hypoinsulinemic diabetes associated with a mixed inflammation centered on the islets. The inflammation and the diabetes were prevented with a neutralizing antibody to the interferon-alpha. Thus, the expression of interferon-alpha by the beta cells could be causal in the development of type I diabetes, which suggests a therapeutic approach to this disease.
A humoral factor (molecular weight less than 60,000) that was present in the ascitic fluid of mice bearing intraperitoneal tumors and in pleural effusions from human cancer patients was found to promote the growth of a murine tumor and to suppress cell-mediated tumor immunity. However, the hosts that had recovered from the immunosuppressive state produced a serum factor that could neutralize the immunosuppressive effect.
Influenza virus evades prevailing natural and vaccine-induced immunity by accumulating antigenic change in the haemagglutinin surface protein. Linking amino acid substitutions in haemagglutinin epitopes to epidemiology has been problematic because of the scarcity of data connecting these scales. We use experiments on equine influenza virus to address this issue, quantifying how key parameters of viral establishment and shedding increase the probability of transmission with genetic distance between previously immunizing virus and challenge virus. Qualitatively similar patterns emerge from analyses based on antigenic distance and from a published human influenza study. Combination of the equine data and epidemiological models allows us to calculate the effective reproductive number of transmission as a function of relevant genetic change in the virus, illuminating the probability of influenza epidemics as a function of immunity.
Interstitial pneumonia linked with reactivation of latent human cytomegalovirus due to iatrogenic immunosuppression can be a serious complication of bone marrow transplantation therapy of aplastic anaemia and acute leukaemia. Cellular immunity plays a critical role in the immune surveillance of inapparent cytomegalovirus infections in man and the mouse. The molecular basis of latency, however, and the interaction between latently or recurrently infected cells and the immune system of the host are poorly understood. We have detected a so far unknown antigen in the mouse model. This antigen is found in infected cells in association with the expression of the herpesvirus 'immediate early' genes and is recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTL). We now demonstrate that an unexpectedly high proportion of the CTL precursors generated in vivo during acute murine cytomegalovirus infection are specific for cells that selectively synthesize immediate early proteins, indicating an immunodominant role of viral non-structural proteins.
Salmonella enterica subspecies I, serovar Typhimurium (S. typhimurium), is a leading cause of human gastroenteritis, and is used as a mouse model of human typhoid fever. The incidence of non-typhoid salmonellosis is increasing worldwide, causing millions of infections and many deaths in the human population each year. Here we sequenced the 4,857-kilobase (kb) chromosome and 94-kb virulence plasmid of S. typhimurium strain LT2. The distribution of close homologues of S. typhimurium LT2 genes in eight related enterobacteria was determined using previously completed genomes of three related bacteria, sample sequencing of both S. enterica serovar Paratyphi A (S. paratyphi A) and Klebsiella pneumoniae, and hybridization of three unsequenced genomes to a microarray of S. typhimurium LT2 genes. Lateral transfer of genes is frequent, with 11% of the S. typhimurium LT2 genes missing from S. enterica serovar Typhi (S. typhi), and 29% missing from Escherichia coli K12. The 352 gene homologues of S. typhimurium LT2 confined to subspecies I of S. enterica-containing most mammalian and bird pathogens-are useful for studies of epidemiology, host specificity and pathogenesis. Most of these homologues were previously unknown, and 50 may be exported to the periplasm or outer membrane, rendering them accessible as therapeutic or vaccine targets.
Antiviral immunity against a pathogen is mounted upon recognition by the host of virally associated structures. One of these viral 'signatures', double-stranded (ds) RNA, is a replication product of most viruses within infected cells and is sensed by Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and the recently identified cytosolic RNA helicases RIG-I (retinoic acid inducible gene I, also known as Ddx58) and Mda5 (melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5, also known as Ifih1 or Helicard). Both helicases detect dsRNA, and through their protein-interacting CARD domains, relay an undefined signal resulting in the activation of the transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-kappaB. Here we describe Cardif, a new CARD-containing adaptor protein that interacts with RIG-I and recruits IKKalpha, IKKbeta and IKKvarepsilon kinases by means of its C-terminal region, leading to the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3. Overexpression of Cardif results in interferon-beta and NF-kappaB promoter activation, and knockdown of Cardif by short interfering RNA inhibits RIG-I-dependent antiviral responses. Cardif is targeted and inactivated by NS3-4A, a serine protease from hepatitis C virus known to block interferon-beta production. Cardif thus functions as an adaptor, linking the cytoplasmic dsRNA receptor RIG-I to the initiation of antiviral programmes.
