DNA breaks are extremely harmful lesions that need to be repaired efficiently throughout the genome. However, the packaging of DNA into nucleosomes is a significant barrier to DNA repair, and the mechanisms of repair in the context of chromatin are poorly understood. Here we show that lysine 56 (K56) acetylation is an abundant modification of newly synthesized histone H3 molecules that are incorporated into chromosomes during S phase. Defects in the acetylation of K56 in histone H3 result in sensitivity to genotoxic agents that cause DNA strand breaks during replication. In the absence of DNA damage, the acetylation of histone H3 K56 largely disappears in G2. In contrast, cells with DNA breaks maintain high levels of acetylation, and the persistence of the modification is dependent on DNA damage checkpoint proteins. We suggest that the acetylation of histone H3 K56 creates a favourable chromatin environment for DNA repair and that a key component of the DNA damage response is to preserve this acetylation.
Oncogenes discovered in retroviruses such as Rous sarcoma virus were generated by transduction of cellular proto-oncogenes into the viral genome. Several different kinds of junctions between the viral and proto-oncogene sequences have been found in different viruses. A system of retrovirus vectors and a protocol that mimicked this transduction during a single cycle of retrovirus replication was developed. The transduction involved the formation of a chimeric viral-cellular RNA, strand switching of the reverse transcription growing point from an infectious retrovirus to the chimeric RNA, and often a subsequent deletion during the rest of viral DNA synthesis. A short region of sequence identity was frequently used for the strand switching. The rate of this process was about 0.1 to 1 percent of the rate of homologous retroviral recombination.
When simian virus 40 (SV40) infects host cells, the viral genes are expressed in two phases. Early in infection, the virus genome is transcribed and translated to yield two related proteins, 'large T' and 'small t' antigens. Later the rate of synthesis of the early messenger RNA falls and the viral genes coding for the coat proteins are transcribed and translated. Early gene transcription is inhibited only when an active large T antigen is present in the cell (for review see ref. 1). These and other observations have led to the hypothesis that T antigen acts as a negative feedback repressor of its own RNA transcript. The properties of SV40 tsA mutants, which produce temperature-sensitive T antigen, provide evidence for another role of T antigen--in the initiation of viral DNA replication. Mutations around the origin of DNA replication in SV40 lead to a cis-acting defect in DNA replication. These mutations fall outside the region of the A gene which codes for T antigen but within the region known to bind T antigen and the closely related and more easily prepared D2T protein which is synthesized by an adeno-SV40 hybrid virus Ad2D2 and seems to differ from SV40 T antigen only in its amino-terminal segment. Revertants of origin-defective mutants have been isolated with second site mutations within the DNA A gene coding sequence. These data support the view that T antigen modulates transcription and replication of SV40 DNA by binding to one or more sites in and around the viral origin of replication. We present here evidence to show that mutants of SV40 carrying constructed mutations in the regulatory region show reduced binding of D2T protein in vitro. This is the first demonstration in a eukaryote that a mutation in a regulatory DNA sequence alters the binding of a controlling protein in vitro.
Cell cycle checkpoints are implemented to safeguard the genome, avoiding the accumulation of genetic errors. Checkpoint loss results in genomic instability and contributes to the evolution of cancer. Among G1-, S-, G2- and M-phase checkpoints, genetic studies indicate the role of an intact S-phase checkpoint in maintaining genome integrity. Although the basic framework of the S-phase checkpoint in multicellular organisms has been outlined, the mechanistic details remain to be elucidated. Human chromosome-11 band-q23 translocations disrupting the MLL gene lead to poor prognostic leukaemias. Here we assign MLL as a novel effector in the mammalian S-phase checkpoint network and identify checkpoint dysfunction as an underlying mechanism of MLL leukaemias. MLL is phosphorylated at serine 516 by ATR in response to genotoxic stress in the S phase, which disrupts its interaction with, and hence its degradation by, the SCF(Skp2) E3 ligase, leading to its accumulation. Stabilized MLL protein accumulates on chromatin, methylates histone H3 lysine 4 at late replication origins and inhibits the loading of CDC45 to delay DNA replication. Cells deficient in MLL showed radioresistant DNA synthesis and chromatid-type genomic abnormalities, indicative of S-phase checkpoint dysfunction. Reconstitution of Mll(-/-) (Mll also known as Mll1) mouse embryonic fibroblasts with wild-type but not S516A or DSET mutant MLL rescues the S-phase checkpoint defects. Moreover, murine myeloid progenitor cells carrying an Mll-CBP knock-in allele that mimics human t(11;16) leukaemia show a severe radioresistant DNA synthesis phenotype. MLL fusions function as dominant negative mutants that abrogate the ATR-mediated phosphorylation/stabilization of wild-type MLL on damage to DNA, and thus compromise the S-phase checkpoint. Together, our results identify MLL as a key constituent of the mammalian DNA damage response pathway and show that deregulation of the S-phase checkpoint incurred by MLL translocations probably contributes to the pathogenesis of human MLL leukaemias.
The oncoprotein large tumour antigen (LTag) is encoded by the DNA tumour virus simian virus 40. LTag transforms cells and induces tumours in animals by altering the functions of tumour suppressors (including pRB and p53) and other key cellular proteins. LTag is also a molecular machine that distorts/melts the replication origin of the viral genome and unwinds duplex DNA. LTag therefore seems to be a functional homologue of the eukaryotic minichromosome maintenance (MCM) complex. Here we present the X-ray structure of a hexameric LTag with DNA helicase activity. The structure identifies the p53-binding surface and reveals the structural basis of hexamerization. The hexamer contains a long, positively charged channel with an unusually large central chamber that binds both single-stranded and double-stranded DNA. The hexamer organizes into two tiers that can potentially rotate relative to each other through connecting alpha-helices to expand/constrict the channel, producing an 'iris' effect that could be used for distorting or melting the origin and unwinding DNA at the replication fork.
Layered on top of information conveyed by DNA sequence and chromatin are higher order structures that encompass portions of chromosomes, entire chromosomes, and even whole genomes. Interphase chromosomes are not positioned randomly within the nucleus, but instead adopt preferred conformations. Disparate DNA elements co-localize into functionally defined aggregates or 'factories' for transcription and DNA replication. In budding yeast, Drosophila and many other eukaryotes, chromosomes adopt a Rabl configuration, with arms extending from centromeres adjacent to the spindle pole body to telomeres that abut the nuclear envelope. Nonetheless, the topologies and spatial relationships of chromosomes remain poorly understood. Here we developed a method to globally capture intra- and inter-chromosomal interactions, and applied it to generate a map at kilobase resolution of the haploid genome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The map recapitulates known features of genome organization, thereby validating the method, and identifies new features. Extensive regional and higher order folding of individual chromosomes is observed. Chromosome XII exhibits a striking conformation that implicates the nucleolus as a formidable barrier to interaction between DNA sequences at either end. Inter-chromosomal contacts are anchored by centromeres and include interactions among transfer RNA genes, among origins of early DNA replication and among sites where chromosomal breakpoints occur. Finally, we constructed a three-dimensional model of the yeast genome. Our findings provide a glimpse of the interface between the form and function of a eukaryotic genome.
A molecular clone of the AIDS-associated retrovirus (ARV-2) was transfected into human T lymphocyte and monocyte cell lines as well as mouse, mink, monkey, and human fibroblast lines. A replicating virus with cytopathic and biologic properties of ARV-2 was recovered from all the cell lines. The animal and human fibroblast cells are resistant to direct infection by ARV, and in these experiments virus production in the fibroblast lines, especially mouse, was reduced compared to human lymphocytes. However, human fibroblasts were more permissive to virus expression than mouse cells. These results show that, whereas the primary block to ARV infection in certain cells may occur at the cell surface, intracellular mechanisms can also participate in controlling virus replication. The results have relevance to vaccine development and encourage further work with modified molecular clones to examine regions of the ARV genome necessary for cytopathology and replication.
Herpesviruses, such as murine and human cytomegalovirus (MCMV and HCMV), can establish a persistent infection within the host and have diverse mechanisms as protection from host immune defences. Several herpesvirus genes that are homologous to host immune modulators have been identified, and are implicated in viral evasion of the host immune response. The discovery of a viral major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I homologue, encoded by HCMV, led to speculation that it might function as an immune modulator and disrupt presentation of peptides by MHC class I to cytotoxic T cells. However, there is no evidence concerning the biological significance of this gene during viral infection. Recent analysis of the MCMV genome has also demonstrated the presence of a MHC class I homologue. Here we show that a recombinant MCMV, in which the gene encoding the class I homologue has been disrupted, has severely restricted replication during the acute stage of infection compared with wild-type MCMV. We demonstrate by in vivo depletion studies that natural killer (NK) cells are responsible for the attenuated phenotype of the mutant. Thus the viral MHC class I homologue contributes to immune evasion through interference with NK cell-mediated clearance.
In viruses, as in eukaryotes, elaborate mechanisms have evolved to protect the genome and to ensure its timely replication and reliable transmission to progeny. Influenza A viruses are enveloped, spherical or filamentous structures, ranging from 80 to 120 nm in diameter. Inside each envelope is a viral genome consisting of eight single-stranded negative-sense RNA segments of 890 to 2,341 nucleotides each. These segments are associated with nucleoprotein and three polymerase subunits, designated PA, PB1 and PB2; the resultant ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) resemble a twisted rod (10-15 nm in width and 30-120 nm in length) that is folded back and coiled on itself. Late in viral infection, newly synthesized RNPs are transported from the nucleus to the plasma membrane, where they are incorporated into progeny virions capable of infecting other cells. Here we show, by transmission electron microscopy of serially sectioned virions, that the RNPs of influenza A virus are organized in a distinct pattern (seven segments of different lengths surrounding a central segment). The individual RNPs are suspended from the interior of the viral envelope at the distal end of the budding virion and are oriented perpendicular to the budding tip. This finding argues against random incorporation of RNPs into virions, supporting instead a model in which each segment contains specific incorporation signals that enable the RNPs to be recruited and packaged as a complete set. A selective mechanism of RNP incorporation into virions and the unique organization of the eight RNP segments may be crucial to maintaining the integrity of the viral genome during repeated cycles of replication.
In infected cells, the RNA genomes of RNA tumour viruses are copied into DNA by a virus-encoded reverse transcriptase enzyme. This transfer of information from RNA into DNA was thought to be a unique feature of RNA tumour viruses, but recent results suggest it may be a more general strategy. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) has a double-stranded DNA genome, and it has recently been shown that the minus DNA strand of the HBV genome is copied from a plus-strand RNA template, leading to the suggestion that reverse transcription is central to the life cycle of HBV. More recently it has been suggested that the replication cycle of a plant virus, cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV), includes a reverse transcription step. We report here the existence of amino acid sequence homology between retroviral reverse transcriptase and the putative polymerases of HBV and CaMV.
When prototrophic yeast cells are cultured under nutrient-limited conditions that mimic growth in the wild, rather than in the high-glucose solutions used in most laboratory studies, they exhibit a robustly periodic metabolic cycle. Over a cycle of 4 to 5 hours, yeast cells rhythmically alternate between glycolysis and respiration. The cell division cycle is tightly constrained to the reductive phase of this yeast metabolic cycle, with DNA replication taking place only during the glycolytic phase. We show that cell cycle mutants impeded in metabolic cycle-directed restriction of cell division exhibit substantial increases in spontaneous mutation rate. In addition, disruption of the gene encoding a DNA checkpoint kinase that couples the cell division cycle to the circadian cycle abolishes synchrony of the metabolic and cell cycles. Thus, circadian, metabolic, and cell division cycles may be coordinated similarly as an evolutionarily conserved means of preserving genome integrity.
Asthma is caused by a combination of poorly understood genetic and environmental factors. We have systematically mapped the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the presence of childhood onset asthma by genome-wide association. We characterized more than 317,000 SNPs in DNA from 994 patients with childhood onset asthma and 1,243 non-asthmatics, using family and case-referent panels. Here we show multiple markers on chromosome 17q21 to be strongly and reproducibly associated with childhood onset asthma in family and case-referent panels with a combined P value of P < 10(-12). In independent replication studies the 17q21 locus showed strong association with diagnosis of childhood asthma in 2,320 subjects from a cohort of German children (P = 0.0003) and in 3,301 subjects from the British 1958 Birth Cohort (P = 0.0005). We systematically evaluated the relationships between markers of the 17q21 locus and transcript levels of genes in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines from children in the asthma family panel used in our association study. The SNPs associated with childhood asthma were consistently and strongly associated (P < 10(-22)) in cis with transcript levels of ORMDL3, a member of a gene family that encodes transmembrane proteins anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum. The results indicate that genetic variants regulating ORMDL3 expression are determinants of susceptibility to childhood asthma.
Among cellular organisms, symbiotic bacteria provide the extreme examples of genome degradation and reduction. However, only isolated snapshots of eroding symbiont genomes have previously been available. We documented the dynamics of symbiont genome evolution by sequencing seven strains of Buchnera aphidicola from pea aphid hosts. We estimated a spontaneous mutation rate of at least 4 x 10(-9) substitutions per site per replication, which is more than 10 times as high as the rates previously estimated for any bacteria. We observed a high rate of small insertions and deletions associated with abundant DNA homopolymers, and occasional larger deletions. Although purifying selection eliminates many mutations, some persist, resulting in ongoing loss of genes and DNA from this already tiny genome. Our results provide a general model for the stepwise process leading to genome reduction.
DNA methylation of CpG dinucleotides is an important epigenetic modification of mammalian genomes and is essential for the regulation of chromatin structure, of gene expression and of genome stability. Differences in DNA methylation patterns underlie a wide range of biological processes, such as genomic imprinting, inactivation of the X chromosome, embryogenesis, and carcinogenesis. Inheritance of the epigenetic methylation pattern is mediated by the enzyme DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), which methylates newly synthesized CpG sequences during DNA replication, depending on the methylation status of the template strands. The protein UHRF1 (also known as Np95 and ICBP90) recognizes hemi-methylation sites via a SET and RING-associated (SRA) domain and directs Dnmt1 to these sites. Here we report the crystal structures of the SRA domain in free and hemi-methylated DNA-bound states. The SRA domain folds into a globular structure with a basic concave surface formed by highly conserved residues. Binding of DNA to the concave surface causes a loop and an amino-terminal tail of the SRA domain to fold into DNA interfaces at the major and minor grooves of the methylation site. In contrast to fully methylated CpG sites recognized by the methyl-CpG-binding domain, the methylcytosine base at the hemi-methylated site is flipped out of the DNA helix in the SRA-DNA complex and fits tightly into a protein pocket on the concave surface. The complex structure suggests that the successive flip out of the pre-existing methylated cytosine and the target cytosine to be methylated is associated with the coordinated transfer of the hemi-methylated CpG site from UHRF1 to Dnmt1.
The genomes of many (+)-stranded RNA viruses, including plant viruses and alphaviruses, consist of polycistronic RNAs whose internal genes are expressed via subgenomic messenger RNAs. The mechanism(s) by which these subgenomic mRNAs arise are poorly understood. Based on indirect evidence, three models have been proposed: (1) internal initiation by the replicase on the (-)-strand of genomic RNA, (2) premature termination during (-)-strand synthesis, followed by independent replication of the subgenomic RNA and (3) processing by nuclease cleavage of genome-length RNA. Using an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (replicase) preparation from barley leaves infected with brome mosaic virus (BMV) to synthesize the viral subgenomic RNA in vitro, we now provide evidence that subgenomic RNA arises by internal initiation on the (-)-strand of genomic RNA. We believe that this also represents the first in vitro demonstration of a replicase from a eukaryotic (+)-stranded RNA virus capable of initiating synthesis of (+)-sense RNA.
Nucleosome disruption and replacement are crucial activities that maintain epigenomes, but these highly dynamic processes have been difficult to study. Here, we describe a direct method for measuring nucleosome turnover dynamics genome-wide. We found that nucleosome turnover is most rapid over active gene bodies, epigenetic regulatory elements, and replication origins in Drosophila cells. Nucleosomes turn over faster at sites for trithorax-group than polycomb-group protein binding, suggesting that nucleosome turnover differences underlie their opposing activities and challenging models for epigenetic inheritance that rely on stability of histone marks. Our results establish a general strategy for studying nucleosome dynamics and uncover nucleosome turnover differences across the genome that are likely to have functional importance for epigenome maintenance, gene regulation, and control of DNA replication.
The human T-cell leukemia viruses (HTLV) are replication-competent retroviruses whose genomes contain gag, pol, and env genes as well as a fourth gene, termed x, which is believed to be the transforming gene of HTLV. The product of the x gene is now shown to be encoded by a 2.1-kilobase messenger RNA derived by splicing of at least two introns. By means of S1 nuclease mapping of this RNA and nucleic acid sequence analysis of a complementary DNA clone, the complete primary structure of the x-gene product has been determined. It is encoded by sequences containing the env initiation codon and one nucleotide of the next codon spliced to the major open reading frame of the HTLV-I and HTLV-II x gene.
Here we determine the complete genomic sequence of the gram negative, gamma-Proteobacterium Vibrio cholerae El Tor N16961 to be 4,033,460 base pairs (bp). The genome consists of two circular chromosomes of 2,961,146 bp and 1,072,314 bp that together encode 3,885 open reading frames. The vast majority of recognizable genes for essential cell functions (such as DNA replication, transcription, translation and cell-wall biosynthesis) and pathogenicity (for example, toxins, surface antigens and adhesins) are located on the large chromosome. In contrast, the small chromosome contains a larger fraction (59%) of hypothetical genes compared with the large chromosome (42%), and also contains many more genes that appear to have origins other than the gamma-Proteobacteria. The small chromosome also carries a gene capture system (the integron island) and host 'addiction' genes that are typically found on plasmids; thus, the small chromosome may have originally been a megaplasmid that was captured by an ancestral Vibrio species. The V. cholerae genomic sequence provides a starting point for understanding how a free-living, environmental organism emerged to become a significant human bacterial pathogen.
Little is known about the dynamics of chromosomes in interphase nuclei. By tagging four chromosomal regions with a green fluorescent protein fusion to lac repressor, we monitored the movement and subnuclear position of specific sites in the yeast genome, sampling at short time intervals. We found that early and late origins of replication are highly mobile in G1 phase, frequently moving at or faster than 0.5 micrometers/10 seconds, in an energy-dependent fashion. The rapid diffusive movement of chromatin detected in G1 becomes constrained in S phase through a mechanism dependent on active DNA replication. In contrast, telomeres and centromeres provide replication-independent constraint on chromatin movement in both G1 and S phases.
West Nile virus (WNV), and related flaviviruses such as tick-borne encephalitis, Japanese encephalitis, yellow fever and dengue viruses, constitute a significant global human health problem. However, our understanding of the molecular interaction of such flaviviruses with mammalian host cells is limited. WNV encodes only 10 proteins, implying that it may use many cellular proteins for infection. WNV enters the cytoplasm through pH-dependent endocytosis, undergoes cycles of translation and replication, assembles progeny virions in association with endoplasmic reticulum, and exits along the secretory pathway. RNA interference (RNAi) presents a powerful forward genetics approach to dissect virus-host cell interactions. Here we report the identification of 305 host proteins that affect WNV infection, using a human-genome-wide RNAi screen. Functional clustering of the genes revealed a complex dependence of this virus on host cell physiology, requiring a wide variety of molecules and cellular pathways for successful infection. We further demonstrate a requirement for the ubiquitin ligase CBLL1 in WNV internalization, a post-entry role for the endoplasmic-reticulum-associated degradation pathway in viral infection, and the monocarboxylic acid transporter MCT4 as a viral replication resistance factor. By extending this study to dengue virus, we show that flaviviruses have both overlapping and unique interaction strategies with host cells. This study provides a comprehensive molecular portrait of WNV-human cell interactions that forms a model for understanding single plus-stranded RNA virus infection, and reveals potential antiviral targets.
The stable propagation of genetic information requires that the entire genome of an organism be faithfully replicated once and only once each cell cycle. In eukaryotes, this replication is initiated at hundreds to thousands of replication origins distributed over the genome, each of which must be prohibited from re-initiating DNA replication within every cell cycle. How cells prevent re-initiation has been a long-standing question in cell biology. In several eukaryotes, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) have been implicated in promoting the block to re-initiation, but exactly how they perform this function is unclear. Here we show that B-type CDKs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae prevent re-initiation through multiple overlapping mechanisms, including phosphorylation of the origin recognition complex (ORC), downregulation of Cdc6 activity, and nuclear exclusion of the Mcm2-7 complex. Only when all three inhibitory pathways are disrupted do origins re-initiate DNA replication in G2/M cells. These studies show that each of these three independent mechanisms of regulation is functionally important.
I have presented a series of observations on macromolecular interactions which occur during the terminal stages of lens cell differentiation. These are summarized in Fig. 2. Other cell types that undergo similar changes are the erythrocyte and skin cells (epidermis) during the process of keratinization. These other cells are also involved in the synthesis of highly specific proteins, and there are indications that molecular alterations similar to those described for the lens may also occur in these cells (26). Thus, elucidation of a specific series of macromolecular initeractions such as those described may provide a basis for the biochemical definition of the terminal stages of cellular differentiation. Differentiation of the reticulocyte, for example, involves inactivation of the nucleus, stabilization of mRNA, and possibly a ribosomal breakdown such as I have described here (26). Furthermore, elucidation of the mechanisms of reactions involving the initiation of tissue-specific protein synthesis and suLbsequent nuclear inactivation, stabilization of mRNA, and breakdown of the ribosomes may provide a basis for defining the mechanisms of terminal cellular differentiation. The lens cell has reached its highest form of cellular differentiation when it has formed the fiber cell. With respect to the mechanism of lens fiber cell formation, we would like to know whether specific biochemical changes such as gamma-crystallin synthesis are intiniately linked to fiber cell formation-that is, whether gamma-crystallins are required to bring about the formation of a fiber cell. The potential for synthesizing gamma-crystallins is inherent in the genome of the cell. This part of the genome is nonfunctional in the epithelial cell. Can these genes be activated without bringing about a simultaneous cellular elongation, nuclear inactivation and loss of cellular replication, stabilization of mRNA, and breakdown of the ribosomes? The degree of coupling or uncoupling of tissue-specific-protein synthesis to morphogenesis is an important part of the mechanism of cellular differentiation. We feel that we have now reached the stage where we can begin to answer these questions.
Transposons are a class of genetic elements that can move from one site in a cell's genome to another independently of the cell's general recombination system. Little is known about the mechanism of transposition of compound transposons such as Tn5, but it is thought that a transposon-encoded protein (a transposase) must recognize the outer ends of the element and, together with host factors, catalyse the transfer of the internal DNA into a new site in a manner that may involve replication. It has previously been shown that the synthesis of an IS50R-encoded protein (protein 1) is an essential requirement for Tn5 transposition. Here we demonstrate that a structure containing only the outer 186 base pairs (bp) of both inverted repeats is capable of being efficiently complemented to transpose in Escherichia coli, provided IS50R is located close by on the same replicon. In addition, Bal31-generated deletions indicate that 16-18 bp of the outer end of IS50L are required for transposition. This 16-18-bp sequence contains the 8-9-bp small inverted repeat present at each end of IS50 plus a 9-bp sequence which is homologous to an interrelated sequence present in four copies in the chromosomal origin of replication in a variety of Gram-negative bacteria. This sequence organization suggests that the ends of Tn5 may function to provide a recognition site for the Tn5 transposase adjacent to a sequence recognized by the host replication system.
Many aspects of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) life cycle have not been reproduced in cell culture, which has slowed research progress on this important human pathogen. Here, we describe a full-length HCV genome that replicates and produces virus particles that are infectious in cell culture (HCVcc). Replication of HCVcc was robust, producing nearly 10(5) infectious units per milliliter within 48 hours. Virus particles were filterable and neutralized with a monoclonal antibody against the viral glycoprotein E2. Viral entry was dependent on cellular expression of a putative HCV receptor, CD81. HCVcc replication was inhibited by interferon-alpha and by several HCV-specific antiviral compounds, suggesting that this in vitro system will aid in the search for improved antivirals.
RNA polymerase (Pol) II catalyses DNA-dependent RNA synthesis during gene transcription. There is, however, evidence that Pol II also possesses RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) activity. Pol II can use a homopolymeric RNA template, can extend RNA by several nucleotides in the absence of DNA, and has been implicated in the replication of the RNA genomes of hepatitis delta virus (HDV) and plant viroids. Here we show the intrinsic RdRP activity of Pol II with only pure polymerase, an RNA template-product scaffold and nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs). Crystallography reveals the template-product duplex in the site occupied by the DNA-RNA hybrid during transcription. RdRP activity resides at the active site used during transcription, but it is slower and less processive than DNA-dependent activity. RdRP activity is also obtained with part of the HDV antigenome. The complex of transcription factor IIS (TFIIS) with Pol II can cleave one HDV strand, create a reactive stem-loop in the hybrid site, and extend the new RNA 3' end. Short RNA stem-loops with a 5' extension suffice for activity, but their growth to a critical length apparently impairs processivity. The RdRP activity of Pol II provides a missing link in molecular evolution, because it suggests that Pol II evolved from an ancient replicase that duplicated RNA genomes.
Parasites of the phylum Apicomplexa include many important human and veterinary pathogens such as Plasmodium (malaria), Toxoplasma (a leading opportunistic infection associated with AIDS and congenital neurological birth defects), and Eimeria (an economically significant disease of poultry and cattle). Recent studies have identified an unusual organelle in these parasites: a plastid that appears to have been acquired by secondary endosymbiosis of a green alga. Here we show that replication of the apicomplexan plastid (apicoplast) genome in Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites can be specifically inhibited using ciprofloxacin, and that this inhibition blocks parasite replication. Moreover, parasite death occurs with peculiar kinetics that are identical to those observed after exposure to clindamycin and macrolide antibiotics, which have been proposed to target protein synthesis in the apicoplast. Conversely, clindamycin (and functionally related compounds) immediately inhibits plastid replication upon drug application-the earliest effect so far described for these antibiotics. Our results directly link apicoplast function with parasite survival, validating this intriguing organelle as an effective target for parasiticidal drug design.
The animal cell genome is organized into a series of replicons with an average size of 50-300 kilobases; each of these units is characterized by its own origin of replication which serves as the point of initiation for DNA synthesis. In animal viruses, origin usage can be regulated by cis-acting elements, and in some cases, replication may be cell-type specific. Little is known, however, about the organization and control of endogenous tissue-specific gene replication. To understand this process, we have used a replication direction assay to examine DNA fragments covering more than 200 kilobases of the human beta-like globin domain, and have identified a single bidirectional origin located upstream of the beta-globin itself. This locus is used to initiate DNA synthesis in expressing cells, where the globin domain replicates early, and in non-expressing cells, which are characterized by late replication of the same region. Deletion of this origin sequence, as occurs in the haemoglobin Lepore syndrome, cancels bidirectional DNA synthesis at this site and leads to a striking reversal of replication direction upstream to the locus. This represents the first genetic proof of the existence of specific, discrete origins of replication in animal cells.
All viruses rely on host cell proteins and their associated mechanisms to complete the viral life cycle. Identifying the host molecules that participate in each step of virus replication could provide valuable new targets for antiviral therapy, but this goal may take several decades to achieve with conventional forward genetic screening methods and mammalian cell cultures. Here we describe a novel genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen in Drosophila that can be used to identify host genes important for influenza virus replication. After modifying influenza virus to allow infection of Drosophila cells and detection of influenza virus gene expression, we tested an RNAi library against 13,071 genes (90% of the Drosophila genome), identifying over 100 for which suppression in Drosophila cells significantly inhibited or stimulated reporter gene (Renilla luciferase) expression from an influenza-virus-derived vector. The relevance of these findings to influenza virus infection of mammalian cells is illustrated for a subset of the Drosophila genes identified; that is, for three implicated Drosophila genes, the corresponding human homologues ATP6V0D1, COX6A1 and NXF1 are shown to have key functions in the replication of H5N1 and H1N1 influenza A viruses, but not vesicular stomatitis virus or vaccinia virus, in human HEK 293 cells. Thus, we have demonstrated the feasibility of using genome-wide RNAi screens in Drosophila to identify previously unrecognized host proteins that are required for influenza virus replication. This could accelerate the development of new classes of antiviral drugs for chemoprophylaxis and treatment, which are urgently needed given the obstacles to rapid development of an effective vaccine against pandemic influenza and the probable emergence of strains resistant to available drugs.
Satellite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV) is the spherical satellite to an obligatory rod-shaped helper tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), which is required for replication. STMV has 60 protein subunits of M(r) 17,500 on a T = 1 icosahedral capsid containing a single-stranded RNA genome of 1,059 bases. STMV appears similar to another virus, STNV, but is approximately 20 per cent smaller. It shows no amino-acid homology or immunological cross-reactivity with either STNV or its host TMV. Here we report the X-ray crystal structure of STMV, which shows that the coat protein of STMV contains a 'Swiss roll' beta-barrel. An amino-terminal strand extends more than 60A and is primarily responsible for quaternary interactions. Each capsid dimer is associated with a segment of genomic RNA double helix comprising seven base pairs. The dyad of each protein dimer is coincident with that of the central base pair of the associated RNA segment whose helix axis is directed along an icosahedral edge. Protein-nucleic acid interactions are extensive. The RNA helices, which have additional stacked bases at their 3' termini, differ significantly from canonical nucleic acid helical forms.
Highly activated transcription is associated with eukaryotic genome instability, resulting in increased rates of mitotic recombination and mutagenesis. The association between high transcription and genome stability is probably due to a variety of factors including an enhanced accumulation of DNA damage, transcription-associated supercoiling, collision between replication forks and the transcription machinery, and the persistence of RNA-DNA hybrids. In the case of transcription-associated mutagenesis, we previously showed that there is a direct proportionality between the level of transcription and the mutation rate in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and that the molecular nature of the mutations is affected by highly activated transcription. Here we show that the accumulation of apurinic/apyrimidinic sites is greatly enhanced in highly transcribed yeast DNA. We further demonstrate that most apurinic/apyrimidinic sites in highly transcribed DNA are derived from the removal of uracil, the presence of which is linked to direct incorporation of dUTP in place of dTTP. These results show an unexpected relationship between transcription and the fidelity of DNA synthesis, and raise intriguing cell biological issues with regard to nucleotide pool compartmentalization.
The transition from independent molecular entities to cellular structures with integrated behaviors was a crucial aspect of the origin of life. We show that simple physical principles can mediate a coordinated interaction between genome and compartment boundary, independent of any genomic functions beyond self-replication. RNA, encapsulated in fatty acid vesicles, exerts an osmotic pressure on the vesicle membrane that drives the uptake of additional membrane components, leading to membrane growth at the expense of relaxed vesicles, which shrink. Thus, more efficient RNA replication could cause faster cell growth, leading to the emergence of Darwinian evolution at the cellular level.
In eukaryotes the entire genome is replicated precisely once in each cell cycle. No DNA is re-replicated until passage through mitosis into the next S-phase. We have used a cell-free DNA replication system from Xenopus eggs to determine which mitotic changes permit DNA to re-replicate. The system efficiently replicates sperm chromatin, but no DNA is re-replicated in a single incubation. This letter shows that nuclei replicated in vitro are unable to re-replicate in fresh replication extract until they have passed through mitosis. However, the only mitotic change which is required to permit re-replication is nuclear envelope permeabilization. This suggests a simple model for the control of DNA replication in the cell cycle, whereby an essential replication factor is unable to cross the nuclear envelope but can only gain access to DNA when the nuclear envelope breaks down at mitosis.
To gain insight into how genomic information is translated into cellular and developmental programs, the Drosophila model organism Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (modENCODE) project is comprehensively mapping transcripts, histone modifications, chromosomal proteins, transcription factors, replication proteins and intermediates, and nucleosome properties across a developmental time course and in multiple cell lines. We have generated more than 700 data sets and discovered protein-coding, noncoding, RNA regulatory, replication, and chromatin elements, more than tripling the annotated portion of the Drosophila genome. Correlated activity patterns of these elements reveal a functional regulatory network, which predicts putative new functions for genes, reveals stage- and tissue-specific regulators, and enables gene-expression prediction. Our results provide a foundation for directed experimental and computational studies in Drosophila and related species and also a model for systematic data integration toward comprehensive genomic and functional annotation.
Bacterial chromosomes are highly compacted structures and share many properties with their eukaryote counterparts, despite not being organized into chromatin or being contained within a cell nucleus. Proteins conserved across all branches of life act in chromosome organization, and common mechanisms maintain genome integrity and ensure faithful replication. The principles that underlie chromosome segregation in bacteria and eukaryotes share similarities, although bacteria segregate DNA as it replicates and lack a eukaryote-like mitotic apparatus for segregating chromosomes. This may be because the distances that newly replicated bacterial chromosomes move apart before cell division are small as compared to those in eukaryotes. Bacteria specify positional information, which determines where cell division will occur and which places the replication machinery and chromosomal loci at defined locations that change during cell cycle progression.
Data derived from both pronuclear transplantation experiments and classical genetic experiments indicate that the maternal and paternal genetic contributions to the mammalian zygote nucleus do not function equivalently during subsequent development. These observations have been interpreted as resulting from differential 'genome imprinting' during male and female gametogenesis. The molecular mechanism responsible for genome imprinting is unknown, but data gathered to date require that the mechanism fulfill at least four criteria: (1) the imprint must be physically linked to the pronucleus; (2) the imprint must persist through DNA replication and cell division; (3) the mechanism must be capable of affecting gene expression; and (4) the mechanism must be capable of switching the identity of the imprint from one sex to the other in successive generations. One molecular mechanism which could satisfy the first three criteria is differential DNA methylation during gametogenesis itself, or before formation of the zygote nucleus during embryogenesis. We present data indicating that the methylation patterns of exogenous DNA sequences in transgenic mice can be changed by switching their gamete of origin in successive generations. These data suggest that DNA methylation can also satisfy the fourth criterion for an imprinting mechanism.
Difficulties associated with in vitro manipulation and culture of the early chicken embryo have restricted generation of transgenic chickens to approaches that use replication-competent retroviruses. The need to produce transgenic chickens in the absence of replicating virus prompted development of a new method of gene transfer into the chicken. Microinjection of the replication-defective reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) vector ME111 beneath unincubated chicken embryo blastoderms results in infection of germline stem cells. This vector contains genetic information exogenous to the chicken genome, including both the herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase gene and the Tn5 neomycin phosphotransferase gene. About 8 percent of male birds hatched from injected embryos contained vector DNA in their semen. All four positive males tested passed vector sequences onto their progeny. Analysis of G1 offspring showed that gonads of G0 male birds were mosaic with respect to insertion of vector provirus. Thus, primordial germ cells present in the unincubated chicken embryo blastoderm are susceptible to infection by defective REV vectors.
The results of molecular hybridization experiments with high-molecular-weight RNA isolated from RNA tumor viruses and DNA from normal cells suggest that RNA tumor virus genomes originate from cell genes. Some RNA tumor viruses (here called class 1) appear to have been generated in recent times in that their RNA is closely related in nucleotide sequence to certain cell genes (class 1 genes). A second class of RNA tumor viruses (here called class 2) is more distantly related to genomic information of normal cells. Structural properties of the RNA of RNA tumor viruses lead us to propose that the tumor virus RNA is originated when RNA transcripts of class 1 genes are processed by a mechanism we call "paraprocessing." We postulate that RNA paraprocessing is normally used only at particular times during differentiation and is characterized by the cytoplasmic appearance of high-molecular-weight RNA chains containing terminal polyadenylic acid (200 residues). Paraprocessing of class 1 gene transcripts in committed or differentiated cells is considered to be aberrant in transcription that can lead to the generation of an RNA tumor virus genome. If the paraprocessed class 1 gene transcript codes for a reverse transcriptase, replication of the RNA becomes possible. Transfer of the replicating RNA to a new cell can result in genetic change such that the virus genome mutates, differing from the original progenitor genes. We propose that this genetic change causes class 1 viruses to become class 2. These ideas are applied to evidence concerning the biology of infection of RNA tumor viruses and concerning the involvement of RNA tumor viruses in human cancer. Genetic change can also occur during the origination of an RNA tumor virus genome by repeated reverse transcription and recombination (45) or by genetic alteration of particularly changeable cell genes ("hot spots") (43).
High mutation frequency during reverse transcription has a principal role in the genetic variation of primate lentiviral populations. It is the main driving force for the generation of drug resistance and the escape from immune surveillance. G to A hypermutation is one of the characteristics of primate lentiviruses, as well as other retroviruses, during replication in vivo and in cell culture. The molecular mechanisms of this process, however, remain to be clarified. Here, we demonstrate that CEM15 (also known as apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G; APOBEC3G), an endogenous inhibitor of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) replication, is a cytidine deaminase and is able to induce G to A hypermutation in newly synthesized viral DNA. This effect can be counteracted by the HIV-1 virion infectivity factor (Vif). It seems that this viral DNA mutator is a viral defence mechanism in host cells that may induce either lethal hypermutation or instability of the incoming nascent viral reverse transcripts, which could account for the Vif-defective phenotype. Importantly, the accumulation of CEM15-mediated non-lethal hypermutation in the replicating viral genome could potently contribute to the genetic variation of primate lentiviral populations.
In mammalian cells, a conserved multiprotein complex of Mre11, Rad50 and NBS1 (also known as nibrin and p95) is important for double-strand break repair, meiotic recombination and telomere maintenance. This complex forms nuclear foci and may be a sensor of double-strand breaks. In the absence of the early region E4, the double-stranded DNA genome of adenovirus is joined into concatemers too large to be packaged. We have investigated the cellular proteins involved in this concatemer formation and how they are inactivated by E4 products during a wild-type infection. Here we show that concatemerization requires functional Mre11 and NBS1, and that these proteins are found at foci adjacent to viral replication centres. Infection with wild-type virus results in both reorganization and degradation of members of the Mre11-Rad50-NBS1 complex. These activities are mediated by three viral oncoproteins that prevent concatemerization. This targeting of cellular proteins involved in genomic stability suggests a mechanism for 'hit-and-run' transformation observed for these viral oncoproteins.
The study of recombination in prokaryotes has been facilitated by the availability of recombinational mutants and simple genetic elements such as phages and plasmids. These small but defined molecules of DNA have been especially useful for electron microscopic analysis of structural detail of molecules undergoing recombination both in vivo and in vitro. A limitation in the structural analysis of plasmid recombination is the absolute number of recombining molecules which can be identified and analysed amidst a background of nonrecombining molecules. This limitation would be of even greater consequence in studies of genetic recombination in animal cells. We therefore chose virus-infected animal cells as a model system for the study of the molecular mechanism of genetic recombination in higher organisms. HeLa cells infected with adenovirus serotype 2 (Ad-2) offer several advantages for studying recombination: (1) the virus contains a small and well characterized genome of about 35 kilobases; (2) a large amount of Ad-2 DNA is accumulated during lytic infection and host DNA synthesis is suppressed; (3) Ad-2 recombines at a very high frequency; and (4) similar to phages, animal viruses and Ad-2 in particular are believed to use many of the host cell's enzymes in necessary metabolic processes, presumably including recombination. In this study we used electron microscopic techniques to visualize the structures of in vivo Ad-2 DNA recombination intermediates. Molecules were observed with structures at putative cross-over points which were consistent with the molecular mechanism of recombination proposed by Holliday. In addition, we observed Ad-2 DNA molecules engaged in recombination which were simultaneously serving as templates for replication and/or transcription. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first visualization of in vivo recombination intermediates of discrete DNA molecules isolated from eukaryotic cells.
Comparison of two closely related primate papovaviruses, simian virus 40 (SV40) and human BK virus (BKV), reveals that the only region of extensive divergence, the tandem sequences adjacent to the origins of DNA replication, is responsible in SV40 for enhancing early gene expression. This study demonstrates a similar enhancer function for the analogous repeated region in BKV. The dissimilarity in sequence of the BKV and SV40 enhancer elements suggests that they may have been acquired since SV40 and BKV diverged. A locus cloned from the human genome homologous to the BKV tandem repeats has been shown to function as low level enhancer element in mammalian cells. These data support the hypothesis that viral enhancer sequences may be evolutionarily related to host cell sequences.
An estimated 170 million persons worldwide are infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV), a major cause of chronic liver disease. Despite increasing knowledge of genome structure and individual viral proteins, studies on virus replication and pathogenesis have been hampered by the lack of reliable and efficient cell culture systems. A full-length consensus genome was cloned from viral RNA isolated from an infected human liver and used to construct subgenomic selectable replicons. Upon transfection into a human hepatoma cell line, these RNAs were found to replicate to high levels, permitting metabolic radiolabeling of viral RNA and proteins. This work defines the structure of HCV replicons functional in cell culture and provides the basis for a long-sought cellular system that should allow detailed molecular studies of HCV and the development of antiviral drugs.
The complete 1.66-megabase pair genome sequence of an autotrophic archaeon, Methanococcus jannaschii, and its 58- and 16-kilobase pair extrachromosomal elements have been determined by whole-genome random sequencing. A total of 1738 predicted protein-coding genes were identified; however, only a minority of these (38 percent) could be assigned a putative cellular role with high confidence. Although the majority of genes related to energy production, cell division, and metabolism in M. jannaschii are most similar to those found in Bacteria, most of the genes involved in transcription, translation, and replication in M. jannaschii are more similar to those found in Eukaryotes.
Single-stranded RNA viruses encompass broad classes of infectious agents and cause the common cold, cancer, AIDS and other serious health threats. Viral replication is regulated at many levels, including the use of conserved genomic RNA structures. Most potential regulatory elements in viral RNA genomes are uncharacterized. Here we report the structure of an entire HIV-1 genome at single nucleotide resolution using SHAPE, a high-throughput RNA analysis technology. The genome encodes protein structure at two levels. In addition to the correspondence between RNA and protein primary sequences, a correlation exists between high levels of RNA structure and sequences that encode inter-domain loops in HIV proteins. This correlation suggests that RNA structure modulates ribosome elongation to promote native protein folding. Some simple genome elements previously shown to be important, including the ribosomal gag-pol frameshift stem-loop, are components of larger RNA motifs. We also identify organizational principles for unstructured RNA regions, including splice site acceptors and hypervariable regions. These results emphasize that the HIV-1 genome and, potentially, many coding RNAs are punctuated by previously unrecognized regulatory motifs and that extensive RNA structure constitutes an important component of the genetic code.
The genes required for autonomous replication and incompatibility in the antibiotic resistance plasmids R100 and R1 have been located within a 2.5-kilobase region of the 90-kilobase genome, within which the incompatibility gene occupies a 1.3-kilobase region excluding the replication origin. We now report that three RNA species are synthesized in vitro from the 2.5-kilobase region, which R100 and R1 have in common. One, a long RNA molecule which is transcribed in the direction of DNA replication, probably acts as a messenger or a protein required for plasmid replication. The second RNA species, only 91 nucleotides long, is transcribed in the opposite direction, from a region of the DNA entirely contained within the first and known to specify incompatibility and copy control functions. The third RNA species, 150 bases long, is transcribed from a region including the replication origin; it may be a primer of DNA synthesis or, in conjunction with the second of the three RNA species, an influence in the control of replication.
During the evolution of cancer, the incipient tumour experiences 'oncogenic stress', which evokes a counter-response to eliminate such hazardous cells. However, the nature of this stress remains elusive, as does the inducible anti-cancer barrier that elicits growth arrest or cell death. Here we show that in clinical specimens from different stages of human tumours of the urinary bladder, breast, lung and colon, the early precursor lesions (but not normal tissues) commonly express markers of an activated DNA damage response. These include phosphorylated kinases ATM and Chk2, and phosphorylated histone H2AX and p53. Similar checkpoint responses were induced in cultured cells upon expression of different oncogenes that deregulate DNA replication. Together with genetic analyses, including a genome-wide assessment of allelic imbalances, our data indicate that early in tumorigenesis (before genomic instability and malignant conversion), human cells activate an ATR/ATM-regulated DNA damage response network that delays or prevents cancer. Mutations compromising this checkpoint, including defects in the ATM-Chk2-p53 pathway, might allow cell proliferation, survival, increased genomic instability and tumour progression.
Swi2/Snf2-type ATPases regulate genome-associated processes such as transcription, replication and repair by catalysing the disruption, assembly or remodelling of nucleosomes or other protein-DNA complexes. It has been suggested that ATP-driven motor activity along DNA disrupts target protein-DNA interactions in the remodelling reaction. However, the complex and highly specific remodelling reactions are poorly understood, mostly because of a lack of high-resolution structural information about how remodellers bind to their substrate proteins. Mot1 (modifier of transcription 1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, denoted BTAF1 in humans) is a Swi2/Snf2 enzyme that specifically displaces the TATA box binding protein (TBP) from the promoter DNA and regulates transcription globally by generating a highly dynamic TBP pool in the cell. As a Swi2/Snf2 enzyme that functions as a single polypeptide and interacts with a relatively simple substrate, Mot1 offers an ideal system from which to gain a better understanding of this important enzyme family. To reveal how Mot1 specifically disrupts TBP-DNA complexes, we combined crystal and electron microscopy structures of Mot1-TBP from Encephalitozoon cuniculi with biochemical studies. Here we show that Mot1 wraps around TBP and seems to act like a bottle opener: a spring-like array of 16 HEAT (huntingtin, elongation factor 3, protein phosphatase 2A and lipid kinase TOR) repeats grips the DNA-distal side of TBP via loop insertions, and the Swi2/Snf2 domain binds to upstream DNA, positioned to weaken the TBP-DNA interaction by DNA translocation. A 'latch' subsequently blocks the DNA-binding groove of TBP, acting as a chaperone to prevent DNA re-association and ensure efficient promoter clearance. This work shows how a remodelling enzyme can combine both motor and chaperone activities to achieve functional specificity using a conserved Swi2/Snf2 translocase.
The organization of chromatin affects all aspects of nuclear DNA metabolism in eukaryotes. H3.3 is an evolutionarily conserved histone variant and a key substrate for replication-independent chromatin assembly. Elimination of chromatin remodeling factor CHD1 in Drosophila embryos abolishes incorporation of H3.3 into the male pronucleus, renders the paternal genome unable to participate in zygotic mitoses, and leads to the development of haploid embryos. Furthermore, CHD1, but not ISWI, interacts with HIRA in cytoplasmic extracts. Our findings establish CHD1 as a major factor in replacement histone metabolism in the nucleus and reveal a critical role for CHD1 in the earliest developmental instances of genome-scale, replication-independent nucleosome assembly. Furthermore, our results point to the general requirement of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-utilizing motor proteins for histone deposition in vivo.
DNA regions which are composed of a single or relatively few short sequence motifs usually in tandem ('pure simple sequences') have been reported in the genomes of diverse species, and have been implicated in a range of functions including gene regulation, signals for gene conversion and recombination, and the replication of telomeres. They are thought to accumulate by DNA slippage and mispairing during replication and recombination or extension of single-strand ends. In order to systematize the range of DNA simplicity and the genetic nature of the regions that are simple, we have undertaken an extensive computer search of the DNA sequence library of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL). We show here that nearly all possible simple motifs occur 5-10 times more frequently than equivalent random motifs. Furthermore, a new computer algorithm reveals the widespread occurrence of significantly high levels of a new type of 'cryptic simplicity' in both coding and noncoding DNA. Cryptically simple regions are biased in nucleotide composition and consist of scrambled arrangements of repetitive motifs which differ within and between species. The universal existence of DNA simplicity from monotonous arrays of single motifs to variable permutations of relatively short-lived motifs suggests that ubiquitous slippage-like mechanisms are a major source of genetic variation in all regions of the genome, not predictable by the classical mutation process.
The notion that telomeres are essential for chromosome linearity stems from the existence of two chief dangers: inappropriate DNA damage response (DDR) reactions that mistake natural chromosome ends for double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs), and the progressive loss of DNA from chromosomal termini due to the end replication problem. Telomeres avert the former peril by binding sequence-specific end-protection factors that control the access of DDR activities. The latter threat is tackled by recruiting telomerase, a reverse transcriptase that uses an integral RNA subunit to template the addition of telomere repeats to chromosome ends. Here we describe an alternative mode of linear chromosome maintenance in which canonical telomeres are superseded by blocks of heterochromatin. We show that in the absence of telomerase, Schizosaccharomyces pombe cells can survive telomere sequence loss by continually amplifying and rearranging heterochromatic sequences. Because the heterochromatin assembly machinery is required for this survival mode, we have termed it 'HAATI' (heterochromatin amplification-mediated and telomerase-independent). HAATI uses the canonical end-protection protein Pot1 (ref. 4) and its interacting partner Ccq1 (ref. 5) to preserve chromosome linearity. The data suggest a model in which Ccq1 is recruited by the amplified heterochromatin and provides an anchor for Pot1, which accomplishes its end-protection function in the absence of its cognate DNA-binding sequence. HAATI resembles the chromosome end-maintenance strategy found in Drosophila melanogaster, which lacks specific telomere sequences but nonetheless assembles terminal heterochromatin structures that recruit end-protection factors. These findings reveal a previously unrecognized mode by which cancer cells might escape the requirement for telomerase activation, and offer a tool for studying genomes that sustain unusually high levels of heterochromatinization.
Evidence is presented that a small protein (VPg) is covalently attached to the 5'-terminal oligonucleotide VPg-pU-U-A-A-A-A-C-A-Gp of the polio genome, to nascent strands of the polio replicative intermediate and to poly(U) of minus strands. A model of polio RNA replication is proposed implicating VPg in initiation of RNA symthesis, possibly as primer.
Checkpoint-mediated control of replicating chromosomes is essential for preventing cancer. In yeast, Rad53 kinase protects stalled replication forks from pathological rearrangements. To characterize the mechanisms controlling fork integrity, we analyzed replication intermediates formed in response to replication blocks using electron microscopy. At the forks, wild-type cells accumulate short single-stranded regions, which likely causes checkpoint activation, whereas rad53 mutants exhibit extensive single-stranded gaps and hemi-replicated intermediates, consistent with a lagging-strand synthesis defect. Further, rad53 cells accumulate Holliday junctions through fork reversal. We speculate that, in checkpoint mutants, abnormal replication intermediates begin to form because of uncoordinated replication and are further processed by unscheduled recombination pathways, causing genome instability.
Many chemical carcinogens or their metabolites react with DNA; thus it is of interest to determine what effect chromosomal structure has on these reactions. The chromosome of simian virus 40 (SV40) is well suited for such studies; like chromatin of eukaryotic cells, it is organized into nucleosomes. The nucleotide sequence of SV40 is known, together with much about the pattern of viral gene expression and DNA replication, and the structure of the viral chromosome. We have investigated the binding of the ultimate carcinogen, N-acetoxy-acetylaminofluorene (AAAF), to specific regions of the SV40 chromosome in situ in the intact infected cell. The results, reported here, indicate that a region containing regulatory functions on the intracellular SV40 chromosome has unique structural properties which render it more susceptible to attack by AAAF than the rest of the SV40 genome. The preferential binding of AAAF to regulatory regions of chromatin may have implications for the mechanism of action of this and similar carcinogens.
Cohesin not only links sister chromatids but also inhibits the transcriptional machinery's interaction with and movement along chromatin. In contrast, replication forks must traverse such cohesin-associated obstructions to duplicate the entire genome in S phase. How this occurs is unknown. Through single-molecule analysis, we demonstrate that the replication factor C (RFC)-CTF18 clamp loader (RFC(CTF18)) controls the velocity, spacing and restart activity of replication forks in human cells and is required for robust acetylation of cohesin's SMC3 subunit and sister chromatid cohesion. Unexpectedly, we discovered that cohesin acetylation itself is a central determinant of fork processivity, as slow-moving replication forks were found in cells lacking the Eco1-related acetyltransferases ESCO1 or ESCO2 (refs 8-10) (including those derived from Roberts' syndrome patients, in whom ESCO2 is biallelically mutated) and in cells expressing a form of SMC3 that cannot be acetylated. This defect was a consequence of cohesin's hyperstable interaction with two regulatory cofactors, WAPL and PDS5A (refs 12, 13); removal of either cofactor allowed forks to progress rapidly without ESCO1, ESCO2, or RFC(CTF18). Our results show a novel mechanism for clamp-loader-dependent fork progression, mediated by the post-translational modification and structural remodelling of the cohesin ring. Loss of this regulatory mechanism leads to the spontaneous accrual of DNA damage and may contribute to the abnormalities of the Roberts' syndrome cohesinopathy.
Rotavirus, the major cause of life-threatening infantile gastroenteritis, is a member of the Reoviridae. Although the structures of rotavirus and other members of the Reoviridae have been extensively studied, little is known about the structures of virus-encoded non-structural proteins that are essential for genome replication and packaging. The non-structural protein NSP2 of rotavirus, which exhibits nucleoside triphosphatase, single-stranded RNA binding, and nucleic-acid helix-destabilizing activities, is a major component of viral replicase complexes. We present here the X-ray structure of the functional octamer of NSP2 determined to a resolution of 2.6 A. The NSP2 monomer has two distinct domains. The amino-terminal domain has a new fold. The carboxy-terminal domain resembles the ubiquitous cellular histidine triad (HIT) group of nucleotidyl hydrolases. This structural similarity suggests that the nucleotide-binding site is located inside the cleft between the two domains. Prominent grooves that run diagonally across the doughnut-shaped octamer are probable locations for RNA binding. Several RNA binding sites, resulting from the quaternary organization of NSP2 monomers, may be required for the helix destabilizing activity of NSP2 and its function during genome replication and packaging.
Centrosomes, each containing a pair of centrioles, organize microtubules in animal cells, particularly during mitosis. DNA and centrosomes are normally duplicated once before cell division to maintain optimal genome integrity. We report a new role for the Orc1 protein, a subunit of the origin recognition complex (ORC) that is a key component of the DNA replication licensing machinery, in controlling centriole and centrosome copy number in human cells, independent of its role in DNA replication. Cyclin A promotes Orc1 localization to centrosomes where Orc1 prevents Cyclin E-dependent reduplication of both centrioles and centrosomes in a single cell division cycle. The data suggest that Orc1 is a regulator of centriole and centrosome reduplication as well as the initiation of DNA replication.
SIRT6 belongs to the sirtuin family of protein lysine deacetylases, which regulate aging and genome stability. We found that human SIRT6 has a role in promoting DNA end resection, a crucial step in DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair by homologous recombination. SIRT6 depletion impaired the accumulation of replication protein A and single-stranded DNA at DNA damage sites, reduced rates of homologous recombination, and sensitized cells to DSB-inducing agents. We identified the DSB resection protein CtIP [C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) interacting protein] as a SIRT6 interaction partner and showed that SIRT6-dependent CtIP deacetylation promotes resection. A nonacetylatable CtIP mutant alleviated the effect of SIRT6 depletion on resection, thus identifying CtIP as a key substrate by which SIRT6 facilitates DSB processing and homologous recombination. These findings further clarify how SIRT6 promotes genome stability.
The mechanism of replication of the simian virus 40 (SV40) genome closely resembles that of cellular chromosomes, thereby providing an excellent model system for examining the enzymatic requirements for DNA replication. Only one viral gene product, the large tumour antigen (large-T antigen), is required for viral replication, so the majority of replication enzymes must be cellular. Indeed, a number of enzymatic activities associated with replication and the S phase of the cell cycle are induced upon SV40 infection. Cell-free extracts derived from human cells, when supplemented with immunopurified SV40 large-T antigen support efficient replication of plasmids that contain the SV40 origin of DNA replication. Using this system, a cellular protein of relative molecular mass 36,000 (Mr = 36K) that is required for the elongation stage of SV40 DNA replication in vitro has been purified and identified as a known cell-cycle regulated protein, alternatively called the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) or cyclin. It was noticed that, in its physical characteristics, PCNA closely resembles a protein that regulates the activity of calf thymus DNA polymerase-delta. Here we show that PCNA and the polymerase-delta auxiliary protein have similar electrophoretic behaviour and are both recognized by anti-PCNA human autoantibodies. More importantly, both proteins are functionally equivalent; they stimulate SV40 DNA replication in vitro and increase the processivity of calf thymus DNA polymerase-delta. These results implicate a novel animal cell DNA polymerase, DNA polymerase-delta, in the elongation stage of replicative DNA synthesis in vitro.
The genome of the human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III/LAV) has the potential to encode at least three polypeptides in addition to those encoded by the gag, pol, and env genes. In this study, the product of the sor (short open reading frame) region, which overlaps the 3' end of the pol gene, was found to be a protein with a molecular weight of 23,000. An assay was developed for testing the ability of cloned HTLV-III proviruses to produce viruses cytopathic for T4+ lymphocytes. In the cell line used, C8166, neither the HTLV-III sor gene product nor the complete 3'-orf gene product were necessary for the replication or cytopathic effects of the HTLV-III.
To maintain genome stability, DNA replication is strictly regulated to occur only once per cell cycle. In eukaryotes, the presence of 'licensing proteins' at replication origins during the G1 cell-cycle phase allows the formation of the pre-replicative complex. The removal of licensing proteins from chromatin during the S phase ensures that origins fire only once per cell cycle. Here we show that the CUL-4 ubiquitin ligase temporally restricts DNA-replication licensing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Inactivation of CUL-4 causes massive DNA re-replication, producing cells with up to 100C DNA content. The C. elegans orthologue of the replication-licensing factor Cdt1 (refs 2, 3) is required for DNA replication. C. elegans CDT-1 is present in G1-phase nuclei but disappears as cells enter S phase. In cells lacking CUL-4, CDT-1 levels fail to decrease during S phase and instead remain constant in the re-replicating cells. Removal of one genomic copy of cdt-1 suppresses the cul-4 re-replication phenotype. We propose that CUL-4 prevents aberrant re-initiation of DNA replication, at least in part, by facilitating the degradation of CDT-1.
Different classes of retroviruses have been shown to induce immunodeficiency diseases in various animal species. These animal models may provide an insight into our understanding of AIDS but, with the exception of one strain of feline leukaemia virus, the determinants of pathogenicity have not yet been mapped to these viral genomes. The immunodeficiency-inducing feline leukaemia virus is replication-defective, harbouring the determinant of pathogenicity within its env sequences. We have studied the Duplan strain of murine leukaemia virus which induces, in C57BL/6 mice, a severe immunodeficiency disease with striking similarities to human AIDS. We have identified the aetiological agent of this murine immunodeficiency disease as another defective retrovirus, with a genome of 4.8 kilobases. Molecular cloning and sequencing of this DNA showed that the pol and env genes have been deleted, but that the complete gag region has been conserved and has a novel sequence encoding the p12 protein. As with the feline leukaemia virus, these results provide evidence for the role of defective retroviruses in inducing immunodeficiency and facilitate the study of the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency syndromes, including AIDS.
Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) have been found to have roles in a great variety of processes, including transcriptional regulation, chromosome replication, RNA processing and modification, messenger RNA stability and translation, and even protein degradation and translocation. Recent studies indicate that ncRNAs are far more abundant and important than initially imagined. These findings raise several fundamental questions: How many ncRNAs are encoded by a genome? Given the absence of a diagnostic open reading frame, how can these genes be identified? How can all the functions of ncRNAs be elucidated?
Several lines of evidence suggest that the paternal and maternal genomes may have different expression patterns in the developing organism and this has been confirmed by the identification of endogenous genes that are parentally imprinted in the mouse. Little is known about the precise mechanisms involved in the process, but structural differences between the two alleles must somehow provide cis-acting signals for directing parental-specific transcription. Cell-cycle replication time is one parameter that has been shown to be associated with both tissue-specific gene expression and the allele-specific transcription patterns of the X chromosomes in female cells. For this reason we have examined the replication timing patterns for the chromosomal regions containing the imprinted genes Igf2, Igf2r, H19 and Snrpn in the mouse. At all of these sites, and their corresponding positions in the human genome, the two homologous alleles replicate asynchronously and it is always the paternal allele that is early-replicating. Thus imprinted genes appear to be embedded in large DNA domains with differential replication patterns, which may provide a structural imprint for parental identity.
Nucleotide sequencing has revealed a common genetic organization for three papillomaviruses: BPV-1 (bovine papillomavirus type 1), HPV-1 (human papillomavirus type 1a) and HPV-6 (human papillomavirus type 6b). Several open reading frames, corresponding to as yet uncharacterized proteins, were observed in these genomes in the region that is required for oncogenic transformation by BPV-1 and for plasmidial maintenance of its genome. The longest of these frames, E1, is also the most conserved between the three viruses; we have compared the amino acid sequence of its putative product ('E1 protein') with those of the large-T proteins of three polyoma viruses and report here significant homologies in their carboxy-terminal halves, extending for over 200 amino acids. Moreover, similar secondary structures were predicted in this region, especially in two blocks of homologous residues, which correspond in the large-T proteins of polyoma and simian virus 40 (SV40) viruses to sites involved in the ATPase and nucleotide-binding activities. These observations suggest that the papillomavirus E1 proteins might have a function in common with the polyoma virus large-T proteins (which are required for the initiation of viral DNA replication). As it was suggested recently that the E1 gene product is involved in maintaining the BPV-1 genome as a plasmid in transformed cells, we speculate that the structural features conserved in these otherwise very different viruses are general characteristics of eukaryotic proteins involved in the control of DNA replication.
We report the generation and analysis of functional data from multiple, diverse experiments performed on a targeted 1% of the human genome as part of the pilot phase of the ENCODE Project. These data have been further integrated and augmented by a number of evolutionary and computational analyses. Together, our results advance the collective knowledge about human genome function in several major areas. First, our studies provide convincing evidence that the genome is pervasively transcribed, such that the majority of its bases can be found in primary transcripts, including non-protein-coding transcripts, and those that extensively overlap one another. Second, systematic examination of transcriptional regulation has yielded new understanding about transcription start sites, including their relationship to specific regulatory sequences and features of chromatin accessibility and histone modification. Third, a more sophisticated view of chromatin structure has emerged, including its inter-relationship with DNA replication and transcriptional regulation. Finally, integration of these new sources of information, in particular with respect to mammalian evolution based on inter- and intra-species sequence comparisons, has yielded new mechanistic and evolutionary insights concerning the functional landscape of the human genome. Together, these studies are defining a path for pursuit of a more comprehensive characterization of human genome function.
Polyoma virus is a papovavirus that productively infects mouse cells. In cells of other species, such as rat cells, polyoma virus is virtually unable to replicate, and a small proportion of infected cells become stably transformed. The ability of polyoma virus to transform infected cells is determined by genes that encode the large, middle and small T antigens and which are found in the early region of the virus genome. We have inserted the transforming region of polyoma virus into a murine leukaemia virus (MLV) vector, to generate a replication-defective transforming retrovirus which for the first time allows efficient transformation of mouse cells by the polyoma virus middle T gene. During the life cycle of this recombinant virus the intervening sequence present in the original polyoma virus middle T gene was removed. The recombinant virus that we have constructed is analogous to other acutely transforming retroviruses, and demonstrates that the polyoma middle T gene is a dominant transforming oncogene.
Multiple pathways prevent DNA replication from occurring more than once per cell cycle. These pathways block re-replication by strictly controlling the activity of pre-replication complexes, which assemble at specific sites in the genome called origins. Here we show that mutations in the homologous histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27) monomethyltransferases, ARABIDOPSIS TRITHORAX-RELATED PROTEIN5 (ATXR5) and ATXR6, lead to re-replication of specific genomic locations. Most of these locations correspond to transposons and other repetitive and silent elements of the Arabidopsis genome. These sites also correspond to high levels of H3K27 monomethylation, and mutation of the catalytic SET domain is sufficient to cause the re-replication defect. Mutation of ATXR5 and ATXR6 also causes upregulation of transposon expression and has pleiotropic effects on plant development. These results uncover a novel pathway that prevents over-replication of heterochromatin in Arabidopsis.
During replication, hepatitis delta virus (HDV) switches from production of small to large delta antigen. Both antigen isoforms have an HDV genome binding domain and are packaged into hepatitis B virus (HBV)-derived envelopes but differ at their carboxy termini. The large antigen was shown to contain a terminal CXXX box and undergo prenylation. The large, but not the small, antigen formed secreted particles when expressed singly with HBV surface antigen. Mutation of Cys211 in the CXXX box of the large antigen abolished both prenylation and particle formation, suggesting that this site is important for virion morphogenesis.
Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is associated with alterations in receptor activity, cellular proliferation and modulation of the cell cycle. Inappropriate tyrosine phosphorylation can lead to unrestrained cell growth and oncogenesis. Enzymes important in tyrosine dephosphorylation have also been described. Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) consist of two families. There is a receptor-like family of PTPases with an extracellular domain, transmembrane-spanning region and typically two repeated phosphatase domains. Proteins of the non-receptor-like family have a single catalytic phosphatase domain, show a substrate specificity for Tyr phosphate and will not hydrolyse Ser or Thr phosphate. Here we report that the vaccinia virus genome contains an open reading frame which shares amino-acid sequence identity with the PTPases. The purified protein encoded by the vaccinia virus H1 open reading frame expressed in bacteria hydrolyses substrates containing phosphotyrosine and phosphoserine. Mutagenesis of an essential Cys in the vaccinia phosphatase abolishes catalytic activity directed towards both substrates, suggesting that hydrolysis proceeds by a common mechanism. Understanding the function of the H1-encoded protein will help to define the role of the phosphatase in viral replication and pathogenesis.
The large genome of herpes simplex virus type of (HSV-1) encodes at least 80 polypeptides, the majority of which have no recognized function. A subgroup of these gene products appears to be nonessential for virus replication in cell culture, but contributes to the complex life cycle of the virus in the host. To identify such functions, a simple insertional mutagenesis method has been used for selective inactivation of individual HSV-1 genes. The bacterial transposon Tn5 was allowed to insert randomly into cloned restriction fragments representing the entire short unique (US) region of the HSV-1 genome. Of the 12 open reading frames that were mutagenized with Tn5, mutant derivatives of US2, US4, and US5 were recombined into the virus. These three genes proved to be nonessential for HSV-1 replication in Vero (African Green monkey kidney) cells and the US4 gene appeared to be involved in viral pathogenesis in the central nervous system of mice. This rapid mutagenesis procedure should prove useful in exploring the entire HSV-1 genome as well as the genomes of other complex animal viruses.
The timing and localization of DNA replication initiation in mammalian cells are heritable traits, but it is not known whether initiation requires specific DNA sequences. A site-specific recombination strategy was used to show that DNA sequences previously identified as replication initiation sites could initiate replication when transferred to new chromosomal locations. An 8-kilobase DNA sequence encompassing the origin of DNA replication in the human beta-globin locus initiated replication in the simian genome. Specific deletions within the globin origin did not initiate replication in these chromosomal sites. These data suggest that initiation of DNA replication in mammalian cells requires specific sequence information and extend the replicon hypothesis to higher eukaryotes.
Cohesin enables post-replicative DNA repair and chromosome segregation by holding sister chromatids together from the time of DNA replication in S phase until mitosis. There is growing evidence that cohesin also forms long-range chromosomal cis-interactions and may regulate gene expression in association with CTCF, mediator or tissue-specific transcription factors. Human cohesinopathies such as Cornelia de Lange syndrome are thought to result from impaired non-canonical cohesin functions, but a clear distinction between the cell-division-related and cell-division-independent functions of cohesion--as exemplified in Drosophila--has not been demonstrated in vertebrate systems. To address this, here we deleted the cohesin locus Rad21 in mouse thymocytes at a time in development when these cells stop cycling and rearrange their T-cell receptor (TCR) a locus (Tcra). Rad21-deficient thymocytes had a normal lifespan and retained the ability to differentiate, albeit with reduced efficiency. Loss of Rad21 led to defective chromatin architecture at the Tcra locus, where cohesion-binding sites flank the TEA promoter and the Ea enhancer, and demarcate Tcra from interspersed Tcrd elements and neighbouring housekeeping genes. Cohesin was required for long-range promoter-enhancer interactions, Tcra transcription, H3K4me3 histone modifications that recruit the recombination machinery and Tcra rearrangement. Provision of pre-rearranged TCR transgenes largely rescued thymocyte differentiation, demonstrating that among thousands of potential target genes across the genome, defective Tcra rearrangement was limiting for the differentiation of cohesin-deficient thymocytes. These findings firmly establish a cell-division-independent role for cohesin in Tcra locus rearrangement and provide a comprehensive account of the mechanisms by which cohesin enables cellular differentiation in a well-characterized mammalian system.
The nuclei of the giant neurons of the marine mollusk Aplysia californica can contain more than 0.2 microgram of DNA. This is more than 200,000 times as much DNA as the haploid amount found in Aplysia sperm. On the basis of nuclear DNA content, the giant neurons R-2, P-1, and L-6 of adult animals can each be divided into at least two populations. The mean DNA content of these two populations (0.067 and 0.131 microgram of DNA) are approximately related by a factor of 2. This suggests that much and perhaps all of the genome replicates repeatedly (up to 16 times) during the growth and development of these neurons and that each replication is synchronous. The enormous amount of DNA in these cells opens up the possibility of characterizing the DNA and other constituents of chromatin from individual but phenotypically different neurons.
Wild-type reverse transcriptase has evolved for the survival of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) by natural selection. In contrast, therapy relying on inhibitors of reverse transcriptase by nucleosides like zidovudine (AZT) or dideoxyinosine (ddI), and by non-nucleosides like pyridinones or nevirapine, may exert different selection pressures on this enzyme. Therefore the acquisition of resistance to reverse transcriptase inhibitors by selection of mutations in the pol gene may require compromises in enzyme function that affect viral replication. As single mutations are unlikely to confer broad resistance when combinations of reverse transcriptase inhibitors are used, multiple mutations may occur that result in further compromises. Certain drug combinations may prevent the co-existence of adequate reverse transcription function and multi-drug resistance (MDR). Unlike bacterial or eukaryotic drug resistance, retroviral drug resistance is conferred only by mutations in its own genome and is limited by genome size. Combining drugs directed against the same essential viral protein may thus prevent HIV-1 MDR, whereas the conventional approach of targeting different HIV-1 proteins for combination therapy may not, because genomes with resistance mutations in different HIV-1 genes might recombine to develop MDR. Here we show that several mutations in the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase gene that confer resistance to inhibitors of this enzyme can attenuate viral replication. We tested whether combinations of mutations giving rise to single-agent resistance might further compromise or even abolish viral replication, and if multidrug-resistant viruses could be constructed. Certain combinations of mutations conferring resistance to AZT, ddI and pyridinone are incompatible with viral replication. These results indicate that evolutionary limitations exist to restrict development of MDR. Furthermore, a therapeutic strategy exploiting these limitations by using selected multidrug regimens directed against the same target may prevent development of MDR. This approach, which we call convergent combination therapy, eliminated HIV-1 replication and virus breakthrough in vitro, and may be applicable to other viral targets. Moreover, elimination of reverse transcription by convergent combination therapy may also limit MDR.
Homologous recombination is crucial for the repair of DNA breaks and maintenance of genome stability. In Escherichia coli, homologous recombination is dependent on the RecA protein. In the presence of ATP, RecA mediates the homologous DNA pairing and strand exchange reaction that links recombining DNA molecules. DNA joint formation is initiated through the nucleation of RecA onto single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) to form helical nucleoprotein filaments. Two RecA-like recombinases, Rad51 and Dmc1, exist in eukaryotes. Whereas Rad51 is needed for both mitotic and meiotic recombination events, the function of Dmc1 is restricted to meiosis. Here we examine human Dmc1 protein (hDmc1) for the ability to promote DNA strand exchange, and show that hDmc1 mediates strand exchange between paired DNA substrates over at least several thousand base pairs. DNA strand exchange requires ATP and is strongly dependent on the heterotrimeric ssDNA-binding molecule replication factor A (RPA). We present evidence that hDmc1-mediated DNA recombination initiates through the nucleation of hDmc1 onto ssDNA to form a helical nucleoprotein filament. The DNA strand exchange activity of hDmc1 is probably indispensable for repair of DNA double-strand breaks during meiosis and for maintaining the ploidy of meiotic chromosomes.
The influenza virus polymerase, a heterotrimer composed of three subunits, PA, PB1 and PB2, is responsible for replication and transcription of the eight separate segments of the viral RNA genome in the nuclei of infected cells. The polymerase synthesizes viral messenger RNAs using short capped primers derived from cellular transcripts by a unique 'cap-snatching' mechanism. The PB2 subunit binds the 5' cap of host pre-mRNAs, which are subsequently cleaved after 10-13 nucleotides by the viral endonuclease, hitherto thought to reside in the PB2 (ref. 5) or PB1 (ref. 2) subunits. Here we describe biochemical and structural studies showing that the amino-terminal 209 residues of the PA subunit contain the endonuclease active site. We show that this domain has intrinsic RNA and DNA endonuclease activity that is strongly activated by manganese ions, matching observations reported for the endonuclease activity of the intact trimeric polymerase. Furthermore, this activity is inhibited by 2,4-dioxo-4-phenylbutanoic acid, a known inhibitor of the influenza endonuclease. The crystal structure of the domain reveals a structural core closely resembling resolvases and type II restriction endonucleases. The active site comprises a histidine and a cluster of three acidic residues, conserved in all influenza viruses, which bind two manganese ions in a configuration similar to other two-metal-dependent endonucleases. Two active site residues have previously been shown to specifically eliminate the polymerase endonuclease activity when mutated. These results will facilitate the optimisation of endonuclease inhibitors as potential new anti-influenza drugs.
DNA replication in bacteriophage lambda begins at a unique origin between residues 39,000 and 39,200 of the lambda genome. This segment of DNA serves a dual function since it also lies within the coding sequence of the lambda replication initiator protein O which binds origin DNA. The lambda origin sequence contains four 19-base-pair (bp) segments (iterons) which have dyad symmetry, followed by a 40-bp A + T-rich zone of highly asymmetrical base composition. It was noted earlier that lambda origin DNA exhibits an anomalous electrophoretic mobility on gels; that is, the length of DNA as determined by DNA sequencing is approximately 20% less than is predicted from electrophoretic mobility. Recent studies of kinetoplast minicircle DNA (K-DNA) from the protozoan Leishmania tarentolae have led to the proposal that sequence-induced DNA curvature could account for such electrophoretic anomalies by alteration of the shape of the DNA molecule. We now present evidence that the lambda origin contains a static curve.
Aerobic respiration generates reactive oxygen species that can damage guanine residues and lead to the production of 8-oxoguanine (8oxoG), the major mutagenic oxidative lesion in the genome. Oxidative damage is implicated in ageing and cancer, and its prevalence presents a constant challenge to DNA polymerases that ensure accurate transmission of genomic information. When these polymerases encounter 8oxoG, they frequently catalyse misincorporation of adenine in preference to accurate incorporation of cytosine. This results in the propagation of G to T transversions, which are commonly observed somatic mutations associated with human cancers. Here, we present sequential snapshots of a high-fidelity DNA polymerase during both accurate and mutagenic replication of 8oxoG. Comparison of these crystal structures reveals that 8oxoG induces an inversion of the mismatch recognition mechanisms that normally proofread DNA, such that the 8oxoG.adenine mismatch mimics a cognate base pair whereas the 8oxoG.cytosine base pair behaves as a mismatch. These studies reveal a fundamental mechanism of error-prone replication and show how 8oxoG, and DNA lesions in general, can form mismatches that evade polymerase error-detection mechanisms, potentially leading to the stable incorporation of lethal mutations.
DNA-dependent adenosine triphosphatases (ATPases) participate in a broad range of biological processes including transcription, DNA repair, and chromatin dynamics. Mutations in the HepA-related protein (HARP) ATPase are responsible for Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD), but the function of the protein is unknown. We found that HARP is an ATP-dependent annealing helicase that rewinds single-stranded DNA bubbles that are stably bound by replication protein A. Other related ATPases, including the DNA translocase Rad54, did not exhibit annealing helicase activity. Analysis of mutant HARP proteins suggests that SIOD is caused by a deficiency in annealing helicase activity. Moreover, the pleiotropy of HARP mutations is consistent with the function of HARP as an annealing helicase that acts throughout the genome to oppose the action of DNA-unwinding activities in the nucleus.
Influenza A virus, being responsible for seasonal epidemics and reoccurring pandemics, represents a worldwide threat to public health. High mutation rates facilitate the generation of viral escape mutants, rendering vaccines and drugs directed against virus-encoded targets potentially ineffective. In contrast, targeting host cell determinants temporarily dispensable for the host but crucial for virus replication could prevent viral escape. Here we report the discovery of 287 human host cell genes influencing influenza A virus replication in a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen. Using an independent assay we confirmed 168 hits (59%) inhibiting either the endemic H1N1 (119 hits) or the current pandemic swine-origin (121 hits) influenza A virus strains, with an overlap of 60%. Notably, a subset of these common hits was also essential for replication of a highly pathogenic avian H5N1 strain. In-depth analyses of several factors provided insights into their infection stage relevance. Notably, SON DNA binding protein (SON) was found to be important for normal trafficking of influenza virions to late endosomes early in infection. We also show that a small molecule inhibitor of CDC-like kinase 1 (CLK1) reduces influenza virus replication by more than two orders of magnitude, an effect connected with impaired splicing of the viral M2 messenger RNA. Furthermore, influenza-virus-infected p27(-/-) (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B; Cdkn1b) mice accumulated significantly lower viral titres in the lung, providing in vivo evidence for the importance of this gene. Thus, our results highlight the potency of genome-wide RNAi screening for the dissection of virus-host interactions and the identification of drug targets for a broad range of influenza viruses.
Double-stranded RNA viruses have an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity associated with the viral particles which is indispensable for their replication cycle. Using the yeast L-A double-stranded RNA virus we have investigated the mechanism by which the virus encapsidates its genomic RNA and RNA polymerase. The L-A gag gene encodes the principal viral coat protein and the overlapping pol gene is expressed as a gag-pol fusion protein which is formed by a -1 ribosomal frameshift. Here we show that Gag alone is sufficient for virus particle formation, but that it fails to package the viral single-stranded RNA genome. Encapsidation of the viral RNA requires only a part of the Pol region (the N-terminal quarter), which is presumably distinct from the RNA polymerase domain. Given that the Pol region has single-stranded RNA-binding activity, these results are consistent with our L-A virus encapsidation model: the Pol region of the fusion protein binds specifically to the viral genome (+) strand, and the N-terminal gag-encoded region primes polymerization of Gag to form the capsid, thus ensuring the packaging of both the viral genome and the RNA polymerase.
RNA interference (RNAi) is the process by which double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) directs sequence-specific degradation of messenger RNA in animal and plant cells. In mammalian cells, RNAi can be triggered by 21-nucleotide duplexes of small interfering RNA (siRNA). Here we describe inhibition of early and late steps of HIV-1 replication in human cell lines and primary lymphocytes by siRNAs targeted to various regions of the HIV-1 genome. We demonstrate that synthetic siRNA duplexes or plasmid-derived siRNAs inhibit HIV-1 infection by specifically degrading genomic HIV-1 RNA, thereby preventing formation of viral complementary-DNA intermediates. These results demonstrate the utility of RNAi for modulating the HIV replication cycle and provide evidence that genomic HIV-1 RNA, as it exists within a nucleoprotein reverse-transcription complex, is amenable to siRNA-mediated degradation.
To protect genome integrity and ensure survival, eukaryotic cells exposed to genotoxic stress cease proliferating to provide time for DNA repair. Human cells responded to ultraviolet light or ionizing radiation by rapid, ubiquitin- and proteasome-dependent protein degradation of Cdc25A, a phosphatase that is required for progression from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle. This response involved activated Chk1 protein kinase but not the p53 pathway, and the persisting inhibitory tyrosine phosphorylation of Cdk2 blocked entry into S phase and DNA replication. Overexpression of Cdc25A bypassed this mechanism, leading to enhanced DNA damage and decreased cell survival. These results identify specific degradation of Cdc25A as part of the DNA damage checkpoint mechanism and suggest how Cdc25A overexpression in human cancers might contribute to tumorigenesis.
The RNA genome of the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) appears to be made up of two parts: a small domain with a high degree of sequence conservation and structural features likely to promote replication; plus a second, larger domain that is less conserved and encodes the delta antigen. This report focuses on one of the several sets of data that have led to the proposal of this model: the existence of a novel structural element in HDV genomic RNA. This structural element lies within the highly conserved domain of HDV RNA and may be related to the local tertiary structure previously mapped to the central conserved region of the plant viroid genome. Both elements occur in regions with no apparent coding capacity and are distinctively responsive to ultraviolet (UV) light. Transcripts containing partial and full-length genomic sequences of HDV readily undergo a UV-induced crosslinking reaction, which establishes a covalent bond between two noncontiguous segments. By locking two segments of the overall structure into place, this crosslink has permitted the unbranched, rodlike model of HDV RNA to be examined and confirmed in the portion of the RNA analyzed. The clustering of the novel tertiary structure and the recently discovered self-cleavage sites into a highly conserved, but apparently noncoding, portion of the genome defines a viroid-like domain in HDV RNA and raises questions about the possible events leading up to the association of free-living RNAs with messenger RNAs and other RNA molecules.
An influenza A reassortant virus that contained the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes of a virulent human virus, A/Udorn/72 (H3N2), and the six other influenza A virus genome segments from an avirulent avian virus, A/Mallard/New York/6750/78 (H2N2), was evaluated for its level of replication is squirrel monkeys and hamsters. In monkeys, the reassortant virus was as attenuated and as restricted in its level of replication in the upper and lower respiratory tract as its avian influenza virus parent. Nonetheless, infection with the reassortant induced significant resistant to challenge with virulent human influenza virus. In hamsters, the reassortant virus replicated to a level intermediate between that of its parents. These findings suggest that the nonsurface antigen genes of the avian parental virus are the primary determinants of restriction of replication of the reassortant virus in monkeys. Attenuation of the reassortant virus for primates is achieved by inefficient functioning of the avian influenza genes in primate cells, while antigenic specificity of the human influenza virus is provided by the neuraminidase and hemagglutinin genes derived from the human virus. This approach could lead to the development of a live influenza A virus vaccine that is attenuated for man if the avian influenza genes are similarly restricted in human cells.
During the evolution of linear genomes, it became essential to protect the natural chromosome ends to prevent triggering of the DNA-damage repair machinery and enzymatic attack. Telomeres - tightly regulated complexes consisting of repetitive G-rich DNA and specialized proteins - accomplish this task. Telomeres not only conceal linear chromosome ends from detection and inappropriate repair but also provide a buffer to counteract replication-associated shortening. Lessons from many model organisms have taught us about the complications of maintaining these specialized structures. Here, we discuss how telomeres interact and cooperate with the DNA replication and DNA-damage repair machineries.
Four virus proteins similar to two human macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP) chemokines, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interferon regulatory factor (IRF) are encoded by the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) genome. vIL-6 was functional in B9 proliferation assays and primarily expressed in KSHV-infected hematopoietic cells rather than KS lesions. HIV-1 transmission studies showed that vMIP-I is similar to human MIP chemokines in its ability to inhibit replication of HIV-1 strains dependent on the CCR5 co-receptor. These viral genes may form part of the response to host defenses contributing to virus-induced neoplasia and may have relevance to KSHV and HIV-I interactions.
The 4,639,221-base pair sequence of Escherichia coli K-12 is presented. Of 4288 protein-coding genes annotated, 38 percent have no attributed function. Comparison with five other sequenced microbes reveals ubiquitous as well as narrowly distributed gene families; many families of similar genes within E. coli are also evident. The largest family of paralogous proteins contains 80 ABC transporters. The genome as a whole is strikingly organized with respect to the local direction of replication; guanines, oligonucleotides possibly related to replication and recombination, and most genes are so oriented. The genome also contains insertion sequence (IS) elements, phage remnants, and many other patches of unusual composition indicating genome plasticity through horizontal transfer.
Faithful chromosome segregation and repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) require cohesin, the protein complex that mediates sister-chromatid cohesion. Cohesion between sister chromatids is thought to be generated only during ongoing DNA replication by an obligate coupling between cohesion establishment factors such as Eco1 (Ctf7) and the replisome. Using budding yeast, we challenge this model by showing that cohesion is generated by an Eco1-dependent but replication-independent mechanism in response to DSBs in G(2)/M. Furthermore, our studies reveal that Eco1 has two functions: a cohesive activity and a conserved acetyltransferase activity, which triggers the generation of cohesion in response to the DSB and the DNA damage checkpoint. Finally, the DSB-induced cohesion is not limited to broken chromosomes but occurs also on unbroken chromosomes, suggesting that the DNA damage checkpoint through Eco1 provides genome-wide protection of chromosome integrity.
More than 1% of the world's population is chronically infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). HCV infection can result in acute hepatitis, chronic hepatitis, and cirrhosis, which is strongly associated with development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Genetic studies of HCV replication have been hampered by lack of a bona fide infectious molecular clone. Full-length functional clones of HCV complementary DNA were constructed. RNA transcripts from the clones were found to be infectious and to cause disease in chimpanzees after direct intrahepatic inoculation. This work defines the structure of a functional HCV genome RNA and proves that HCV alone is sufficient to cause disease.
Vertebrate evolution has taken place against a background of constant retrovirus infection, and much of the mammalian genome consists of endogenous retrovirus-like elements. Several host genes have evolved to control retrovirus replication, including Friend-virus-susceptibility-1, Fv1, on mouse chromosome 4 (refs 3, 4). The Fv1 gene acts on murine leukaemia virus at a stage after entry into the target cell but before integration and formation of the provirus. Although restriction is not absolute, Fv1 prevents or delays spontaneous or experimentally induced viral tumours. In vitro, Fv1 restriction leads to an apparent 50-1,000 fold reduction in viral titre. Genetic evidence implicates a direct interaction between the Fv1 gene product and a component of the viral preintegration complex, the capsid protein CA (refs 7-9). We have now cloned Fv1: the gene appears to be derived from the gag region of an endogenous retrovirus unrelated to murine leukaemia virus, implying that the Fv1 protein and its target may share functional similarities despite the absence of nucleotide-sequence homology.
UV light is a potent mutagen in most living cells, but molecular analysis of its mode of action in animal cells has not been possible because of the high complexity of the cell genome. Therefore, we have used simian virus 40 (SV40) as a biological probe to study the mutagenic effect of UV-irradiation at the molecular level. A thermosensitive SV40 mutant of the large T antigen (tsA58), which is defective at high temperature for initiation of viral DNA replication and for repression of early transcription, was UV-irradiated in vitro, then replicated in monkey kidney cells. Revertants of tsA58 were selected for growth at the nonpermissive temperature, then the reversion sites were mapped by using the marker rescue technique, and precisely localized by DNA sequencing. We report here that all revertants analysed showed one or two base pair substitutions localized in the C-terminal half of the T antigen gene. The original tsA58 mutation was still present in all revertant genomes. In 16 DNAs sequenced, seven reversion sites were found on the large T antigen gene, all of which localized opposite a possible UV-induced pyrimidine-pyrimidine lesion, suggesting targeted mutagenesis. UV-irradiation of the host cell before infection did not change the pattern of reversion sites at the molecular level, although it strongly increased the mutation frequency. These results demonstrate for the first time in animal cells the specificity of UV-induced mutagenesis.
We have searched the human genome for genes that predispose to type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus using semi-automated fluorescence-based technology and linkage analysis. In addition to IDDM1 (in the major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6p21) and IDDM2 (in the insulin gene region on chromosome 11p15), eighteen different chromosome regions showed some positive evidence of linkage to disease. Linkages to chromosomes 11q (IDDM4) and 6q (IDDM5) were confirmed by replication, and chromosome 18 may encode a fifth disease locus. There are probably no genes with large effects aside from IDDM1. Therefore polygenic inheritance is indicated, with a major locus at the major histocompatibility complex.
Theory predicts that recombination will increase the effectiveness of natural selection. A Drosophila melanogaster model system was developed that increased experimental power with the use of high experimental replication, explicit tracking of individual genes, and high but natural levels of background selection. Each of 34 independent experiments traced the fate of a newly arisen mutation located within genome-wide, synthetic chromosomes that were propagated with or without recombination. An intrinsic advantage to recombination was demonstrated by the finding that the realized strength of selection on new mutations was markedly increased when recombination was present.
In an attempt to establish a model of the healthy carrier state in hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections, transgenic mice expressing HBV genes were produced. Fertilized one-cell eggs were microinjected with subgenomic fragments of HBV DNA containing the coding regions for the HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) and pre-S and X antigens. Either the normal (HBV) or metallothionein promoters were used to obtain expression of the HBV genes. There was no evidence of viral replication or tissue pathology. The integrated HBV DNA sequences were inherited in a normal Mendelian fashion. Three of 16 transgenic mice expressed HBV-encoded gene products to which they were immunologically tolerant. Expression was not tissue specific and may be influenced by the genomic integration site and cellular factors. Both HBsAg and pre-S antigen were detectable within the cytoplasm of hepatocytes and renal tubular epithelial cells. High serum concentrations of HBsAg were detectable and the secreted product appeared authentic as judged by mean density, morphology, mean particle diameter, polypeptide composition, and antigenicity. The absence of tissue pathology in these immunologically tolerant animals supports the hypothesis that cellular injury under these conditions is not a direct consequence of expression of the pre-S or HBs regions of the HBV genome.
Since the discovery of Z-DNA by X-ray analysis of the alternated hexanucleotide d(C-G)3 crystals, numerous studies have shown that fragments of natural DNAs can adopt the Z conformation, topological constraints being a major factor stabilizing this conformation. Immunochemical assays using antibodies to Z-DNA provide strong evidence for the presence of Z fragments in chromosomes. The biological role of Z-DNA is not yet known, but it might be involved in gene regulation. Proteins which bind specifically to Z-DNA have been isolated and interactions between Z-DNA and several cellular proteins have been studied. The ability of DNA repair enzymes to maintain the genome's integrity is of major importance to the cell. On alkylation of DNA by chemical carcinogens such as dimethyl sulphate, methyl methanesulphonate, methylnitrosourea or methylnitrosoguanidine, the main target is the N7 of the guanosine residue, yielding 7-methylguanine (mG). In alkaline conditions, the imidazole ring of mG opens up, yielding the ring-opened form 2,6-diamino-4-oxo-5-methylformamidopyrimidine (rom7G); this lesion is a block to DNA replication. It occurs in vivo and is enzymatically removed by the DNA glycosylase. Here we report that the lesion is not excised when present in DNA in the left-handed Z conformation.
Intraperitoneal injection of neuropathogenic strains of lactic dehydrogenase virus (LDV) causes a histologically distinctive fatal paralytic disease characterized by an inflammatory destruction of motor neurones in the brain stem and cord in C58 mice aged over 9 months. To elicit the disease in the naturally susceptible C58 strain requires an age-associated or X-ray induced loss of immunological competence, LDV infection and genetic susceptibility. Genetic studies of the common inbred mouse strains showed that susceptibility to the disease was not linked to the major histocompatibility complex but correlated with the FV-1n allele, susceptibility to spontaneous leukaemia, and infection by neuropathogenic strains of LDV. These observations suggested that neuropathogenic strains of LDV elicit the disease only in those strains of mice that carry multiple copies of N-tropic C-type retroviruses in their genomes and that are permissive for retrovirus replication. Presumably the expression of these viral genomes (high titres of virus in tissues correlating with age) is the important factor. Here we present genetic evidence to support this hypothesis and briefly discuss the possible implications.
Budding yeast Mec1, homolog of mammalian ATR, is an essential protein that mediates S-phase checkpoint responses and meiotic recombination. Elimination of Mec1 function leads to genomewide fork stalling followed by chromosome breakage. Breaks do not result from stochastic collapse of stalled forks or other incidental lesions; instead, they occur in specific regions of the genome during a G2 chromosomal transition. Break regions are found to be genetically encoded replication slow zones (RSZs), a newly discovered yeast chromosomal determinant. Thus, Mec1 has important functions in normal S phase and the genome instability of mec1 (and, analogously, ATR-/-) mutants stems from defects in these basic roles.
Sister-chromatid cohesion, established during replication by the protein complex cohesin, is essential for both chromosome segregation and double-strand break (DSB) repair. Normally, cohesion formation is strictly limited to the S phase of the cell cycle, but DSBs can trigger cohesion also after DNA replication has been completed. The function of this damage-induced cohesion remains unknown. In this investigation, we show that damage-induced cohesion is essential for repair in postreplicative cells in yeast. Furthermore, it is established genome-wide after induction of a single DSB, and it is controlled by the DNA damage response and cohesin-regulating factors. We thus define a cohesion establishment pathway that is independent of DNA duplication and acts together with cohesion formed during replication in sister chromatid-based DSB repair.
A 311-base pair fragment containing the SV40 origin of replication was linked to the chicken thymidine kinase gene on a recombinant plasmid. This molecule was transfected into human 143 thymidine kinase-deficient (TK-) cells, and colonies positive for thymidine kinase were selected. When cell lines derived from these colonies were fused to permissive simian cells that produce SV40 T antigen, the recombinant plasmid excised itself from the human cellular genome and replicated with a high copy number per cell. These results show that this segment of the viral genome is the only sequence required in cis to mediate SV40 excision and replication upon fusion to permissive cells. In addition, we have shown that excised plasmids apparently identical to the input DNA can be efficiently rescued in Escherichia coli. SV40 excision and replication may therefore be useful for the recovery of cloned genes from eukaryotic cells.
In sexually reproducing animals, a crucial step in zygote formation is the decondensation of the fertilizing sperm nucleus into a DNA replication-competent male pronucleus. Genome-wide nucleosome assembly on paternal DNA implies the replacement of sperm chromosomal proteins, such as protamines, by maternally provided histones. This fundamental process is specifically impaired in sesame (ssm), a unique Drosophila maternal effect mutant that prevents male pronucleus formation. Here we show that ssm is a point mutation in the Hira gene, thus demonstrating that the histone chaperone protein HIRA is required for nucleosome assembly during sperm nucleus decondensation. In vertebrates, HIRA has recently been shown to be critical for a nucleosome assembly pathway independent of DNA synthesis that specifically involves the H3.3 histone variant. We also show that nucleosomes containing H3.3, and not H3, are specifically assembled in paternal Drosophila chromatin before the first round of DNA replication. The exclusive marking of paternal chromosomes with H3.3 represents a primary epigenetic distinction between parental genomes in the zygote, and underlines an important consequence of the critical and highly specialized function of HIRA at fertilization.
Influenza A virus is an RNA virus that encodes up to 11 proteins and this small coding capacity demands that the virus use the host cellular machinery for many aspects of its life cycle. Knowledge of these host cell requirements not only informs us of the molecular pathways exploited by the virus but also provides further targets that could be pursued for antiviral drug development. Here we use an integrative systems approach, based on genome-wide RNA interference screening, to identify 295 cellular cofactors required for early-stage influenza virus replication. Within this group, those involved in kinase-regulated signalling, ubiquitination and phosphatase activity are the most highly enriched, and 181 factors assemble into a highly significant host-pathogen interaction network. Moreover, 219 of the 295 factors were confirmed to be required for efficient wild-type influenza virus growth, and further analysis of a subset of genes showed 23 factors necessary for viral entry, including members of the vacuolar ATPase (vATPase) and COPI-protein families, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) proteins, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)-beta. Furthermore, 10 proteins were confirmed to be involved in post-entry steps of influenza virus replication. These include nuclear import components, proteases, and the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase) IIbeta (CAMK2B). Notably, growth of swine-origin H1N1 influenza virus is also dependent on the identified host factors, and we show that small molecule inhibitors of several factors, including vATPase and CAMK2B, antagonize influenza virus replication.
There is increasing evidence that genome-wide association (GWA) studies represent a powerful approach to the identification of genes involved in common human diseases. We describe a joint GWA study (using the Affymetrix GeneChip 500K Mapping Array Set) undertaken in the British population, which has examined approximately 2,000 individuals for each of 7 major diseases and a shared set of approximately 3,000 controls. Case-control comparisons identified 24 independent association signals at P < 5 x 10(-7): 1 in bipolar disorder, 1 in coronary artery disease, 9 in Crohn's disease, 3 in rheumatoid arthritis, 7 in type 1 diabetes and 3 in type 2 diabetes. On the basis of prior findings and replication studies thus-far completed, almost all of these signals reflect genuine susceptibility effects. We observed association at many previously identified loci, and found compelling evidence that some loci confer risk for more than one of the diseases studied. Across all diseases, we identified a large number of further signals (including 58 loci with single-point P values between 10(-5) and 5 x 10(-7)) likely to yield additional susceptibility loci. The importance of appropriately large samples was confirmed by the modest effect sizes observed at most loci identified. This study thus represents a thorough validation of the GWA approach. It has also demonstrated that careful use of a shared control group represents a safe and effective approach to GWA analyses of multiple disease phenotypes; has generated a genome-wide genotype database for future studies of common diseases in the British population; and shown that, provided individuals with non-European ancestry are excluded, the extent of population stratification in the British population is generally modest. Our findings offer new avenues for exploring the pathophysiology of these important disorders. We anticipate that our data, results and software, which will be widely available to other investigators, will provide a powerful resource for human genetics research.
Oligonucleotide microarrays were used to map the detailed topography of chromosome replication in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The times of replication of thousands of sites across the genome were determined by hybridizing replicated and unreplicated DNAs, isolated at different times in S phase, to the microarrays. Origin activations take place continuously throughout S phase but with most firings near mid-S phase. Rates of replication fork movement vary greatly from region to region in the genome. The two ends of each of the 16 chromosomes are highly correlated in their times of replication. This microarray approach is readily applicable to other organisms, including humans.
The type 1 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) contains a conical capsid comprising approximately 1,500 CA protein subunits, which organizes the viral RNA genome for uncoating and replication in a new host cell. In vitro, CA spontaneously assembles into helical tubes and cones that resemble authentic viral capsids. Here we describe electron cryo-microscopy and image reconstructions of CA tubes from six different helical families. In spite of their polymorphism, all tubes are composed of hexameric rings of CA arranged with approximate local p6 lattice symmetry. Crystal structures of the two CA domains were 'docked' into the reconstructed density, which showed that the amino-terminal domains form the hexameric rings and the carboxy-terminal dimerization domains connect each ring to six neighbours. We propose a molecular model for the HIV-1 capsid that follows the principles of a fullerene cone, in which the body of the cone is composed of curved hexagonal arrays of CA rings and the ends are closed by inclusion of 12 pentagonal 'defects'.
The genome of the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi B31, the aetiologic agent of Lyme disease, contains a linear chromosome of 910,725 base pairs and at least 17 linear and circular plasmids with a combined size of more than 533,000 base pairs. The chromosome contains 853 genes encoding a basic set of proteins for DNA replication, transcription, translation, solute transport and energy metabolism, but, like Mycoplasma genitalium, it contains no genes for cellular biosynthetic reactions. Because B. burgdorferi and M. genitalium are distantly related eubacteria, we suggest that their limited metabolic capacities reflect convergent evolution by gene loss from more metabolically competent progenitors. Of 430 genes on 11 plasmids, most have no known biological function; 39% of plasmid genes are paralogues that form 47 gene families. The biological significance of the multiple plasmid-encoded genes is not clear, although they may be involved in antigenic variation or immune evasion.
The assembly of DNA into chromatin is a critical step in the replication and repair of the eukaryotic genome. It has been known for nearly 20 years that chromatin assembly is an ATP-dependent process. ATP-dependent chromatin-assembly factor (ACF) uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis for the deposition of histones into periodic nucleosome arrays, and the ISWI subunit of ACF is an ATPase that is related to helicases. Here we show that ACF becomes committed to the DNA template upon initiation of chromatin assembly. We also observed that ACF assembles nucleosomes in localized arrays, rather than randomly distributing them. By using a purified ACF-dependent system for chromatin assembly, we found that ACF hydrolyses about 2#150;4 molecules of ATP per base pair in the assembly of nucleosomes. This level of ATP hydrolysis is similar to that used by DNA helicases for the unwinding of DNA. These results suggest that a tracking mechanism exists in which ACF assembles chromatin as an ATP-driven DNA-translocating motor. Moreover, this proposed mechanism for ACF may be relevant to the function of other chromatin-remodelling factors that contain ISWI subunits.
Interactions between bacterial hosts and their viruses (phages) lead to reciprocal genome evolution through a dynamic co-evolutionary process. Phage-mediated transfer of host genes--often located in genome islands--has had a major impact on microbial evolution. Furthermore, phage genomes have clearly been shaped by the acquisition of genes from their hosts. Here we investigate whole-genome expression of a host and phage, the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus MED4 and the T7-like cyanophage P-SSP7, during lytic infection, to gain insight into these co-evolutionary processes. Although most of the phage genome was linearly transcribed over the course of infection, four phage-encoded bacterial metabolism genes formed part of the same expression cluster, even though they are physically separated on the genome. These genes--encoding photosystem II D1 (psbA), high-light inducible protein (hli), transaldolase (talC) and ribonucleotide reductase (nrd)--are transcribed together with phage DNA replication genes and seem to make up a functional unit involved in energy and deoxynucleotide production for phage replication in resource-poor oceans. Also unique to this system was the upregulation of numerous genes in the host during infection. These may be host stress response genes and/or genes induced by the phage. Many of these host genes are located in genome islands and have homologues in cyanophage genomes. We hypothesize that phage have evolved to use upregulated host genes, leading to their stable incorporation into phage genomes and their subsequent transfer back to hosts in genome islands. Thus activation of host genes during infection may be directing the co-evolution of gene content in both host and phage genomes.
The complete nucleotide sequence (580,070 base pairs) of the Mycoplasma genitalium genome, the smallest known genome of any free-living organism, has been determined by whole-genome random sequencing and assembly. A total of only 470 predicted coding regions were identified that include genes required for DNA replication, transcription and translation, DNA repair, cellular transport, and energy metabolism. Comparison of this genome to that of Haemophilus influenzae suggests that differences in genome content are reflected as profound differences in physiology and metabolic capacity between these two organisms.
Regulation of the expression of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) genome is accomplished in large part by controlling transcription elongation. The viral protein Tat hijacks the host cell's RNA polymerase II elongation control machinery through interaction with the positive transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, and directs the factor to promote productive elongation of HIV mRNA. Here we describe the crystal structure of the Tat.P-TEFb complex containing HIV-1 Tat, human Cdk9 (also known as CDK9), and human cyclin T1 (also known as CCNT1). Tat adopts a structure complementary to the surface of P-TEFb and makes extensive contacts, mainly with the cyclin T1 subunit of P-TEFb, but also with the T-loop of the Cdk9 subunit. The structure provides a plausible explanation for the tolerance of Tat to sequence variations at certain sites. Importantly, Tat induces significant conformational changes in P-TEFb. This finding lays a foundation for the design of compounds that would specifically inhibit the Tat.P-TEFb complex and block HIV replication.
Type C sarcoma viruses are genetic recombinants containing portions of replication-competent helper viruses linked to sarcoma virus-specific sequences (generically designated onc genes) which are thought to be required for acute fibroblast transformation. The onc elements of different avian and mammalian sarcoma viral isolates are each homologous to subsets of cellular DNA sequences which have no well-defined role in normal cells. Because of the lack of significant homology between helper viral genes and cellular onc sequences, the recombinational mechanisms which facilitate the formation of sarcoma viral genomes remain unclear. In Moloney murine sarcoma virus, viral onc (or v-mos) and cellular onc (or c-mos) sequences exhibit complete and uninterrupted homology as determined by heteroduplex and restriction enzyme analyses of molecularly cloned DNA. By contrast, the cellular counterparts of the onc elements of Rous sarcoma virus (G. Cooper and R. Parker, personal communication), avian erythroblastosis virus (B. Vennstrom, personal communication), Abelson leukaemia virus (D. Baltimore, personal communication), Harvey sarcoma virus (E. Scolnick, personal communication) and simian sarcoma virus (R. Gallo, personal communication) are now known to contain intervening sequences which do not appear in the respective viral genomes. Here we report the use of the Southern blot technique to examine cat cellular DNA sequences (c-fes) homologous to the onc gene (v-fes) of Snyder-Theilen feline sarcoma virus (ST-FeSV). We used cloned DNA 'probes' containing defined portions of the ST-FeSV genome to show that v-fes sequences originate from at least four noncontiguous sequences in cat cellular DNA, separated from each other by intervening sequences.
The precise association of DNA-binding proteins with localized regions of DNA is crucial for regulated replication and expression of the genome. For certain DNA transactions, the requirement for precision in localization and control is extremely high. High-precision events amenable to detailed biochemical analysis are the initiation of DNA replication and site-specific recombination by bacteriophage lambda and Escherichia coli. Recent experiments indicate that site-localization and control in these reactions involves the association of DNA-bound proteins to generate organized nucleoprotein structures in which the DNA is folded or wound. These specialized nucleoprotein structures are likely to provide the requisite accuracy for site localization and the necessary regulated reactivity to direct the DNA transaction. Multiple DNA-protein interactions are also required for controlled transcription of the eukaryotic genome. Distant upstream regulator and enhancer sequences may define protein-binding sites that form part of a reactive nucleoprotein structure capable of initiating transcription.
Chromophyte algae differ fundamentally from plants in possessing chloroplasts that contain chlorophyll c and that have a more complex bounding-membrane topology. Although chromophytes are known to be evolutionary chimaeras of a red alga and a non-photosynthetic host, which gave rise to their exceptional membrane complexity, their cell biology is poorly understood. Cryptomonads are the only chromophytes that still retain the enslaved red algal nucleus as a minute nucleomorph. Here we report complete sequences for all three nucleomorph chromosomes from the cryptomonad Guillardia theta. This tiny 551-kilobase eukaryotic genome is the most gene-dense known, with only 17 diminutive spliceosomal introns and 44 overlapping genes. Marked evolutionary compaction hundreds of millions of years ago eliminated nearly all the nucleomorph genes for metabolic functions, but left 30 for chloroplast-located proteins. To allow expression of these proteins, nucleomorphs retain hundreds of genetic-housekeeping genes. Nucleomorph DNA replication and periplastid protein synthesis require the import of many nuclear gene products across endoplasmic reticulum and periplastid membranes. The chromosomes have centromeres, but possibly only one loop domain, offering a means for studying eukaryotic chromosome replication, segregation and evolution.
In most RNA viruses, genome replication and transcription are catalysed by a viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Double-stranded RNA viruses perform these operations in a capsid (the polymerase complex), using an enzyme that can read both single- and double-stranded RNA. Structures have been solved for such viral capsids, but they do not resolve the polymerase subunits in any detail. Here we show that the 2 A resolution X-ray structure of the active polymerase subunit from the double-stranded RNA bacteriophage straight phi6 is highly similar to that of the polymerase of hepatitis C virus, providing an evolutionary link between double-stranded RNA viruses and flaviviruses. By crystal soaking and co-crystallization, we determined a number of other structures, including complexes with oligonucleotide and/or nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs), that suggest a mechanism by which the incoming double-stranded RNA is opened up to feed the template through to the active site, while the substrates enter by another route. The template strand initially overshoots, locking into a specificity pocket, and then, in the presence of cognate NTPs, reverses to form the initiation complex; this process engages two NTPs, one of which acts with the carboxy-terminal domain of the protein to prime the reaction. Our results provide a working model for the initiation of replication and transcription.
The DNA of avian sarcoma virus assumes a closed circular configuration before integration into the host cell chromosomal DNA. Ethidium bromide reduces the formation of superhelical viral DNA and concurrently blocks integration of the viral genome. Inhibition of integration of viral DNA results in the inhibition of virus replication.
The worm Caenorhabditis elegans is a model system for studying many aspects of biology, including host responses to bacterial pathogens, but it is not known to support replication of any virus. Plants and insects encode multiple Dicer enzymes that recognize distinct precursors of small RNAs and may act cooperatively. However, it is not known whether the single Dicer of worms and mammals is able to initiate the small RNA-guided RNA interference (RNAi) antiviral immunity as occurs in plants and insects. Here we show complete replication of the Flock house virus (FHV) bipartite, plus-strand RNA genome in C. elegans. We show that FHV replication in C. elegans triggers potent antiviral silencing that requires RDE-1, an Argonaute protein essential for RNAi mediated by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) but not by microRNAs. This immunity system is capable of rapid virus clearance in the absence of FHV B2 protein, which acts as a broad-spectrum RNAi inhibitor upstream of rde-1 by targeting the siRNA precursor. This work establishes a C. elegans model for genetic studies of animal virus-host interactions and indicates that mammals might use a siRNA pathway as an antiviral response.
The duplication of the mammalian genome is an organized event, but there is limited information about the precision of the duplication program at specific genetic loci. We developed an approach that allows DNA replication events to be visualized in individual DNA molecules. Studying the latent replication of Epstein-Barr virus episomes, we show that different initiation sites are used to commence DNA replication from a specific portion of the viral genome (zone), whereas termination does not seem to be genomically defined. We conclude that initiation zones and pausing sites are major organizers of the duplication program, but initiation, fork progression, and termination of replication can vary in each molecule.
The dependence of mitosis on the completion of the period of DNA replication in the cell cycle [synthesis (S) phase] ensures that chromosome segregation occurs only after the genome has been fully duplicated. A key negative regulator of mitosis, the protein kinase Wee1, was degraded in a Cdc34-dependent fashion in Xenopus egg extracts. This proteolysis event was required for a timely entrance into mitosis and was inhibited when DNA replication was blocked. Therefore, the DNA replication checkpoint can prevent mitosis by suppressing the proteolysis of Wee1 during S phase.
Mice of the AKR strain are characterised by a high incidence of spontaneous thymic lymphomas. AKR chromosomes contain the genomes of ecotropic murine leukaemia virus (MuLV) at two loci, termed Akv-1 and Akv-2 (refs 2-6). Shortly after birth, the normal tissues of AKR mice begin to produce high levels of this XC-positive MuLV (ref. 7) (that is, one that forms XC plaques). A second class of MuLV, termed mink cell focus-inducing virus (MCF), is produced specifically by preleukaemic and leukaemic AKR thymocytes. Nowinski et al. have established a series of tissue culture lines from AKR leukaemias and reported that the resulting cell lines produce virus particles, but that these particles, surprisingly, do not give rise to XC plaques. We have analysed the virus particles produced by one of these cell lines, termed AKRSL2. We show here that, unlike most or all of the nonmalignant tissues in the AKR mouse, these cultured lymphoma cells produce very little non-defective ecotropic MuLV; however, they do produce replication-defective ecotropic MuLV.
Oncogenic avian retroviruses can be classified into three groups: sarcoma viruses, acute leukaemia viruses and lymphoid leukosis viruses (LLVs). Sarcoma and acute leukaemia viruses transform fibroblasts and/or haematopoietic cells in culture and induce tumours with short latent periods in infected birds. In contrast, LLVs do not transform cells in vitro and require long latent periods before formation of neoplasms in vivo. The most frequent neoplasm induced by LLVs is malignant lymphoma of the bursa of Fabricius, but LLVs also induce other neoplasms, including sarcomas, nephroblastomas and erythroblastosis. The genomes of both sarcoma and acute leukaemai viruses contain specific genes responsible for viral oncogenicity, whereas the genome of LLVs apparently includes only genes required for virus replication. The genetic basis for the low oncogenic potential of LLVs is therefore obscure. The present experiments indicate that LLV-induced tumours contain transforming genes that can be detected by transfection of NH 3T3 mouse cells. These transforming genes are not linked to LLV DNA sequences, suggesting that oncogenesis by LLVs may result from indirect activation of cellular transforming genes.
Plasmodium berghei and Plasmodium chabaudi are widely used model malaria species. Comparison of their genomes, integrated with proteomic and microarray data, with the genomes of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium yoelii revealed a conserved core of 4500 Plasmodium genes in the central regions of the 14 chromosomes and highlighted genes evolving rapidly because of stage-specific selective pressures. Four strategies for gene expression are apparent during the parasites' life cycle: (i) housekeeping; (ii) host-related; (iii) strategy-specific related to invasion, asexual replication, and sexual development; and (iv) stage-specific. We observed posttranscriptional gene silencing through translational repression of messenger RNA during sexual development, and a 47-base 3' untranslated region motif is implicated in this process.
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) shows extensive genetic variation and undergoes rapid evolution. The fidelity of purified HIV-1 reverse transcriptase was measured during DNA polymerization in vitro by means of three different assays. Reverse transcriptase from HIV-1 introduced base-substitution errors in DNA from the bacteriophage phi X174 amber3 at estimated frequencies of 1/2000 to 1/4000. Analyses of misincorporation rates opposite a single template adenine residue showed that HIV-1 reverse transcriptase catalyzed nucleotide mismatches with a specificity of A:C much greater than A:G greater than A:A. The high error rate of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase in vitro translates to approximately five to ten errors per HIV-1 genome per round of replication in vivo. This high error rate suggests that misincorporation by HIV-1 reverse transcriptase is, at least in part, responsible for the hypermutability of the AIDS virus. The specificity of misincorporation may provide a basis for the systematic construction of antiviral nucleosides.
The influenza A viral heterotrimeric polymerase complex (PA, PB1, PB2) is known to be involved in many aspects of viral replication and to interact with host factors, thereby having a role in host specificity. The polymerase protein sequences from the 1918 human influenza virus differ from avian consensus sequences at only a small number of amino acids, consistent with the hypothesis that they were derived from an avian source shortly before the pandemic. However, when compared to avian sequences, the nucleotide sequences of the 1918 polymerase genes have more synonymous differences than expected, suggesting evolutionary distance from known avian strains. Here we present sequence and phylogenetic analyses of the complete genome of the 1918 influenza virus, and propose that the 1918 virus was not a reassortant virus (like those of the 1957 and 1968 pandemics), but more likely an entirely avian-like virus that adapted to humans. These data support prior phylogenetic studies suggesting that the 1918 virus was derived from an avian source. A total of ten amino acid changes in the polymerase proteins consistently differentiate the 1918 and subsequent human influenza virus sequences from avian virus sequences. Notably, a number of the same changes have been found in recently circulating, highly pathogenic H5N1 viruses that have caused illness and death in humans and are feared to be the precursors of a new influenza pandemic. The sequence changes identified here may be important in the adaptation of influenza viruses to humans.
In the traditional view of molecular evolution, the rate of point mutation is uniform over the genome of an organism and variation in the rate of nucleotide substitution among DNA regions reflects differential selective constraints. Here we provide evidence for significant variation in mutation rate among regions in the mammalian genome. We show first that substitutions at silent (degenerate) sites in protein-coding genes in mammals seem to be effectively neutral (or nearly so) as they do not occur significantly less frequently than substitutions in pseudogenes. We then show that the rate of silent substitution varies among genes and is correlated with the base composition of genes and their flanking DNA. This implies that the variation in both silent substitution rate and base composition can be attributed to systematic differences in the rate and pattern of mutation over regions of the genome. We propose that the differences arise because mutation patterns vary with the timing of replication of different chromosomal regions in the germline. This hypothesis can account for both the origin of isochores in mammalian genomes and the observation that silent nucleotide substitutions in different mammalian genes do not have the same molecular clock.
The concept of complementary base pairing, integral to the double-helical structure of DNA, provides an effective and elegant mechanism for the faithful transmission of genetic information. Implicit in this model, however, is the potential for incorporating non-complementary base pairs (mismatches) during replication or subsequently, for example, during genetic recombination. As such errors are usually damaging to the organism, they are generally detected and repaired. Occasionally, however, the propagation of erroneous copies of the genome confers a selective advantage, leading to genetic variation and evolutionary change. An understanding of the nature of base-pair mismatches at a molecular level, and the effect of incorporation of such errors on the secondary structure of DNA is thus of fundamental importance. We now report the first single-crystal X-ray analysis of a DNA fragment, d(GGGGCTCC), which contains two non-complementary G X T base pairs, and discuss the implications of the results for the in vivo recognition of base-pair mismatches.
Proteins interact with genomic DNA to bring the genome to life; and these interactions also define many functional features of the genome. SBF and MBF are sequence-specific transcription factors that activate gene expression during the G1/S transition of the cell cycle in yeast. SBF is a heterodimer of Swi4 and Swi6, and MBF is a heterodimer of Mbpl and Swi6 (refs 1, 3). The related Swi4 and Mbp1 proteins are the DNA-binding components of the respective factors, and Swi6 mayhave a regulatory function. A small number of SBF and MBF target genes have been identified. Here we define the genomic binding sites of the SBF and MBF transcription factors in vivo, by using DNA microarrays. In addition to the previously characterized targets, we have identified about 200 new putative targets. Our results support the hypothesis that SBF activated genes are predominantly involved in budding, and in membrane and cell-wall biosynthesis, whereas DNA replication and repair are the dominant functions among MBF activated genes. The functional specialization of these factors may provide a mechanism for independent regulation of distinct molecular processes that normally occur in synchrony during the mitotic cell cycle.
Avian myelocytomatosis virus strain MC29 is a replication-defective avian oncovirus which in newborn chickens causes myelocytomatosis and liver and kidney tumours. In vitro infection of bone marrow cells gives rise to colonies of transformed macrophage-like cells, and cloned viruses is also capable of transforming fibroblasts. The genome of MC29 contains cellular sequences which are closely related to those in other defective leukaemia viruses with similar transforming spectra. Consequently, these cellular sequences have been postulated to represent a new oncogene which has been designated mac, for macrophage transformation. MC29-transformed cells contain a gag gene-related protein of a 110,000 molecular weight (MW) (p110), which by tryptic peptide analysis has been shown to be a fusion product comprised of a gag gene-derived sequences and sequences which are presumed to be coded by the adjacent mac gene. These findings suggest that this protein may be implicated in transformation by MC29. We now describe three mutants of MC29 and synthesize smaller gag gene-related proteins. These mutants have an altered ability to transform bone marrow cells but not fibroblasts. This demonstrates for the first time a direct involvement of the p110 protein of MC29 in transformation.
The checkpoint regulatory mechanism has an important role in maintaining the integrity of the genome. This is particularly important in S phase of the cell cycle, when genomic DNA is most susceptible to various environmental hazards. When chemical agents damage DNA, activation of checkpoint signalling pathways results in a temporary cessation of DNA replication. A replication-pausing complex is believed to be created at the arrested forks to activate further checkpoint cascades, leading to repair of the damaged DNA. Thus, checkpoint factors are thought to act not only to arrest replication but also to maintain a stable replication complex at replication forks. However, the molecular mechanism coupling checkpoint regulation and replication arrest is unknown. Here we demonstrate that the checkpoint regulatory proteins Tof1 and Mrc1 interact directly with the DNA replication machinery in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. When hydroxyurea blocks chromosomal replication, this assembly forms a stable pausing structure that serves to anchor subsequent DNA repair events.
In many viral infections the host cell carries the viral genome without producing viral particles, a phenomenon known as viral latency. The cellular mechanisms by which viral latency is maintained or viral replication is induced are not known. The modulation of intracellular calcium concentrations by calcium ionophores induced Epstein-Barr viral antigens in lymphoblastoid cell lines that carry the virus. When calcium ionophores were used in conjunction with direct activators of protein kinase C (12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate and a synthetic diacylglycerol), a greater induction of viral antigens was observed than with either agent alone. Activation of protein kinase C may be required for the expression of the viral genome.
Although the murine retrovirus SL3-3 is highly leukaemogenic, in both the structure of its genome and in its properties of replication in tissue culture it closely resembles the nonleukaemogenic retrovirus Akv (refs 3, 4). An earlier investigation of the properties of recombinant SL3-3-Akv viruses localized the major determinant of leukaemogenicity outside the env gene, in a region of the viral genome that includes the gag gene and the noncoding long terminal repeat (LTR). To localize the determinant of SL3-3's leukaemogenicity more precisely we have now construced a recombinant provirus containing the LTR of SL3-3 and the coding region of Akv. The leukaemogenicity of these recombinants demonstrates that the determinant of leukaemogenicity lies within the SL3-3 LTR. Nucleotide sequencing of the LTRs of SL3-3 and Akv shows that they differ by a set of changes in the region thought to contain a transcriptional enhancer element. We suggest that enhancer region sequences are the major determinants of leukaemogenicity in these viruses.
Ribonuclease mitochondrial RNA processing, a site-specific endoribonuclease involved in primer RNA metabolism in mammalian mitochondria, requires an RNA component for its activity. On the basis of copurification and selective inactivation with complementary oligonucleotides, a 135-nucleotide RNA species, not encoded in the mitochondrial genome, is identified as the RNA moiety of the endoribonuclease. This finding implies transport of a nucleus-encoded RNA, essential for organelle DNA replication, to the mitochondrial matrix.
DNA from a replication-defective spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) was reconstructed and transfected into psi-2 cells containing a packaging-defective mutant of Moloney murine leukemia virus. Replication-incompetent retrovirus particles (helper virus-free containing genomes that express the transforming envelope gene of SFFV (gp52) transformed bone marrow cells in vitro and, after direct intravenous introduction of the vector, induced malignant erythroid disease in vivo. Disease induction was dependent on prior treatment of mice with phenylhydrazine, which probably increased the availability of erythroid target cells. Since there was no evidence of virus particle expression in mice with malignant disease, this study demonstrates the acute oncogenic potential of a limited number of erythroid cells expressing SFFV gp52. Direct inoculation of animals with nonreplicating retroviral vectors containing transforming genes may be useful in study the oncogenic effects of such genes.
Evidence is provided for the existence of a seventh gene in the genome of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus. The gene is necessary for replication and acts post-transcriptionally to relieve negative regulation of the messenger RNA for the virion capsid and envelope proteins. These observations suggest mechanisms for regulating both the latent and lytic phases of the virus life cycle.
Four juvenile rhesus monkeys were inoculated with 10(12) plaque-forming units of the bacteriophage phiV1 isolated from live virus vaccines. After phiV1 had been cleared from the blood, DNA's were isolated from the livers and kidneys and analyzed for the presence of bacteriophage by plaque assays, and for the presence of phiV1 DNA by DNA-DNA reassociation kinetics. No evidence was found for persistence of the bacteriophage or for replication of the phage genome in these rhesus monkeys.
Despite a rapid increase in the amount of available archaeal sequence information, little is known about the duplication of genetic material in the third domain of life. We identified a single origin of bidirectional replication in Pyrococcus abyssi by means of in silico analyses of cumulative oligomer skew and the identification of an early replicating chromosomal segment. The replication origin in three Pyrococcus species was found to be highly conserved, and several eukaryotic-like DNA replication genes were clustered around it. As in Bacteria, the chromosomal region containing the replication terminus was a hot spot of genome shuffling. Thus, although bacterial and archaeal replication proteins differ profoundly, they are used to replicate chromosomes in a similar manner in both prokaryotic domains.
Cyanobacteria, and the viruses (phages) that infect them, are significant contributors to the oceanic 'gene pool'. This pool is dynamic, and the transfer of genetic material between hosts and their phages probably influences the genetic and functional diversity of both. For example, photosynthesis genes of cyanobacterial origin have been found in phages that infect Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus, the numerically dominant phototrophs in ocean ecosystems. These genes include psbA, which encodes the photosystem II core reaction centre protein D1, and high-light-inducible (hli) genes. Here we show that phage psbA and hli genes are expressed during infection of Prochlorococcus and are co-transcribed with essential phage capsid genes, and that the amount of phage D1 protein increases steadily over the infective period. We also show that the expression of host photosynthesis genes declines over the course of infection and that replication of the phage genome is a function of photosynthesis. We thus propose that the phage genes are functional in photosynthesis and that they may be increasing phage fitness by supplementing the host production of these proteins.
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) is an autosomal recessive human disease associated with multiple deletions of skeletal muscle mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which have been ascribed to a defect in communication between the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. Examination of 12 MNGIE probands revealed homozygous or compound-heterozygous mutations in the gene specifying thymidine phosphorylase (TP), located on chromosome 22q13.32-qter. TP activity in leukocytes from MNGIE patients was less than 5 percent of controls, indicating that loss-of-function mutations in TP cause the disease. The pathogenic mechanism may be related to aberrant thymidine metabolism, leading to impaired replication or maintenance of mtDNA, or both.
It is widely believed that DNA replication in multicellular animals (metazoa) begins at specific origins to which a pre-replicative complex (pre-RC) binds. Nevertheless, a consensus sequence for origins has yet to be identified in metazoa. Origin identity can change during development, suggesting that there are epigenetic influences. A notable example of developmental specificity occurs in Drosophila, where somatic follicle cells of the ovary transition from genomic replication to exclusive re-replication at origins that control amplification of the eggshell (chorion) protein genes. Here we show that chromatin acetylation is critical for this developmental transition in origin specificity. We find that histones at the active origins are hyperacetylated, coincident with binding of the origin recognition complex (ORC). Mutation of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) Rpd3 induced genome-wide hyperacetylation, genomic replication and a redistribution of the origin-binding protein ORC2 in amplification-stage cells, independent of effects on transcription. Tethering Rpd3 or Polycomb proteins to the origin decreased its activity, whereas tethering the Chameau acetyltransferase increased origin activity. These results suggest that nucleosome acetylation and other epigenetic changes are important modulators of origin activity in metazoa.
Successful viral infection requires viruses to redirect host biochemistry to replicate the viral genome, and produce and assemble progeny virions. Cellular heat-shock responses, which are characterized as elevation and relocalization of heat-shock proteins, occur during replication of many viruses. Such responses might be host reactions to the synthesis of foreign protein, or might be irrelevant consequences of the viral need to activate transcription. Alternatively, as heat-shock proteins can facilitate protein folding, activating a heat-shock response might be a specific virus function ensuring proper synthesis of viral proteins and virions. It is not possible to determine whether heat-shock response is essential for virus replication, because the implicated viral genes (such as Ad5 EIA, ref. 10) also control other essential replication steps. Here we report that expression of Gam1, a protein encoded by the avian virus CELO (ref. 11), elevates and relocalizes hsp70 and hsp40. Gam1-negative CELO is replication-defective; however, Gam1 function can be partially replaced by either heat shock or forced hsp40 expression. Thus, an essential function of Gam1 during virus replication is to activate host heat-shock responses with hsp40 as a primary target.
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) in children results from autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells, leading to insufficient production of insulin. A number of genetic determinants of T1D have already been established through candidate gene studies, primarily within the major histocompatibility complex but also within other loci. To identify new genetic factors that increase the risk of T1D, we performed a genome-wide association study in a large paediatric cohort of European descent. In addition to confirming previously identified loci, we found that T1D was significantly associated with variation within a 233-kb linkage disequilibrium block on chromosome 16p13. This region contains KIAA0350, the gene product of which is predicted to be a sugar-binding, C-type lectin. Three common non-coding variants of the gene (rs2903692, rs725613 and rs17673553) in strong linkage disequilibrium reached genome-wide significance for association with T1D. A subsequent transmission disequilibrium test replication study in an independent cohort confirmed the association. These results indicate that KIAA0350 might be involved in the pathogenesis of T1D and demonstrate the utility of the genome-wide association approach in the identification of previously unsuspected genetic determinants of complex traits.
Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is a pathogenic human virus whose RNA genome and replication cycle resemble those of plant viroids. However, viroid genomes contain no open reading frames, whereas HDV RNA encodes a single protein, hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg), which is required for viral replication. A cellular gene whose product interacts with HDAg has now been identified, and this interaction was found to affect viral genomic replication in intact cells. DNA sequence analysis revealed that this protein, termed delta-interacting protein A (DIPA), is a cellular homolog of HDAg. These observations demonstrate that a host gene product can modulate HDV replication and suggest that HDV may have evolved from a primitive viroidlike RNA through capture of a cellular transcript.
The increasingly rapid pace at which genomic DNA sequences are being determined has created a need for more efficient techniques to determine which parts of these sequences are bound in vivo by the proteins controlling processes such as gene expression, DNA replication and chromosomal mechanics. Here we describe a whole-genome approach to identify and characterize such DNA sequences. The method uses endogenous or artificially introduced methylases to methylate all genomic targets except those protected in vivo by protein or non-protein factors interfering with methylase action. These protected targets remain unmethylated in purified genomic DNA and are identified using methylation-sensitive restriction endonucleases. When the method was applied to the Escherichia coli genome, 0.1% of the endogenous adenine methyl-transferase (Dam methylase) targets were found to be unmethylated. Five foreign methylases were examined by transfection. Database-matched DNA sequences flanking the in vivo-protected Dam sites all fell in the non-coding regions of seven E. coli operons (mtl, cdd, flh, gut, car, psp and fep). In the first four operons these DNA sequences closely matched the consensus sequence that binds to the cyclic AMP-receptor protein. The in vivo protection at the Dam site upstream of the car operon was correlated with a downregulation of car expression, as expected of a feedback repressor-binding model.
A variant of human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III) is described that replicates but does not kill normal human T cells in vitro. This variant, designated X10-1, was derived from the genome of a cytopathic HTLV-III clone (pHXB2D) by excision of a 200-base pair segment in the 3' region of the virus, spanning the env and 3'-orf genes. Comparable variants with 55 to 109 base pairs deleted exclusively in 3'-orf produced, in contrast, virus that was extremely cytopathic. On the basis of these findings it is concluded that the 3'-orf gene is not required for cytopathogenicity or replication of HTLV-III. In addition, the results suggest that virus replication and cytotoxicity are not intrinsically coupled. Furthermore, since clone X10-1 retains the ability to trans-activate genes linked to the viral long terminal repeats, trans-activation per se is not responsible for T-cell killing by HTLV-III. These results also raise the possibility that the carboxyl terminus of the envelope gene of HTLV-III has a direct role in T-cell killing by this virus.
RNA viruses show high mutation frequencies partly because of a lack of the proofreading enzymes that assure fidelity of DNA replication. This high mutation frequency is coupled with high rates of replication reflected in rates of RNA genome evolution which can be more than a millionfold greater than the rates of the DNA chromosome evolution of their hosts. There are some disease implications for the DNA-based biosphere of this rapidly evolving RNA biosphere.
DNA replication in bacteria is carried out by a multiprotein complex, which is thought to contain only one essential DNA polymerase, specified by the dnaE gene in Escherichia coli and the polC gene in Bacillus subtilis. Bacillus subtilis genome analysis has revealed another DNA polymerase gene, dnaE(BS), which is homologous to dnaE. We show that, in B. subtilis, dnaE(BS) is essential for cell viability and for the elongation step of DNA replication, as is polC, and we conclude that there are two different essential DNA polymerases at the replication fork of B. subtilis, as was previously observed in eukaryotes. dnaE(BS) appears to be involved in the synthesis of the lagging DNA strand and to be associated with the replication factory, which suggests that two different polymerases carry out synthesis of the two DNA strands in B. subtilis and in many other bacteria that contain both polC and dnaE genes.
NS3, an essential helicase for replication of hepatitis C virus, is a model enzyme for investigating helicase function. Using single-molecule fluorescence analysis, we showed that NS3 unwinds DNA in discrete steps of about three base pairs (bp). Dwell time analysis indicated that about three hidden steps are required before a 3-bp step is taken. Taking into account the available structural data, we propose a spring-loaded mechanism in which several steps of one nucleotide per adenosine triphosphate molecule accumulate tension on the protein-DNA complex, which is relieved periodically via a burst of 3-bp unwinding. NS3 appears to shelter the displaced strand during unwinding, and, upon encountering a barrier or after unwinding >18 bp, it snaps or slips backward rapidly and repeats unwinding many times in succession. Such repetitive unwinding behavior over a short stretch of duplex may help to keep secondary structures resolved during viral genome replication.
Cell-free translation of poliovirus RNA in an extract of uninfected human (HeLa) cells yielded viral proteins through proteolysis of the polyprotein. In the extract, newly synthesized proteins catalyzed poliovirus-specific RNA synthesis, and formed infectious poliovirus de novo. Newly formed virions were neutralized by type-specific antiserum, and infection of human cells with them was prevented by poliovirus receptor-specific antibodies. Poliovirus synthesis was increased nearly 70-fold when nucleoside triphosphates were added, but it was abolished in the presence of inhibitors of translation or viral genome replication. The ability to conduct cell-free synthesis of poliovirus will aid in the study of picornavirus proliferation and in the search for the control of picornaviral disease.
Eukaryotic cells use numerous mechanisms to ensure that no segment of their DNA is inappropriately re-replicated, but the importance of this stringent control on genome stability has not been tested. Here we show that re-replication in Saccharomyces cerevisiae can strongly induce the initial step of gene amplification, increasing gene copy number from one to two or more. The resulting amplicons consist of large internal chromosomal segments that are bounded by Ty repetitive elements and are intrachromosomally arrayed at their endogenous locus in direct head-to-tail orientation. These re-replication-induced gene amplifications are mediated by nonallelic homologous recombination between the repetitive elements. We suggest that re-replication may be a contributor to gene copy number changes, which are important in fields such as cancer biology, evolution, and human genetics.
Gross chromosome rearrangements (GCRs), such as translocations, deletion of a chromosome arm, interstitial deletions and inversions, are often observed in cancer cells. Spontaneous GCRs are rare in Saccharomyces cerevisiae; however, the existence of mutator mutants with increased genome instability suggests that GCRs are actively suppressed. Here we show by genetic analysis that these genome rearrangements probably result from DNA replication errors and are suppressed by at least three interacting pathways or groups of proteins: S-phase checkpoint functions, recombination proteins and proteins that prevent de novo addition of telomeres at double-strand breaks (DSBs). Mutations that inactivate these pathways cause high rates of GCRs and show synergistic interactions, indicating that the pathways that suppress GCRs all compete for the same DNA substrates.
Studies of the genomic structure of human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III) and related viruses, implicated as the causal agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), have identified a sixth open reading frame in addition to the five previously known within the genome (gag, pol, sor, env and 3'orf). This gene, called tat-III, lies between the sor and env genes and is able to mediate activation, in a trans configuration, of the genes linked to HTLV-III long terminal repeat (LTR) sequences. We now present evidence that the product of tat-III is an absolute requirement for virus expression. We show that derivatives of a biologically competent molecular clone of HTLV-III, in which the tat-III gene is deleted or the normal splicing abrogated, failed to produce or expressed unusually low levels of virus, respectively, when transfected into T-cell cultures. The capacity of these tat-III-defective genomes was transiently restored by co-transfection of a plasmid clone containing a functional tat-III gene or by introducing the TAT-III protein itself. As HTLV-III and related viruses are the presumed causal agents of AIDS and associated conditions, the observation that tat-III is critical for HTLV-III replication has important clinical implications, and suggests that specific inhibition of the activity of tat-III could be a novel and effective therapeutic approach to the treatment of AIDS.
Common copy number variations (CNVs) represent a significant source of genetic diversity, yet their influence on phenotypic variability, including disease susceptibility, remains poorly understood. To address this problem in human cancer, we performed a genome-wide association study of CNVs in the childhood cancer neuroblastoma, a disease in which single nucleotide polymorphism variations are known to influence susceptibility. We first genotyped 846 Caucasian neuroblastoma patients and 803 healthy Caucasian controls at approximately 550,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms, and performed a CNV-based test for association. We then replicated significant observations in two independent sample sets comprised of a total of 595 cases and 3,357 controls. Here we describe the identification of a common CNV at chromosome 1q21.1 associated with neuroblastoma in the discovery set, which was confirmed in both replication sets. This CNV was validated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction, fluorescent in situ hybridization and analysis of matched tumour specimens, and was shown to be heritable in an independent set of 713 cancer-free parent-offspring trios. We identified a previously unknown transcript within the CNV that showed high sequence similarity to several neuroblastoma breakpoint family (NBPF) genes and represents a new member of this gene family (NBPF23). This transcript was preferentially expressed in fetal brain and fetal sympathetic nervous tissues, and the expression level was strictly correlated with CNV state in neuroblastoma cells. These data demonstrate that inherited copy number variation at 1q21.1 is associated with neuroblastoma and implicate a previously unknown neuroblastoma breakpoint family gene in early tumorigenesis of this childhood cancer.
Whole-genome sequencing of the protozoan pathogen Trypanosoma cruzi revealed that the diploid genome contains a predicted 22,570 proteins encoded by genes, of which 12,570 represent allelic pairs. Over 50% of the genome consists of repeated sequences, such as retrotransposons and genes for large families of surface molecules, which include trans-sialidases, mucins, gp63s, and a large novel family (>1300 copies) of mucin-associated surface protein (MASP) genes. Analyses of the T. cruzi, T. brucei, and Leishmania major (Tritryp) genomes imply differences from other eukaryotes in DNA repair and initiation of replication and reflect their unusual mitochondrial DNA. Although the Tritryp lack several classes of signaling molecules, their kinomes contain a large and diverse set of protein kinases and phosphatases; their size and diversity imply previously unknown interactions and regulatory processes, which may be targets for intervention.
Positive-strand RNA viruses such as poliovirus replicate their genomes on intracellular membranes of their eukaryotic hosts. Electron microscopy has revealed that purified poliovirus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase forms planar and tubular oligomeric arrays. The structural integrity of these arrays correlates with cooperative RNA binding and RNA elongation and is sensitive to mutations that disrupt intermolecular contacts predicted by the polymerase structure. Membranous vesicles isolated from poliovirus-infected cells contain structures consistent with the presence of two-dimensional polymerase arrays on their surfaces during infection. Therefore, host cytoplasmic membranes may function as physical foundations for two-dimensional polymerase arrays, conferring the advantages of surface catalysis to viral RNA replication.
