Studies of immobilized kinesin have shown that a single dimeric molecule can maintain contact with and drive sliding of a microtubule. In solution, however, native kinesin binds microtubules too weakly and hydrolyses ATP too slowly to produce the high sliding velocities seen in motility assay. This apparent inhibition in solution appears to be caused by the binding of kinesin's tail domains to its motor (head) domains in a folded conformation. DKH392, a construct containing two heads but no tails, has been shown to display both tight binding to microtubules and high ATPase rates. Furthermore, it retains one molecule of ADP per dimer when bound to microtubules, which could facilitate a 'hand-over-hand' mechanism for processive motion. Here we show that DKH392 hydrolyses more than 100 ATP molecules per diffusional encounter with a microtubule, even in the high-salt conditions encountered physiologically. This provides direct evidence that kinesin's activity is highly processive, with the motor remaining attached to a microtubule through many cycles of ATP hydrolysis.
DNAs from both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms have yielded restriction fragments which manifest markedly anomalous electrophoretic behaviour (reduced mobility) when run on polyacrylamide gels. We have shown previously that the abnormal electrophoretic behaviour of one such fragment is a consequence of stable curvature of the helix axis in solution. The molecules involved tend to contain oligo(dA)-oligo(dT) runs which are approximately in-phase with the helix repeat; however, the precise structural elements responsible for DNA curvature have not been identified. One popular model for curvature invokes a non-coplanar 'wedge-like' conformation of ApA/TpT dinucleotide pairs. Despite a lack of direct evidence in support of this model, it has been used to provide quantitative estimates of curvature. To critically evaluate the ApA wedge model, we have performed an electrophoretic analysis of a series of closely related DNA polymers in which oligo(dA)-oligo(dT) runs of different polarity were compared. We conclude that ApA dinucleotide wedges cannot account for DNA curvature. Therefore, quantitative estimates for ApA wedge deformations, based solely on apparent curvature, cannot be correct.
A 148-nucleotide subfragment of hepatitis delta virus RNA was shown to undergo cleavage and ligation reversibly. The direction of the reaction is determined by the presence or absence of Mg2+ ions, with the presence of Mg2+ favoring the cleavage reaction. Ligation requires specific conformation of the RNA molecules involved and occurs only between two cleaved RNA fragments that are still held together by hydrogen bonds. The ligation reaction occurs rapidly on removal of Mg2+ by EDTA. This represents a new class of RNA enzymes.
Fluorimetry, a powerful research tool in the study of biological macromolecules, has a number of valuable applications in investigations of synthetic polymers. These techniques reveal the microscopically heterogeneous distribution of species in polymer systems, which is specially pronounced in solutions of polyelectrolytes. They also allow us to study conformational mobility of flexible chains, diffusion-controlled intermolecular reactions of macromolecular reagents, glass transition phenomena, and polymer compatibility.
Folding of two monomeric enzymes mediated by groE has been reconstituted in vitro. The groEL protein stabilizes the polypeptides in a conformation resembling the 'molten globule' state. Mg-ATP and groES then promote the acquisition of ordered tertiary structure at the surface of groEL. Folding requires the hydrolysis of about 100 ATP molecules per protein monomer. This active process of surface-mediated chain folding might represent a general mechanism for the formation of protein structure in vivo.
Enzymatic turnovers of single cholesterol oxidase molecules were observed in real time by monitoring the emission from the enzyme's fluorescent active site, flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Statistical analyses of single-molecule trajectories revealed a significant and slow fluctuation in the rate of cholesterol oxidation by FAD. The static disorder and dynamic disorder of reaction rates, which are essentially indistinguishable in ensemble-averaged experiments, were determined separately by the real-time single-molecule approach. A molecular memory phenomenon, in which an enzymatic turnover was not independent of its previous turnovers because of a slow fluctuation of protein conformation, was evidenced by spontaneous spectral fluctuation of FAD.
Protein folding is inherently a heterogeneous process because of the very large number of microscopic pathways that connect the myriad unfolded conformations to the unique conformation of the native structure. In a first step towards the long-range goal of describing the distribution of pathways experimentally, Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET) has been measured on single, freely diffusing molecules. Here we use this method to determine properties of the free-energy surface for folding that have not been obtained from ensemble experiments. We show that single-molecule FRET measurements of a small cold-shock protein expose equilibrium collapse of the unfolded polypeptide and allow us to calculate limits on the polypeptide reconfiguration time. From these results, limits on the height of the free-energy barrier to folding are obtained that are consistent with a simple statistical mechanical model, but not with the barriers derived from simulations using molecular dynamics. Unlike the activation energy, the free-energy barrier includes the activation entropy and thus has been elusive to experimental determination for any kinetic process in solution.
Mutations in Ras protein at positions Gly12 and Gly13 (phosphate-binding loop L1) and at positions Ala59, Gly60, and Gln61 (loop L4) are commonly associated with oncogenic activation. The structural and catalytic roles of these residues were probed with a series of unnatural amino acids that have unusual main chain conformations, hydrogen bonding abilities, and steric features. The properties of wild-type and transforming Ras proteins previously thought to be uniquely associated with the structure of a single amino acid at these positions were retained by mutants that contained a variety of unnatural amino acids. This expanded set of functional mutants provides new insight into the role of loop L4 residues in switch function and suggests that loop L1 may participate in the activation of Ras protein by effector molecules.
We have solved the crystal structure of a synthetic DNA hexadecanucleotide of sequence: C-G-C-G-C-G-T-T-T-T-C-G-C-G-C-G, at 2.1 A resolution, and observed that it adopts a monomeric hairpin configuration with a Z-DNA hexamer stem. In the T4 loop the bases stack with one another and with neighbouring molecules of the crystal, and not with base pairs of their own hexamer stem. Two thymine T10 rings from different molecules stack between the C1-G16 ends of a third and a fourth hairpin helix, in a manner that suggests T-T base 'pairing' and simulates a long, 13-base-pair helix. Although such T-T interactions would not be present in solution, they illustrate a remarkable tendency of thymines for self-association. Purine-purine G-A base pairs are known to exist in the anti-anti conformation with an increase in local helix width; it may be that more serious consideration should be given to the possible existence of pyrimidine-pyrimidine C-T base pairs with decreased local helix width, particularly where several such base pairs occur sequentially.
Bacterial multidrug tolerance is largely responsible for the inability of antibiotics to eradicate infections and is caused by a small population of dormant bacteria called persisters. HipA is a critical Escherichia coli persistence factor that is normally neutralized by HipB, a transcription repressor, which also regulates hipBA expression. Here, we report multiple structures of HipA and a HipA-HipB-DNA complex. HipA has a eukaryotic serine/threonine kinase-like fold and can phosphorylate the translation factor EF-Tu, suggesting a persistence mechanism via cell stasis. The HipA-HipB-DNA structure reveals the HipB-operator binding mechanism, approximately 70 degrees DNA bending, and unexpected HipA-DNA contacts. Dimeric HipB interacts with two HipA molecules to inhibit its kinase activity through sequestration and conformational inactivation. Combined, these studies suggest mechanisms for HipA-mediated persistence and its neutralization by HipB.
Our understanding of how ions pass across biological membranes has been greatly advanced by the study of small molecules which are capable of enhancing ion transport. The concepts of ion movement through channels or via mobile ion carriers have arisen from studies of model systems. However, direct probing at the molecular level of the process of ion movement in a membrane system has proved difficult. The electrical properties of black lipid membrane model systems do not provide information about the details of ionophore location or conformation. Spectroscopic methods which are suited for probing the details of ionophore conformation and the stoichometry of ion binding have been confined largely to organic solvent systems which are limited as models for biological membranes. We report here proton magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectroscopic studies which investigate valinomycin conformation and ion binding in small bilayer vesicles.
Secondary transporters are integral membrane proteins that catalyse the movement of substrate molecules across the lipid bilayer by coupling substrate transport to one or more ion gradients, thereby providing a mechanism for the concentrative uptake of substrates. Here we describe crystallographic and thermodynamic studies of Glt(Ph), a sodium (Na+)-coupled aspartate transporter, defining sites for aspartate, two sodium ions and d,l-threo-beta-benzyloxyaspartate, an inhibitor. We further show that helical hairpin 2 is the extracellular gate that controls access of substrate and ions to the internal binding sites. At least two sodium ions bind in close proximity to the substrate and these sodium-binding sites, together with the sodium-binding sites in another sodium-coupled transporter, LeuT, define an unwound alpha-helix as the central element of the ion-binding motif, a motif well suited to the binding of sodium and to participation in conformational changes that accompany ion binding and unbinding during the transport cycle.
Using an optical-trap/flow-control video microscopy technique, we followed transcription by single molecules of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase in real time over long template distances. These studies reveal that RNA polymerase molecules possess different intrinsic transcription rates and different propensities to pause and stop. The data also show that reversible pausing is a kinetic intermediate between normal elongation and the arrested state. The conformational metastability of RNA polymerase revealed by this single-molecule study of transcription has direct implications for the mechanisms of gene regulation in both bacteria and eukaryotes.
Selenocysteine is the only genetically encoded amino acid in humans whose biosynthesis occurs on its cognate transfer RNA (tRNA). O-Phosphoseryl-tRNA:selenocysteinyl-tRNA synthase (SepSecS) catalyzes the final step of selenocysteine formation by a poorly understood tRNA-dependent mechanism. The crystal structure of human tRNA(Sec) in complex with SepSecS, phosphoserine, and thiophosphate, together with in vivo and in vitro enzyme assays, supports a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent mechanism of Sec-tRNA(Sec) formation. Two tRNA(Sec) molecules, with a fold distinct from other canonical tRNAs, bind to each SepSecS tetramer through their 13-base pair acceptor-TPsiC arm (where Psi indicates pseudouridine). The tRNA binding is likely to induce a conformational change in the enzyme's active site that allows a phosphoserine covalently attached to tRNA(Sec), but not free phosphoserine, to be oriented properly for the reaction to occur.
Relative orientations of the DNA strands within a purine.purine.pyrimidine triple helix have been determined by affinity cleaving. A purine-rich oligonucleotide bound in the major groove of double-helical DNA antiparallel to the Watson-Crick purine strand. Binding depended upon the concentration of multivalent cations such as spermine or Mg2+, and appeared to be relatively independent of pH. Two models with specific hydrogen-bonding patterns for base triplets (G.GC, A.AT, and T.AT) are proposed to explain the sequence specificity of binding. The two models differ in the conformation about the glycosyl bond (syn or anti) and the location of the phosphate-deoxyribose backbone in the major groove of DNA. This motif broadens the structural frameworks available as a basis for the design of sequence-specific DNA binding molecules.
The contour lengths of phiX174 DNA duplex and RNA-DNA hybrid molecules were measured by several commonly used electron microscopic techniques. The countour length of the hybrid molecules corresponds to a rise of 2.5 to 2.6 angstroms per base pair, as expected for the A conformation, while the length of phiX174 duplex DNA similarly measured corresponds to a 2.9-angstrom rise, very different from 3.4 angstroms of the classic B form. Thus any chromatin structure parameter based on electron microscopy and a rise of 3.4 angstroms must be reappraised. The possibility that DNA in dilute solution also has a rise of 2.9 angstroms and a screw of 10.5 base pairs per turn is discussed.
The x-ray structures of a murine MHC class I molecule (H-2Kb) were determined in complex with two different viral peptides, derived from the vesicular stomatitis virus nucleoprotein (52-59), VSV-8, and the Sendai virus nucleoprotein (324-332), SEV-9. The H-2Kb complexes were refined at 2.3 A for VSV-8 and 2.5 A for SEV-9. The structure of H-2Kb exhibits a high degree of similarity with human HLA class I, although the individual domains can have slightly altered dispositions. Both peptides bind in extended conformations with most of their surfaces buried in the H-2Kb binding groove. The nonamer peptide maintains the same amino- and carboxyl-terminal interactions as the octamer primarily by the insertion of a bulge in the center of an otherwise beta conformation. Most of the specific interactions are between side-chain atoms of H-2Kb and main-chain atoms of peptide. This binding scheme accounts in large part for the enormous diversity of peptide sequences that bind with high affinity to class I molecules. Small but significant conformational changes in H-2Kb are associated with peptide binding, and these synergistic movements may be an integral part of the T cell receptor recognition process.
The serpins have evolved to be the predominant family of serine-protease inhibitors in man. Their unique mechanism of inhibition involves a profound change in conformation, although the nature and significance of this change has been controversial. Here we report the crystallographic structure of a typical serpin-protease complex and show the mechanism of inhibition. The conformational change is initiated by reaction of the active serine of the protease with the reactive centre of the serpin. This cleaves the reactive centre, which then moves 71 A to the opposite pole of the serpin, taking the tethered protease with it. The tight linkage of the two molecules and resulting overlap of their structures does not affect the hyperstable serpin, but causes a surprising 37% loss of structure in the protease. This is induced by the plucking of the serine from its active site, together with breakage of interactions formed during zymogen activation. The disruption of the catalytic site prevents the release of the protease from the complex, and the structural disorder allows its proteolytic destruction. It is this ability of the conformational mechanism to crush as well as inhibit proteases that provides the serpins with their selective advantage.
L-N-Acetylhistidine crystallizes from aqueous solution as the monohydrate. The crystals are triclinic, space group P1, with two formula units per cell. The structural solution was accomplished by direct methods. The two independent molecules have very different conformations, one open and one closed. These two conformations are compared with those found in other histidine structures.
Membranes composed of amphiphilic molecules are highly flexible surfaces that determine the architecture of biological systems and provide a basic structural element for complex fluids such as microemulsions. Physical theories have been developed to describe many aspects of their conformational behaviour, such as the preferred shapes and shape transformations of closed vesicles, and the shape fluctuations, random-surface configurations, and adhesion and unbinding of interacting membranes. Understanding of these phenomena has been much improved through fruitful interactions between theory and experiment.
The three-dimensional structure of tropomyosin filaments has been determined by X-ray crystallography. The ends of the molecules were located by reference to the single pair of cysteine residues. Departures from the alpha-helical-coiled coil conformation may occur in localised domains along the molecule as well as at the overlapping ends.
General anaesthesia can be induced by a wide variety of structurally dissimilar molecules. Consequently, the mechanism must involve some rather nonspecific interactions as the target site, generally held to be in nerve membranes. The primary site of action has been postulated to be either lipid or protein or both. Although recent work has cast doubt on the lipid hypotheses, protein models still flourish. In particular, Seeman and his co-workers have shown that biological membranes expand when anaesthetic molecules are added, and that this expansion is far greater than that which occurs with lipid bilayers. It has been suggested that this difference is due to extensive conformational changes in the membrane proteins, and several mechanisms have been proposed to explain this large expansion of proteins. We now report the first direct measurements of the volumes occupied by general anaesthetic molecules in both biological membranes and lipid bilayers. We show that, in fact, biological membranes expand much less and lipid bilayers expand more than previously reported. The volume that a general anaesthetic molecule occupies is essentially the same in biological membranes, lipid bilayers and water. Our results lead us to question all generalized membrane expansion hypotheses for the mechanism of general anaesthesia, in favour of hypotheses would include more specialized target sites.
Individual polymers at thermal equilibrium were exposed to an elongational flow producing a high strain rate, and their dynamics were recorded with video fluorescence microscopy. The flow was turned on suddenly so that the entire evolution of molecular conformation could be observed without initial perturbations. The rate of stretching of individual molecules is highly variable and depends on the molecular conformation that develops during stretching. This variability is due to a dependence of the dynamics on the initial, random equilibrium conformation of the polymer coil. The increasing appearance at high strain rates of slowly unraveling hairpin folds is an example of nonergodic dynamics, which can occur when a statistical mechanical system is subjected to nonadiabatic, or "sudden," external forces.
Protein folding by the double-ring chaperonin GroEL is initiated in cis ternary complexes, in which polypeptide is sequestered in the central channel of a GroEL ring, capped by the co-chaperonin GroES. The cis ternary complex is dissociated (half-life of approximately 15 s) by trans-sided ATP hydrolysis, which triggers release of GroES. For the substrate protein rhodanese, only approximately 15% of cis-localized molecules attain their native form before hydrolysis. A major question concerning the GroEL mechanism is whether both native and non-native forms are released from the cis complex. Here we address this question using a 'cis-only' mixed-ring GroEL complex that binds polypeptide and GroES on only one of its two rings. This complex mediates refolding of rhodanese but, as with wild-type GroEL, renaturation is quenched by addition of mutant GroEL 'traps', which bind but do not release polypeptide substrate. This indicates that non-native forms are released from the cis complex. Quenching of refolding by traps was also observed under physiological conditions, both in undiluted Xenopus oocyte extract and in intact oocytes. We conclude that release of non-native forms from GroEL in vivo allows a kinetic partitioning among various chaperones and proteolytic components, which determines both the conformation and lifetime of a protein.
Molecular assemblies held together by weak intermolecular bonds exhibit a rich variety of geometries. Even a simple complex formed by only two molecules can adopt several conformations corresponding to different geometrical isomers. Isomers of small polar dimers can be isolated nondestructively by taking advantage of a selective and reversible ionization process, with the use of a mass spectrometry method that allows the determination and control of the geometrical configuration of neutral or negatively charged molecular complexes in supersonic beams. Here, the method is applied to isolated nucleic acid base pairs that can be selected in stacked or H-bonded configurations.
Recent analyses of the three-dimensional structure of synthetic DNA molecules has revealed the existence of a left-handed double-helical conformation of DNA, called Z-DNA. The Z-DNA structure was first observed in molecules having alternating guanine and cytosine bases, but has now also been shown for molecules of sequence poly(dT-dG) . poly(dC-dA) (refs 4-7). If Z-DNA occurs naturally then it might have quite different reactivities with molecules such as proteins or carcinogens from right-handed B-DNA. The interconversion of sequences between B and Z forms, under the influence, for example, of DNA binding proteins or chemical modification, may be important in regulating DNA function. So far, little data have been published on the occurrence of potential Z-DNA forming sequences in eukaryotic DNA. Here we report the presence of a sequence of 50 alternating dT and dG residues within one of the introns of a human cardiac muscle actin gene. Also, using a probe specific for poly(dT-dG) sequences, we have also found that potential Z-DNA forming sequences are highly repeated in the human genome.
Dynamic Monte Carlo simulations of the folding of a globular protein, apoplastocyanin, have been undertaken in the context of a new lattice model of proteins that includes both side chains and a-carbon backbone atoms and that can approximate native conformations at the level of 2 angstroms (root mean square) or better. Starting from random-coil unfolded states, the model apoplastocyanin was folded to a native conformation that is topologically similar to the real protein. The present simulations used a marginal propensity for local secondary structure consistent with but by no means enforcing the native conformation and a full hydrophobicity scale in which any nonbonded pair of side chains could interact. These molecules folded through a punctuated on-site mechanism of assembly where folding initiated at or near one of the turns ultimately found in the native conformation. Thus these simulations represent a partial solution to the globular-protein folding problem.
The nucleotide sequence of one of the Escherichia coli tyrosine-transfer ribonucleic acids was determined in order to compare its sequence with that of yeast tyrosine-transfer ribonucleic acid. Forty-four positions of both transfer ribonucleic acids are occupied by the same nucleotides if they are arranged in the manner shown here. The information obtained suggests that the conformation of transfer ribonucleic acid molecules may be a greater contributing factor than a specific nucleotide sequence in the interaction of transfer ribonucleic acid with its corresponding aminoacyl-transfer ribonucleic acid synthetase.
The multidomain proapoptotic molecules BAK or BAX are required to initiate the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. How cells maintain the potentially lethal proapoptotic effector BAK in a monomeric inactive conformation at mitochondria is unknown. In viable cells, we found BAK complexed with mitochondrial outer-membrane protein VDAC2, a VDAC isoform present in low abundance that interacts specifically with the inactive conformer of BAK. Cells deficient in VDAC2, but not cells lacking the more abundant VDAC1, exhibited enhanced BAK oligomerization and were more susceptible to apoptotic death. Conversely, overexpression of VDAC2 selectively prevented BAK activation and inhibited the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Death signals activate "BH3-only" molecules such as tBID, BIM, or BAD, which displace VDAC2 from BAK, enabling homo-oligomerization of BAK and apoptosis. Thus, VDAC2, an isoform restricted to mammals, regulates the activity of BAK and provides a connection between mitochondrial physiology and the core apoptotic pathway.
The folding pathways of large, highly structured RNA molecules are largely unexplored. Insight into both the kinetics of folding and the presence of intermediates was provided in a study of the Mg(2+)-induced folding of the Tetrahymena ribozyme by hybridization of complementary oligodeoxynucleotide probes. This RNA folds via a complex mechanism involving both Mg(2+)-dependent and Mg(2+)-independent steps. A hierarchical model for the folding pathway is proposed in which formation of one helical domain (P4-P6) precedes that of a second helical domain (P3-P7). The overall rate-limiting step is formation of P3-P7, and takes place with an observed rate constant of 0.72 +/- 0.14 minute-1. The folding mechanism of large RNAs appears similar to that of many multidomain proteins in that formation of independently stable substructures precedes their association into the final conformation.
The crystal structure of bovine heart cytochrome c oxidase at 2.8 A resolution with an R value of 19.9 percent reveals 13 subunits, each different from the other, five phosphatidyl ethanolamines, three phosphatidyl glycerols and two cholates, two hemes A, and three copper, one magnesium, and one zinc. Of 3606 amino acid residues in the dimer, 3560 have been converged to a reasonable structure by refinement. A hydrogen-bonded system, including a propionate of a heme A (heme a), part of peptide backbone, and an imidazole ligand of CuA, could provide an electron transfer pathway between CuA and heme a. Two possible proton pathways for pumping, each spanning from the matrix to the cytosolic surfaces, were identified, including hydrogen bonds, internal cavities likely to contain water molecules, and structures that could form hydrogen bonds with small possible conformational change of amino acid side chains. Possible channels for chemical protons to produce H2O, for removing the produced water, and for O2, respectively, were identified.
Protein folding mediated by the molecular chaperone GroEL occurs by its binding to non-native polypeptide substrates and is driven by ATP hydrolysis. Both of these processes are influenced by the reversible association of the co-protein, GroES (refs 2-4). GroEL and other chaperonin 60 molecules are large, cylindrical oligomers consisting of two stacked heptameric rings of subunits; each ring forms a cage-like structure thought to bind polypeptides in a central cavity. Chaperonins play a passive role in folding by binding or sequestering folding proteins to prevent their aggregation, but they may also actively unfold substrate proteins trapped in misfolded forms, enabling them to assume productive folding conformations. Biochemical studies show that GroES improves the efficiency of GroEL function, but the structural basis for this is unknown. Here we report the first direct visualization, by cryo-electron microscopy, of a non-native protein substrate (malate dehydrogenase) bound to the mobile, outer domains at one end of GroEL. Addition of GroES to GroEL in the presence of ATP causes a dramatic hinge opening of about 60 degrees. GroES binds to the equivalent surface of the GroEL outer domains, but on the opposite end of the GroEL oligomer to the protein substrate.
We tracked over time the conductance switching of single and bundled phenylene ethynylene oligomers isolated in matrices of alkanethiolate monolayers. The persistence times for isolated and bundled molecules in either the ON or OFF switch state range from seconds to tens of hours. When the surrounding matrix is well ordered, the rate at which the inserted molecules switch is low. Conversely, when the surrounding matrix is poorly ordered, the inserted molecules switch more often. We conclude that the switching is a result of conformational changes in the molecules or bundles, rather than electrostatic effects of charge transfer.
Crystal structures of insulin contain molecules that are similar but not identical in conformation. Packed helices move relative to each other, these shifts being accommodated by motions of side-chain atoms arising from small changes in torsion angles. Such low-energy conformational adjustments can accommodate shifts of no more than approximately 1.5 A. This limits the extent to which conformational changes can be dissipated locally, causing their transmission over long distances.
X-ray analysis, circular dichroism, receptor binding and biological potencies of chemically modified insulins suggest that the conformation of the insulin molecule is critical to the formation of both the zinc insulin hexamer and the insulin-receptor complex. Results are consistent with an insulin receptor-binding region including many of the hydrophobic residues important to dimerisation in addition to more polar surface residues. There is a further possibility of formation of an antiparallel sheet structure between the insulin and receptor molecules in the complex similar to that between monomers in the insulin dimer.
The crystal structure of a cubic phase of composition XeF(6) has been determined at -80 degrees C. There are no simple molecules in the complex structure which involves 1008 atoms distributed over 1600 positions per unit cell. Ions of XeF(5)+ and F- are associated in tetrameric and hexameric rings of point group symmetries 4 and 32, respectively. The structure contains right-and left-handed conformations of both tetramers and hexamers. The handedness of the tetramers is dis-ordered but the orientation is ordered. The handedness of the hexamers is ordered but the orientation is disordered.
Many indirect methods have been developed to study the constitution and conformation of macromolecules inside the living cell. Direct analysis by Raman spectroscopy is an ideal complement to techniques using directly labelled fluorescent probes or of indirect labelling with mono- and polyclonal antibodies. The high information content of Raman spectra can characterize biological macromolecules both in solution and in crystals. The positions, intensities and linewidths of the Raman lines (corresponding to vibrational energy levels) in spectra of DNA-protein complexes yield information about the composition, secondary structure and interactions of these molecules, including the chemical microenvironment of molecular subgroups. The main drawback of the method is the low Raman scattering cross-section of biological macromolecules, which until now has prohibited studies at the level of the single cell with the exception of (salmon) sperm heads, in which the DNA is condensed to an exceptionally high degree. Ultraviolet-resonance Raman spectroscopy has been used to obtain single cell spectra (and F. Sureau and P. Y. Turpin, personal communication), but in this method absorption of laser light may impair the integrity of the sample. We have avoided this problem in developing a novel, highly sensitive confocal Raman microspectrometer for nonresonant Raman spectroscopy. Our instrument makes it possible to study single cells and chromosomes with a high spatial resolution (approximately less than 1 micron 3).
The crystal structure of interferon-gamma bound to the extracellular fragment of its high-affinity cell-surface receptor reveals the first view of a class-2 cytokine receptor-ligand complex. In the complex, one interferon-gamma homodimer binds two receptor molecules. Unlike the class-1 growth hormone receptor complex, the two interferon-gamma receptors do not interact with one another and are separated by 27 A. Upon receptor binding, the flexible AB loop of interferon-gamma undergoes a conformational change that includes the formation of a 3(10) helix.
A new crystal form of rabbit muscle aldolase shows that the molecule has 222 symmetry to at least 4-angstrom resolution, and hence that the gross conformation of the four subunits is the same. Comparison of the new form with a previously reported form establishes the number of molecules per unit cell, n, in the older form. For an independent check, the "crystal-volume and protein-content method" was developed to determine n without directly measuring the water content of the crystals.
There is evidence that peptide ligands take part in the assembly of class I molecules. In particular, addition of peptides to extracts of the mutant cells RMA-S and .174/T2, in which stable assembly of class I does not occur, results in a conformational change in the class I heavy chain and stable association of the heavy chain with beta 2-microglobulin (beta 2m). Thus specific peptides may stabilize or induce a conformational change in the class I heavy chain that results in a rise in the binding affinity of the heavy chain for beta 2m (Fig. 1a). Here we show that peptides have two cooperative roles in class I assembly. Specific short peptides (9-10 amino acids) can induce folding of the heavy chain in the absence of beta 2m. Both short (nine amino acids) and longer sequences (15 amino acids) can stabilize performed low-affinity complexes of heavy chain and beta 2m. To alter the conformation of free heavy chains, the peptides must be exactly the correct size, and they are found to correspond to the sequences isolated from infected cells. This property may therefore be the basis for selection of epitopes presented in vivo.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a type I receptor tyrosine kinase, the deregulation of which has been implicated in a variety of human carcinomas. EGFR signalling is preceded by receptor dimerization, typically thought to result from a ligand-induced conformational change in the ectodomain that exposes a loop (dimerization arm) required for receptor association. Ligand binding may also trigger allosteric changes in the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor that is crucial for signalling. Despite these insights, ensemble-averaging approaches have not determined the precise mechanism of receptor activation in situ. Using quantum-dot-based optical tracking of single molecules combined with a novel time-dependent diffusivity analysis, here we present the dimerization dynamics of individual EGFRs on living cells. Before ligand addition, EGFRs spontaneously formed finite-lifetime dimers kinetically stabilized by their dimerization arms. The dimers were primed both for ligand binding and for signalling, such that after EGF addition they rapidly showed a very slow diffusivity state that correlated with activation. Although the kinetic stability of unliganded dimers was in principle sufficient for EGF-independent activation, ligand binding was still required for signalling. Interestingly, dimers were enriched in the cell periphery in an actin- and receptor-expression-dependent fashion, resulting in a peripheral enhancement of EGF-induced signalling that may enable polarized responses to growth factors.
Phage T4 lysozyme consists of two domains between which is formed the active-site cleft of the enzyme. The crystallographically determined thermal displacement parameters for the protein suggested that the amino terminal of the two domains undergoes 'hinge-bending' motion about an axis passing through the waist of the molecule. Such conformational mobility may be important in allowing access of substrates to the active site of the enzyme. We report here a crystallographic study of a mutant T4 lysozyme which demonstrates further the conformational flexibility of the protein. A mutant form of the enzyme with a methionine residue (Met 6) replaced by isoleucine crystallizes with four independent molecules in the crystal lattice. These four molecules have distinctly different conformations. The mutant protein can also crystallize in standard form with a structure very similar to the wild-type protein. Thus the mutant protein can adopt five different crystal conformations. The isoleucine for methionine substitution at the intersection of the two domains of T4 lysozyme apparently enhances the hinge-bending motion presumed to occur in the wild-type protein, without significantly affecting the catalytic activity or thermal stability of the protein.
The photochemistry of poly[2-methoxy, 5-(2'-ethyl-hexyloxy)-p-phenylene-vinylene] (MEH-PPV) has been found to be highly dependent on the presence of O(2), which increases singlet exciton quenching dramatically. Spectroscopy on isolated single molecules of MEH-PPV in polycarbonate films that exclude O(2) reveals two distinct polymer conformations with fluorescence maxima near 555 and 580 nanometers wavelength, respectively. Time-resolved single-molecule data demonstrate that the 580-nanometer conformation exhibits a "landscape" for intramolecular electronic energy relaxation with a "funnel" that contains a 580-nanometer singlet exciton trap at the bottom. The exciton traps can be converted to exciton quenchers by reaction with O(2). Conformationally induced, directed-energy transfer is arguably a critical dynamical process that is responsible for many of the distinctive photophysical properties of conjugated polymers.
The optical, electronic and mechanical properties of synthetic and biological materials consisting of polymer chains depend sensitively on the conformation adopted by these chains. The range of conformations available to such systems has accordingly been of intense fundamental as well as practical interest, and distinct conformational classes have been predicted, depending on the stiffness of the polymer chains and the strength of attractive interactions between segments within a chain. For example, flexible polymers should adopt highly disordered conformations resembling either a random coil or, in the presence of strong intrachain attractions, a so-called 'molten globule'. Stiff polymers with strong intrachain interactions, in contrast, are expected to collapse into conformations with long-range order, in the shape of toroids or rod-like structures. Here we use computer simulations to show that the anisotropy distribution obtained from polarization spectroscopy measurements on individual poly[2-methoxy-5-(2'-ethylhexyl)oxy-1,4-phenylenevinylene] polymer molecules is consistent with this prototypical stiff conjugated polymer adopting a highly ordered, collapsed conformation that cannot be correlated with ideal toroid or rod structures. We find that the presence of so-called 'tetrahedral chemical defects', where conjugated carbon-carbon links are replaced by tetrahedral links, divides the polymer chain into structurally identifiable quasi-straight segments that allow the molecule to adopt cylindrical conformations. Indeed, highly ordered, cylindrical conformations may be a critical factor in dictating the extraordinary photophysical properties of conjugated polymers, including highly efficient intramolecular energy transfer and significant local optical anisotropy in thin films.
Sodium-coupled transporters are ubiquitous pumps that harness pre-existing sodium gradients to catalyse the thermodynamically unfavourable uptake of essential nutrients, neurotransmitters and inorganic ions across the lipid bilayer. Dysfunction of these integral membrane proteins has been implicated in glucose/galactose malabsorption, congenital hypothyroidism, Bartter's syndrome, epilepsy, depression, autism and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Sodium-coupled transporters are blocked by a number of therapeutically important compounds, including diuretics, anticonvulsants and antidepressants, many of which have also become indispensable tools in biochemical experiments designed to probe antagonist binding sites and to elucidate transport mechanisms. Steady-state kinetic data have revealed that both competitive and noncompetitive modes of inhibition exist. Antagonist dissociation experiments on the serotonin transporter (SERT) have also unveiled the existence of a low-affinity allosteric site that slows the dissociation of inhibitors from a separate high-affinity site. Despite these strides, atomic-level insights into inhibitor action have remained elusive. Here we screen a panel of molecules for their ability to inhibit LeuT, a prokaryotic homologue of mammalian neurotransmitter sodium symporters, and show that the tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) clomipramine noncompetitively inhibits substrate uptake. Cocrystal structures show that clomipramine, along with two other TCAs, binds in an extracellular-facing vestibule about 11 A above the substrate and two sodium ions, apparently stabilizing the extracellular gate in a closed conformation. Off-rate assays establish that clomipramine reduces the rate at which leucine dissociates from LeuT and reinforce our contention that this TCA inhibits LeuT by slowing substrate release. Our results represent a molecular view into noncompetitive inhibition of a sodium-coupled transporter and define principles for the rational design of new inhibitors.
Human platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is a connective tissue cell mitogen comprised of two related chains encoded by distinct genes. The B chain is the homolog of the v-sis oncogene product. Properties that distinguish these ligands include greater transforming potency of the B chain and more efficient secretion of the A chain. By a strategy involving the generation of PDGF A and B chimeras, these properties were mapped to distinct domains of the respective molecules. Increased transforming efficiency segregated with the ability to activate both alpha and beta PDGF receptors. These findings genetically map PDGF B residues 105 to 144 as responsible for conformational alterations critical to beta PDGF receptor interaction and provide a mechanistic basis for the greater transforming potency of the PDGF B chain.
Many RNAs are complex, globular molecules formed from elements of secondary and tertiary structure analogous to those found in proteins. Little is known about recognition of RNAs by proteins. In the case of transfer RNAs (tRNAs), considerable evidence suggests that elements dispersed in both the one- and three-dimensional structure are important for recognition by aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. Fragments of alanine tRNA synthetase were created by in vitro manipulations of the cloned alaS gene and examined for their interaction with alanine-specific tRNA. Sequences essential for recognition were located near the middle of the polypeptide, juxtaposed to the carboxyl-terminal side of the domain for aminoacyl adenylate synthesis. The most essential part of the tRNA interaction strength and specificity was dependent on a sequence of fewer than 100 amino acids. Within this sequence, and in the context of the proper conformation, a segment of no more than 17 amino acids was responsible for 25% or more of the total synthetase-tRNA free energy of association. The results raise the possibility that an important part of specific RNA recognition by an aminoacyl tRNA synthetase involves a polypeptide segment that is short relative to the total size of the protein.
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) provides a versatile, gentle, high resolution method for fractionation and physical-chemical characterization of molecules on the basis of size, conformation, and net charge. The polymerization reaction can be rigorously controlled to provide uniform gels of reproducible, measurable pore size over a wide range. This makes it possible to obtain reproducible relative mobility (Rf) values as physical-chemical constants. Application and extension of Ogston's (random fiber) model for a gel allows for calculation of molecular volume, surface area, or radius, free mobility, and valence from RJ measurements at several gel concentrations, to calculate gel concentration for optimal resolution, and to predict behavior of macromolecules on gel gradients by computerized methods. Extension of classical moving boundary theory has been used to generate multiphasic buffer systems (providing selective stacking, unstacking, restacking, and preparative steady-state-stacking) with known operating characteristics for any pH at 0 degrees and 25 degrees C. A general strategy for isolation of macromolecules and for macromolecular mapping has been developed. Preparative scale PAGE is operational for milligram loads and feasible for gram quantities.
Most of the non-lysosomal proteolysis that occurs in eukaryotic cells is performed by a nonspecific and abundant barrel-shaped complex called the 20S proteasome. Substrates access the active sites, which are sequestered in an internal chamber, by traversing a narrow opening (alpha-annulus) that is blocked in the unliganded 20S proteasome by amino-terminal sequences of alpha-subunits. Peptide products probably exit the 20S proteasome through the same opening. 11S regulators (also called PA26 (ref. 4), PA28 (ref. 5) and REG) are heptamers that stimulate 20S proteasome peptidase activity in vitro and may facilitate product release in vivo. Here we report the co-crystal structure of yeast 20S proteasome with the 11S regulator from Trypanosoma brucei (PA26). PA26 carboxy-terminal tails provide binding affinity by inserting into pockets on the 20S proteasome, and PA26 activation loops induce conformational changes in alpha-subunits that open the gate separating the proteasome interior from the intracellular environment. The reduction in processivity expected for an open conformation of the exit gate may explain the role of 11S regulators in the production of ligands for major histocompatibility complex class I molecules.
It no longer seems likely that DNA molecules in situ have a uniform conformation, represented by the classical B-form helix. For example, recent structural studies have shown that in certain conditions DNA can have a left-handed (so-called Z-form) helix, and have revealed extensive sequence-dependent variations of B-DNA helical parameters. Such sequence-dependent variations in DNA structure can be investigated in solution with reagents that bind to DNA in a conformation-dependent manner, and cut one or both strands of the double-helix at the site of binding, as, for example, has been shown for the endonuclease DNase I3. We describe here a simple way to endow a DNA-binding ligand with the ability to cleave DNA--labelling with 125I. The radiochemical damage associated with 125I decay induces a double-stranded DNA break. Using this technique we have shown that a sequence of four consecutive A X T base pairs is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for strong binding to DNA of the bis-benzamide Hoechst 33258--presumably the other important factor is the conformation of the double-helix at the site of the (A/T)4 sequence. We suggest 125I-Hoechst 33258 may be a useful new probe of DNA structure.
The sequence d(GGGGTTTTGGGG) from the 3' overhang of the Oxytricha telomere has been crystallized and its three-dimensional structure solved to 2.5 A resolution. The oligonucleotide forms hairpins, two of which join to make a four-stranded helical structure with the loops containing four thymine residues at either end. The guanine residues are held together by cyclic hydrogen bonding and an ion is located in the centre. The four guanine residues in each segment have a glycosyl conformation that alternates between anti and syn. There are two four-stranded molecules in the asymmetric unit showing that the structure has some intrinsic flexibility.
The crystal structure of uridylyl (3',5') adenosine hemihydrate has been analyzed by x-ray diffraction. The two independent molecules found in the asymmetric unit exhibit conformations that differ significantly from those found in double-helical RNA. The conformational information obtained from this analysis provides considerable insight into the possible conformations of nonhelical "loop" regions of transfer RNA, as well as single-stranded regions of nucleic acids in general.
SINCE insulin was first shown by Scott to crystallize in the presence of zinc ions in 1934, a variety of Zn-containing insulin crystals have been grown. The structures of insulin in the related rhombohedral crystals of 2Zn-insulin and 4Zn-insulin have been solved and reveal that the molecule is a hexamer, organized as three dimers, each containing a 2-fold symmetry axis and held together by Zn ions. In 2Zn-insulin the hexamer is nearly symmetrical with the two axial Zn ions and the two molecules of the dimer related closely by a local 2-fold axis. But in 4Zn-insulin the two molecules in the dimer differ remarkably, creating an asymmetric 4Zn-hexamer in which one trimer is essentially equivalent to that in 2Zn-insulin and the other is different by virtue of an additional stretch of N-terminal helix between residues B1 and B8 (refs 6, 7). We report here the structure of a new symmetrical hexamer, in which all six molecules have the B1-B8 helix seen in 4Zn-insulin. Phenol molecules, found bonding specifically to each molecule, evidently stabilize this new helical conformation.
The mechanisms by which hydrophobic molecules, such as long-chain fatty acids, enter cells are poorly understood. In Gram-negative bacteria, the lipopolysaccharide layer in the outer membrane is an efficient barrier for fatty acids and aromatic hydrocarbons destined for biodegradation. We report crystal structures of the long-chain fatty acid transporter FadL from Escherichia coli at 2.6 and 2.8 angstrom resolution. FadL forms a 14-stranded beta barrel that is occluded by a central hatch domain. The structures suggest that hydrophobic compounds bind to multiple sites in FadL and use a transport mechanism that involves spontaneous conformational changes in the hatch.
Many bacterial pathogens use a type III protein secretion system to deliver virulence effector proteins directly into the host cell cytosol, where they modulate cellular processes. A requirement for the effective translocation of several such effector proteins is the binding of specific cytosolic chaperones, which typically interact with discrete domains in the virulence factors. We report here the crystal structure at 1.9 A resolution of the chaperone-binding domain of the Salmonella effector protein SptP with its cognate chaperone SicP. The structure reveals that this domain is maintained in an extended, unfolded conformation that is wound around three successive chaperone molecules. Short segments from two different SptP molecules are juxtaposed by the chaperones, where they dimerize across a hydrophobic interface. These results imply that the chaperones associated with the type III secretion system maintain their substrates in a secretion-competent state that is capable of engaging the secretion machinery to travel through the type III apparatus in an unfolded or partially folded manner.
Many molecules can rotate freely around single bonds and thereby interconvert between different conformations, such as gauche and anti 1,2-disubstituted ethane, a classic example of conformational isomerism. Even though rotation occurs rapidly at room temperature, the product selectivity seen in some reactions has been explained by conformation-dependent reaction mechanisms: if reactant molecules differing only in their conformation are located at different positions on the reaction path, they may undergo different reactions. But a direct verification of this effect is difficult, because the energy barrier separating conformational isomers is so low that under ambient conditions reactants with more than one conformation will be present. But by using temperatures low enough to suppress the interconversion between different conformations, gauche-1-iodopropane ions and anti-1-iodopropane ions have been selectively generated. Here we show that the kinetic energy released during the photodissociation of 1-iodopropane ions depends strongly on the conformation of the ions. Thermodynamic arguments and ab initio calculations indicate that this difference in kinetic energy release results from differences in the reaction mechanism, with gauche-1-iodopropane ions forming 2-propyl ions and anti-1-iodopropane ions forming protonated cyclopropane ions. These findings suggest that the well-known concept of conformation selection forms the basis of a simple scheme for reaction control, thus providing in some cases an attractive alternative for more involved schemes that utilize the phase and pulse shape of laser beams to control chemical reactions.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) isolated from woodchucks chronically infected with the woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) carry low levels of nonreplicating WHV DNA. When PBLs from chronic carrier woodchucks were activated in culture with the generalized mitogen lipopolysaccharide (LPS), WHV DNA replication was initiated in cells obtained from one of three animals examined. Intracellular WHV core particles, containing WHV DNA replication intermediates, RNA/DNA hybrid molecules, and an active endogenous DNA polymerase, appeared 3 days after the start of LPS stimulation. After 5 to 7 days of LPS stimulation, WHV DNA-containing particles, which displayed the properties of intact, mature virions, were released into the culture medium. These studies provide evidence for reactivation of a latent WHV infection of circulating lymphoid cells and indicate that the presence of nonreplicating hepadnaviral DNA in lymphoid cells represents a potentially active infection following cellular activation.
The dynamic character of phospholipid aggregates limits conventional structural studies to the determination of average molecular features. In order to develop more detailed descriptions of phospholipid structure for comparison with experiment, the molecular dynamics of a hydrated lysophosphatidylethanolamine (LPE) micelle, incorporating 85 LPE and 1591 water molecules, have been simulated. Comparison of the initial and equilibrated micelles shows substantial differences both in LPE hydrocarbon chain conformation and polar head-group-solvent interactions. Although these changes produce only subtle effects on the averaged structural properties of the system, the alterations in hydrocarbon chain packing and head-group solvation appear to mimic a polymorphic pretransition from a spherical toward a cylindrical micelle structure.
Target cell lysis is regulated by natural killer (NK) cell receptors that recognize class I MHC molecules. Here we report the crystal structure of the human immunoglobulin-like NK cell receptor KIR2DL2 in complex with its class I ligand HLA-Cw3 and peptide. KIR binds in a nearly orthogonal orientation across the alpha1 and alpha2 helices of Cw3 and directly contacts positions 7 and 8 of the peptide. No significant conformational changes in KIR occur on complex formation. The receptor footprint on HLA overlaps with but is distinct from that of the T-cell receptor. Charge complementarity dominates the KIR/HLA interface and mutations that disrupt interface salt bridges substantially diminish binding. Most contacts in the complex are between KIR and conserved HLA-C residues, but a hydrogen bond between Lys 44 of KIR2DL2 and Asn 80 of Cw3 confers the allotype specificity. KIR contact requires position 8 of the peptide to be a residue smaller than valine. A second KIR/HLA interface produced an ordered receptor-ligand aggregation in the crystal which may resemble receptor clustering during immune synapse formation.
Sedimentation field flow fractionation (SFFF) is a method for purifying and providing mass or size distribution information on samples containing particulates or soluble macromolecules. Since SFFF separations are based on simple physical phenomena related to first principles, molecular weight (or particle sizes) can be determined without calibration standards. SFFF is a gentle technique suited for fractionating biomolecules. Studies with the fragile lambda DNA (molecular weight, 33 X 10(6] and smaller supercoiled plasmids have shown that these materials are not altered during SFFF separation; molecular weights and conformation remain unchanged, and biological activity is not reduced. Recoveries of nucleic acids approach 100 percent. Typically, components with about 20 percent difference in mass can be separated essentially to baseline if required. Fractionation time is usually independent of molecular weight, and separations often can be carried out within an hour.
RNAs fold into three-dimensional (3D) structures that subsequently undergo large, functionally important, conformational transitions in response to a variety of cellular signals. RNA structures are believed to encode spatially tuned flexibility that can direct transitions along specific conformational pathways. However, this hypothesis has proved difficult to examine directly because atomic movements in complex biomolecules cannot be visualized in 3D by using current experimental methods. Here we report the successful implementation of a strategy using NMR that has allowed us to visualize, with complete 3D rotational sensitivity, the dynamics between two RNA helices that are linked by a functionally important trinucleotide bulge over timescales extending up to milliseconds. The key to our approach is to anchor NMR frames of reference onto each helix and thereby directly measure their dynamics, one relative to the other, using 'relativistic' sets of residual dipolar couplings (RDCs). Using this approach, we uncovered super-large amplitude helix motions that trace out a surprisingly structured and spatially correlated 3D dynamic trajectory. The two helices twist around their individual axes by approximately 53 degrees and 110 degrees in a highly correlated manner (R = 0.97) while simultaneously (R = 0.81-0.92) bending by about 94 degrees. Remarkably, the 3D dynamic trajectory is dotted at various positions by seven distinct ligand-bound conformations of the RNA. Thus even partly unstructured RNAs can undergo structured dynamics that directs ligand-induced transitions along specific predefined conformational pathways.
The elucidation of bioactive conformations of small peptide hormones remains an elusive goal to structural chemists because of the inherent flexibility of these molecules. Angiotensin II (AII), the major effector of the renin-angiotensin system, is an octapeptide hormone for which no clear structural models exist. Peptide hormones such as AII share the property that they bind to their receptors with high affinities, in spite of the fact that they must overcome an extremely large conformational entropy barrier to bind in one conformation. A "surrogate system" that consists of a high-affinity monoclonal antibody (MAb) and AII has been used to study a bound conformation of AII. The crystallographic structure of the complex reveals a structure of AII that is compatible with predicted bioactive conformations of AII derived from structure-activity studies and theoretical calculations. In the complex, the deeply bound hormone is folded into a compact structure in which two turns bring the amino and carboxyl termini close together. The antibody of this complex (MAb 131) has the unusual property that it was not generated against AII, but rather against an anti-idiotypic antibody reactive with a MAb to AII, which renders this antibody an anti-anti-idiotypic antibody. The high affinity for AII of the original MAb to AII was passed on to MAb 131 through a structural determinant on the anti-idiotypic antibody. Strikingly, the conformation of AII in this complex is highly similar to complementarity determining region loops of antibodies, possibly indicating that a true molecular mimic of bound AII was present on the anti-idiotypic antibody against which MAb 131 was elicited.
The crystal structure of beta-D-cellotetraose shows the same molecule packing as cellulose II, with two antiparallel molecules in the unit cell: For cellulose II, the orientation of the C6-O6 bonds has been described as gauche-trans and trans-gauche, respectively, for the two antiparallel molecules, which otherwise have identical conformations. In contrast, in beta-D-cellotetraose all C6-O6 bonds are gauche-trans, but the conformations of the two antiparallel molecules are different. Energy minimization and molecular dynamics studies suggest that the structure of cellulose II should be reinvestigated in light of these findings.
Proteins are inherently plastic molecules, whose function often critically depends on excursions between different molecular conformations (conformers). However, a rigorous understanding of the relation between a protein's structure, dynamics and function remains elusive. This is because many of the conformers on its energy landscape are only transiently formed and marginally populated (less than a few per cent of the total number of molecules), so that they cannot be individually characterized by most biophysical tools. Here we study a lysozyme mutant from phage T4 that binds hydrophobic molecules and populates an excited state transiently (about 1 ms) to about 3% at 25 degC (ref. 5). We show that such binding occurs only via the ground state, and present the atomic-level model of the 'invisible', excited state obtained using a combined strategy of relaxation-dispersion NMR (ref. 6) and CS-Rosetta model building that rationalizes this observation. The model was tested using structure-based design calculations identifying point mutants predicted to stabilize the excited state relative to the ground state. In this way a pair of mutations were introduced, inverting the relative populations of the ground and excited states and altering function. Our results suggest a mechanism for the evolution of a protein's function by changing the delicate balance between the states on its energy landscape. More generally, they show that our approach can generate and validate models of excited protein states.
The DNA double helix is not a regular, featureless barberpole molecule. Different base sequences have their own special signature, in the way that they influence groove width, helical twist, bending, and mechanical rigidity or resistance to bending. These special features probably help other molecules such as repressors to read and recognize one base sequence in preference to another. Single crystal x-ray structure analysis is beginning to show us the various structures possible in the B-DNA family. The DNA decamer C-C-A-A-G-A-T-T-G-G appears to be a better model for mixed-sequence B-DNA than was the earlier C-G-C-G-A-A-T-T-C-G-C-G, which is more akin to regions of poly(dA).poly(dT). The G.A mismatch base pairs at the center of the decamer are in the anti-anti conformation about their bonds from base to sugar, in agreement with nuclear magnetic resonance evidence on this and other sequences, and in contrast to the anti-syn geometry reported for G.A pairs in C-G-C-G-A-A-T-T-A-G-C-G. The ordered spine of hydration seen earlier in the narrow-grooved dodecamer has its counterpart, in this wide-grooved decamer, in two strings of water molecules lining the walls of the minor groove, bridging from purine N3 or pyrimidine O2, to the following sugar O4'. The same strings of hydration are present in the phosphorothioate analog of G-C-G-C-G-C. Unlike the spine, which is broken up by the intrusion of amine groups at guanines, these water strings are found in general, mixed-sequence DNA because they can pass by unimpeded to either side of a guanine N2 amine. The spine and strings are perceived as two extremes of a general pattern of hydration of the minor groove, which probably is the dominant factor in making B-DNA the preferred form at high hydration.
Synthetic single-helical conformations are quite common, but the formation of double helices based on recognition between the two constituent strands is relatively rare. Known examples include duplex formation through base-pair-specific hydrogen bonding and stacking, as found in nucleic acids and their analogues, and polypeptides composed of amino acids with alternating L and D configurations. Some synthetic polymers and self-assembled fibres have double-helical winding induced by van der Waals interactions. A third mode of non-covalent interaction, coordination of organic ligands to metal ions, can give rise to double, triple and quadruple helices, although in this case the assembly is driven by the coordination geometry of the metal and the structure of the ligands, rather than by direct inter-strand complementarity. Here we describe a family of oligomeric molecules with bent conformations, which exhibit dynamic exchange between single and double molecular helices in solution, through spiral sliding of the synthetic oligomer strands. The bent conformations leading to the helical shape of the molecules result from intramolecular hydrogen bonding within 2'-pyridyl-2-pyridinecarboxamide units, with extensive intermolecular aromatic stacking stabilizing the double-stranded helices that form through dimerization.
In the myosin-linked regulatory mechanism typified by the molluscan scallop adductor muscle, contraction is controlled by Ca2+ binding to sites on the thick filament protein, myosin. The regulatory light chains of myosin heads are involved directly in this mechanism and early studies suggested that, in the absence of Ca2+, these subunits prevent the interaction of a myosin-adenosine nucleotide complex with the actin-containing thin filament. Subsequently, Ashiba et al. reported that the steady-state ATPase of molluscan myosin exhibits a limited degree of Ca2+ activation in the absence of actin. Recently, however, we have shown that steady-state ATPase activity in relaxing conditions is dominated by the unregulated molecules in the myosin preparation. Single-turnover kinetic methods are required to monitor the highly suppressed ATPase activity of the regulated population. Using the latter approach, we report here that scallop myosin ATPase is reduced about 100-fold on removal of Ca2+. The regulatory light chains maintain the relaxed state via conformational changes which suppress the product release steps, irrespective of the presence of actin.
Many molecules can rotate internally around one or more of their bonds so that during a full 360 degrees rotation, they will change between unstable and relatively stable conformations. Ethane is the textbook example of a molecule exhibiting such behaviour: as one of its two methyl (CH3) groups rotates once around the central carbon-carbon bond, the molecule will alternate three times between an unstable eclipsed conformation and the preferred staggered conformation. This structural preference is usually attributed to steric effects; that is, while ethane rotates towards an eclipsed structure, the electrons in C-H bonds on the different C atoms are drawing closer to each other and therefore experience increased repulsion, introducing a rotation barrier that destabilizes the eclipsed structure. Stabilization of the staggered structure through rotation-induced weakening of the central C-C bond and hyperconjugation has been considered to be involved, but evaluation of the contributions of these effects to ethane's internal rotation barrier and conformational preference remains difficult. Here we report a series of ethane structure optimizations, where successive removal of different interactions indicates that ethane's staggered conformation is the result of preferential stabilization through hyperconjugation. Removal of hyperconjugation interactions yields the eclipsed structure as the preferred conformation, whereas repulsive forces, either present or absent, have no influence on the preference for a staggered conformation.
Theoretical modeling of the dynamics of complexation and decomplexation of guest molecules by container molecules reveals that gating has a critical influence on the ease of formation and stability of host-guest complexes. Hosts equipped with gates can form very stable complexes with a variety of guests under readily achievable conditions. Gating involves conformational processes of the host molecule that alter the size of the portals through which guest molecules pass. "French door" and "sliding door" mechanisms of gate opening are identified.
The recA protein catalyses the ATP-driven homologous pairing and strand exchange of DNA molecules. It is an allosteric enzyme: the ATPase activity is DNA-dependent, and ATP-bound recA protein has a high affinity for DNA, whereas the ADP-bound form has a low affinity. In the absence of ATP hydrolysis, recA protein can still promote homologous pairing, apparently through the formation of a triple-stranded intermediate. The exact role of ATP hydrolysis is not clear, but it presumably drives the triplex intermediate towards products. Here we determine the position of bound ADP diffused into the recA crystal. We show that only the phosphates are bound in the same way as in other NTPases containing the G/AXXXXGKT/S motif. We propose that recA protein may change its conformation upon ATP hydrolysis in a manner analogous to one such protein, the p21 protein from the ras oncogene. A model is presented to account for the allosteric stimulation of DNA binding by ATP. The mechanism by which nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis is coupled to the binding of another ligand in recA protein and p21 may be typical of the large class of NTPases containing this conserved motif.
Development of thymocytes involves two distinct outcomes resulting from superficially similar events. Recognition by thymocytes of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins plus peptides leads to their rescue from apoptosis (positive selection), and recognition of antigenic peptide induces cell death (negative selection). Antigen analogues, and sometimes low concentrations of antigenic peptide, induce positive selection; such analogues are often antagonists of mature T-cell clones. Various models seek to explain how recognition of different peptide/MHC complexes leads to such different outcomes: quantitative models relate response to the affinity, avidity or kinetics of T-cell-antigen receptor (TCR) binding, whereas qualitative models require conformational or spatial changes in the TCR or associated molecules to modulate signal transduction. We have used surface plasmon resonance to measure the kinetics of TCR interactions with positively and negatively selecting ligands to distinguish between these models, and find that affinity correlates to the outcome of selection. A 'window' of affinity resulting in positive selection extends over a 1-log range starting threefold below the affinity for negative selection.
A specific high affinity galactose transport system called P(betag) can be induced by trace amounts of galactose in the medium by virtue of its own ability to capture and accumulate galactose. The transport system is coregulated with the production of a high affinity periplasmic galactose binding protein, which constitutes but one part of the transport system. Some transport negative mutants still remain producers of this binding protein. A close correlation exists between production of the active binding protein and the presence of galactose chemotaxis. The hypothesis, that this binding protein is a common element of the specific galactose transport system, P(betag), and of galactose chemotaxis is supported by observations on structural mutants, being defective in galactose binding protein as well as showing a lack of galactose chemotaxis. The binding protein is a monomer with two binding sites for galactose. Binding of one or two of the galactose molecules elicits specific conformational changes of the galactose binding protein (lowered affinity for galactose, increase of charges of the protein, increased fluorescence of tryptophan residues). The importance of these features for transport and for chemotaxis is discussed (70).
Calpains are non-lysosomal calcium-dependent cysteine proteinases that selectively cleave proteins in response to calcium signals and thereby control cellular functions such as cytoskeletal remodelling, cell cycle progression, gene expression and apoptotic cell death. In mammals, the two best-characterized members of the calpain family, calpain 1 and calpain 2 (micro-calpain and m-calpain, respectively), are ubiquitously expressed. The activity of calpains is tightly controlled by the endogenous inhibitor calpastatin, which is an intrinsically unstructured protein capable of reversibly binding and inhibiting four molecules of calpain, but only in the presence of calcium. To date, the mechanism of inhibition by calpastatin and the basis for its absolute specificity have remained speculative. It was not clear how this unstructured protein inhibits calpains without being cleaved itself, nor was it known how calcium induced changes that facilitated the binding of calpastatin to calpain. Here we report the 2.4-A-resolution crystal structure of the calcium-bound calpain 2 heterodimer bound by one of the four inhibitory domains of calpastatin. Calpastatin is seen to inhibit calpain by occupying both sides of the active site cleft. Although the inhibitor passes through the active site cleft it escapes cleavage in a novel manner by looping out and around the active site cysteine. The inhibitory domain of calpastatin recognizes multiple lower affinity sites present only in the calcium-bound form of the enzyme, resulting in an interaction that is tight, specific and calcium dependent. This crystal structure, and that of a related complex, also reveal the conformational changes that calpain undergoes on binding calcium, which include opening of the active site cleft and movement of the domains relative to each other to produce a more compact enzyme.
Evidence is presented that suggests a role for transmembrane domain interactions in the assembly of class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Mutations in the transmembrane domains of the class II MHC alpha or beta chains resulted in proteins that did not generate complexes recognized by conformation-dependent antibodies and that were largely retained in the endoplasmic reticulum. Insertion of the alpha and beta transmembrane domains into other proteins allowed the chimeric proteins to assemble, suggesting a direct interaction of the alpha and beta transmembrane domains. The interactions were mediated by a structural motif involving several glycine residues on the same face of a putative alpha helix.
Structure-based drug design traditionally uses static protein models as inspirations for focusing on "active" site targets. Allosteric regulation of biological macromolecules, however, is affected by both conformational and dynamic properties of the protein or protein complex and can potentially lead to more avenues for therapeutic development. We discuss the advantages of searching for molecules that conformationally trap a macromolecule in its inactive state. Although multiple methodologies exist to probe protein dynamics and ligand binding, our current discussion highlights the use of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy in the drug discovery and design process.
Members of the nuclear receptor (NR) superfamily of transcription factors modulate gene transcription in response to small lipophilic molecules. Transcriptional activity is regulated by ligands binding to the carboxy-terminal ligand-binding domains (LBDs) of cognate NRs. A subgroup of NRs referred to as 'orphan receptors' lack identified ligands, however, raising issues about the function of their LBDs. Here we report the crystal structure of the LBD of the orphan receptor Nurr1 at 2.2 A resolution. The Nurr1 LBD adopts a canonical protein fold resembling that of agonist-bound, transcriptionally active LBDs in NRs, but the structure has two distinctive features. First, the Nurr1 LBD contains no cavity as a result of the tight packing of side chains from several bulky hydrophobic residues in the region normally occupied by ligands. Second, Nurr1 lacks a 'classical' binding site for coactivators. Despite these differences, the Nurr1 LBD can be regulated in mammalian cells. Notably, transcriptional activity is correlated with the Nurr1 LBD adopting a more stable conformation. Our findings highlight a unique structural class of NRs and define a model for ligand-independent NR function.
Nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation time (T1) of the intracellular water protons and water content were measured in synchronized HeLa cells. The T1 was maximum (1020 milliseconds) in mitotic and minimum (534 milliseconds) in S phase cells. The cyclic pattern of T1 values correlated well with the chromosome condensation cycle. By treating cells with spermine, it was possible to alter T1 without a significant change in the water content. The results of this study suggest that an additional variable, namely, the conformational state of macromolecules, should be incluced in any expression explaining the shortened relaxation times of water protons in biological systems.
X-ray analysis of the free-acid crystal form of the coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) revealed a conformational difference between the free NAD+ molecule and one bound in enzymes or complexed to Li+ ions. The pyrophosphate group showed asymmetry in the phosphate-oxygen bonds of the phosphate-oxygen-phosphate link; this bond at the nicotinamide side of the link is longer than that at the adenosine side by 0.04 angstrom. The crystal structure showed a novel intermolecular stacking of adenine and water molecules on opposite sides of nicotinamide that gives rise to a nicotinamide sandwich.
The height fluctuations on top of the protein lysozyme adsorbed on mica were measured locally with an atomic force microscope operated in tapping mode in liquid. Height fluctuations of an apparent size of 1 nanometer that lasted for about 50 milliseconds were observed over lysozyme molecules when a substrate (oligoglycoside) was present. In the presence of the inhibitor chitobiose, these height fluctuations decreased to the level without the oligoglycoside. The most straightforward interpretation of these results is that the height fluctuations correspond to the conformational changes of lysozyme during hydrolysis. It is also possible, however, that the height fluctuations are, at least in part, the result of a different height or elasticity of the transient complex of lysozyme plus the substrate.
Crystalline cholesterol undergoes a phase transition a few degrees below human body temperature. The high-temperature form has an unusually complex structure with 16 independent molecules. In the transition two molecules change side chain conformation, four reorient about their long axes, and ten remain unchanged. The transition mechanism implies relatively nonspecific intermolecular interactions, qualitatively consistent with the behavior of cholesterol in biomembranes. The transition preserves a remarkably closely obeyed pseudosymmetry present in the structure.
The regulation of ion channel activity by specific lipid molecules is widely recognized as an integral component of electrical signalling in cells. In particular, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)), a minor yet dynamic phospholipid component of cell membranes, is known to regulate many different ion channels. PIP(2) is the primary agonist for classical inward rectifier (Kir2) channels, through which this lipid can regulate a cell's resting membrane potential. However, the molecular mechanism by which PIP(2) exerts its action is unknown. Here we present the X-ray crystal structure of a Kir2.2 channel in complex with a short-chain (dioctanoyl) derivative of PIP(2). We found that PIP(2) binds at an interface between the transmembrane domain (TMD) and the cytoplasmic domain (CTD). The PIP(2)-binding site consists of a conserved non-specific phospholipid-binding region in the TMD and a specific phosphatidylinositol-binding region in the CTD. On PIP(2) binding, a flexible expansion linker contracts to a compact helical structure, the CTD translates 6 A and becomes tethered to the TMD and the inner helix gate begins to open. In contrast, the small anionic lipid dioctanoyl glycerol pyrophosphatidic acid (PPA) also binds to the non-specific TMD region, but not to the specific phosphatidylinositol region, and thus fails to engage the CTD or open the channel. Our results show how PIP(2) can control the resting membrane potential through a specific ion-channel-receptor-ligand interaction that brings about a large conformational change, analogous to neurotransmitter activation of ion channels at synapses.
According to the 'thermodynamic hypothesis', the sequence of a biological macromolecule defines its folded, active (or 'native') structure as a global energy minimum in the folding landscape. However, the enormous complexity of folding landscapes of large macromolecules raises the question of whether there is in fact a unique global minimum corresponding to a unique native conformation or whether there are deep local minima corresponding to alternative active conformations. The folding of many proteins is well described by two-state models, leading to highly simplified representations of protein folding landscapes with a single native conformation. Nevertheless, accumulating experimental evidence suggests a more complex topology of folding landscapes with multiple active conformations that can take seconds or longer to interconvert. Here we demonstrate, using single-molecule experiments, that an RNA enzyme folds into multiple distinct native states that interconvert on a timescale much longer than that of catalysis. These data demonstrate that severe ruggedness of RNA folding landscapes extends into conformational space occupied by native conformations.
The specificity of the 20S proteasome, which degrades many intracellular proteins, is regulated by protein complexes that bind to one or both ends of the cylindrical proteasome structure. One of these regulatory complexes, the 11S regulator (known as REG or PA28), stimulates proteasome peptidase activity and enhances the production of antigenic peptides for presentation by class I molecules of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). The three REG subunits that have been identified, REGalpha, REGbeta and REGgamma (also known as the Ki antigen), share extensive sequence similarity, apart from a highly variable internal segment of 17-34 residues which may confer subunit-specific properties. REGalpha and REGbeta preferentially form a heteromeric complex, although purified REGalpha forms a heptamer in solution and has biochemical properties similar to the heteromeric REGalpha/REGbeta complex. We have now determined the crystal structure of human recombinant REGalpha at 2.8 A resolution. The heptameric barrel-shaped assembly contains a central channel that has an opening of 20 A diameter at one end and another of 30 A diameter at the presumed proteasome-binding surface. The binding of REG probably causes conformational changes that open a pore in the proteasome alpha-subunits through which substrates and products can pass.
Covalent carbon-carbon bonds are hard to break. Their strength is evident in the hardness of diamonds and tensile strength of polymeric fibres; on the single-molecule level, it manifests itself in the need for forces of several nanonewtons to extend and mechanically rupture one bond. Such forces have been generated using extensional flow, ultrasonic irradiation, receding meniscus and by directly stretching a single molecule with nanoprobes. Here we show that simple adsorption of brush-like macromolecules with long side chains on a substrate can induce not only conformational deformations, but also spontaneous rupture of covalent bonds in the macromolecular backbone. We attribute this behaviour to the fact that the attractive interaction between the side chains and the substrate is maximized by the spreading of the side chains, which in turn induces tension along the polymer backbone. Provided the side-chain densities and substrate interaction are sufficiently high, the tension generated will be strong enough to rupture covalent carbon-carbon bonds. We expect similar adsorption-induced backbone scission to occur for all macromolecules with highly branched architectures, such as brushes and dendrimers. This behaviour needs to be considered when designing surface-targeted macromolecules of this type-either to avoid undesired degradation, or to ensure rupture at predetermined macromolecular sites.
Observations of Raman spectra of various molecules at different exciting laser wavelengths lead to an empirical rule. If a Raman line becomes stronger when the exciting frequency is brought closer to the frequency of an electronic band, this means that the equilibrium conformation of the molecule is distorted along the normal coordinate for the Raman line in the transition from the ground to the excited electronic state.
T lymphocytes recognize antigen-derived peptides associated with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I or class II proteins. Peptide is critical in class I heavy-chain folding and/or stable association with beta 2-microglobulin. Although data exist suggesting a relationship between class II structure and peptide association, no equivalent positive contribution of peptide to the folding state or stability of class II dimers has yet been demonstrated. We report here that most purified E alpha k E beta k molecules leaving low pH in the absence of specific peptide lack a compact, stable dimeric structure. Brief exposure to the appropriate peptide just before and during neutralization promotes this specific conformation in proportion to stably bound peptide, indicating that peptide is important in determining class II MHC structure. Our results also indicate that efficient generation of long-lived peptide-class II complexes involves two stages: initial peptide binding in an acidic environment, which enhances the ability of class II to enter a conformation, from which stabilization upon neutralization results in high-affinity binding of previously associated peptide.
The uniform angle and conformation of myosin subfragment 1 (S1) bound to actin filaments (F-actin) attest to the precise alignment and stereospecificity of the binding of these two contractile proteins. Because actin filaments are polar, myosin heads must swing or rotate about the head-tail junction in order to bind. Electron microscopy of isolated thick filaments and of myosin molecules suggests that the molecules are flexible, but myosin fragments and crossbridges have been reported not to interact with inappropriately oriented actin filaments. Here we describe myofibrillar defects engendered by a site-directed mutation within the flight-muscle-specific actin gene of the fruitfly Drosophila. The mutation apparently retards sarcomere assembly: peripheral thick and thin filaments are misregistered and not incorporated into the Z-line. Therefore, a myosin filament encounters thin filaments with the 'wrong' polarity. We show that myosin heads tethered in a single thick filament can bind with opposite rigor crossbridge angles to flanking thin filaments, which are apparently of opposite polarities. Preservation of identical actomyosin interfaces requires that sets of heads originating from opposite sides of the thick filament swivel 180 degrees relative to each other, implying that myosin crossbridges are as flexible as isolated molecules.
Protein folding in vivo is mediated by helper proteins, the molecular chaperones, of which Hsp60 and its Escherichia coli variant GroEL are some of the best characterized. GroEL is an oligomeric protein with 14 subunits each of M(r) 60K, which possesses weak, co-operative ATPase activity and high plasticity. GroEL seems to interact with non-native proteins, binding one or two molecules per 14-mer in a 'central cavity', but little is known about the conformational state of the bound polypeptides. Here we use nuclear magnetic resonance techniques to show that the interaction of the small protein cyclophilin with GroEL is reversible by temperature changes, and all amide protons in GroEL-bound cyclophilin are exchanged with the solvent, although this exchange does not occur in free cyclophilin. The complete secondary structure of cyclophilin must be disrupted when bound to GroEL.
X-ray analysis of the pancreatic hormone glucagon shows that in crystals the polypeptide adopts a mainly helical conformation, which is stabilised by hydrophobic interactions between molecules related by threefold symmetry. A model is presented in which the glucagon molecule exists in dilute solutions as an equilibrium population of conformers with little retention of conformers with little retention of structure, and in which the helical conformation is stablised by hydrophobic interactions either as an oligomer or as a complex with the receptor.
The separation of macromolecules such as polymers and DNA by means of electrophoresis, gel permeation chromatography or filtration exploits size-dependent differences in the time it takes for the molecules to migrate through a random porous network. Transport through the gel matrices, which usually consist of full swollen crosslinked polymers, depends on the relative size of the macromolecule compared with the pore radius. Sufficiently small molecules are thought to adopt an approximately spherical conformation when diffusing through the gel matrix, whereas larger ones are forced to migrate in a snake-like fashion. Molecules of intermediate size, however, can get temporarily trapped in the largest pores of the matrix, where the molecule can extend and thus maximize its conformational entropy. This 'entropic trapping' is thought to increase the dependence of diffusion rate on molecular size. Here we report the direct experimental verification of this phenomenon. Bragg diffraction from a hydrogel containing a periodic array of monodisperse water voids confirms that polymers of different weights partition between the hydrogel matrix and the water voids according to the predictions of the entropic trapping theory. Our approach might also lead to the design of improved separation media based on entropic trapping.
The telomeres of most eukaryotes contain a repeating G-rich sequence with the consensus d(T/A)1-4G1-8, of which 12-16 bases form a 3' single-strand overhang beyond the telomeric duplex. It has been proposed that these G-rich oligonucleotides associate to form four-stranded structures from one, two or four individual strands and that these structures may be relevant in vivo. The proposed structures contain Hoogsteen base-paired G-quartets, precedent for which has been in the literature for many years. Here we use 1H NMR spectroscopy to study the conformations of the DNA oligonucleotides d(G4T4G4) (Oxy-1.5) and d(G4T4G4T4G4T4G4) (Oxy-3.5) which contain the Oxytricha telomere repeat (T4G4). We find that these molecules fold to form a symmetrical bimolecular and an intramolecular quadruplex, respectively. Both structures have four G-quartets formed from nucleotides that are alternately syn and anti along each strand. This arrangement differs from earlier models in which the strands are alternately all syn or all anti. The T4 loops in Oxy-1.5 are on opposite ends of the quadruplex and loop diagonally across the G-quartet, resulting in adjacent strands being alternately parallel and antiparallel.
Members of the cytochrome P450 superfamily catalyze the addition of molecular oxygen to nonactivated hydrocarbons at physiological temperature-a reaction that requires high temperature to proceed in the absence of a catalyst. Structures were obtained for three intermediates in the hydroxylation reaction of camphor by P450cam with trapping techniques and cryocrystallography. The structure of the ferrous dioxygen adduct of P450cam was determined with 0.91 angstrom wavelength x-rays; irradiation with 1.5 angstrom x-rays results in breakdown of the dioxygen molecule to an intermediate that would be consistent with an oxyferryl species. The structures show conformational changes in several important residues and reveal a network of bound water molecules that may provide the protons needed for the reaction.
Lipidic cubic phases provide a continuous three-dimensional bilayer matrix that facilitates nucleation and growth of bacteriorhodopsin microcrystals. The crystals diffract x-rays isotropically to 2.0 angstroms. The structure of this light-driven proton pump was solved at a resolution of 2.5 angstroms by molecular replacement, using previous results from electron crystallographic studies as a model. The earlier structure was generally confirmed, but several differences were found, including loop conformations and side chain residues. Eight water molecules are now identified experimentally in the proton pathway. These findings reveal the constituents of the proton translocation pathway in the ground state.
Electron transfer is used as a probe for angstrom-scale structural changes in single protein molecules. In a flavin reductase, the fluorescence of flavin is quenched by a nearby tyrosine residue by means of photo-induced electron transfer. By probing the fluorescence lifetime of the single flavin on a photon-by-photon basis, we were able to observe the variation of flavin-tyrosine distance over time. We could then determine the potential of mean force between the flavin and the tyrosine, and a correlation analysis revealed conformational fluctuation at multiple time scales spanning from hundreds of microseconds to seconds. This phenomenon suggests the existence of multiple interconverting conformers related to the fluctuating catalytic reactivity.
The precise molecular structure of the antigenic determinant recognized by the T-cell receptor of the CD4-positive cell has not been completely resolved. A major advance in our understanding of this issue has been made by our demonstration of a direct association between an immunogenic peptide and a purified Ia molecule. The most likely and economical hypothesis is that antigen binds directly to an Ia molecule creating the antigenic determinant and that this antigen-Ia complex is recognized by the T-cell receptor. We examined in detail a determinant of hen egg-white lysozyme (HEL) contained in the tryptic fragment HEL(46-61), recognized by T cells in H-2k strains of mice. This peptide binds with a Kd of approximately 3 microM to I-Ak molecules. We have already ascertained that (1) the 10-mer HEL(52-61) is the shortest stimulatory peptide; (2) the Leu56 residue, the only residue different from mouse lysozyme, is responsible for the immunogenicity; (3) the Leu56 and Tyr53 residues are critical for recognition by the T-cell receptor and (4) HEL(46-61) generates multiple determinants when it associated with the I-Ak molecule. If antigen and Ia interact, the antigen must have two features: it must bind to an Ia molecule and also interact with the T-cell receptor. The two sites do not appear to be laterally separable in this peptide and are therefore probably composed of distinct but interspersed amino-acid residues. We have now identified the three residues of HEL(52-61) that contact the T-cell receptor and three other residues that contact the I-Ak molecule. From modelling studies we also propose that HEL(52-61) assumes an alpha-helical conformation as it is bound to I-Ak and recognized by the T-cell receptor.
Most cellular interactions essential for the development of an immune response involve the membrane glycoproteins encoded in the major histocompatibility gene complex. The products of the I region, the class II histocompatibility molecules (Ia molecules), are essential for accessory cells such as macrophages to present polypeptide antigens to helper T cells. This interaction, antigen presentation, is needed for T-cell recognition of the antigen and its consequent activation. How the Ia molecules regulate the immune response during antigen presentation is not known, although it is commonly thought to result from their association with the presented antigen. Recent studies, including the elucidation of the structure of the T-cell receptor, favour recognition of a single structure, an antigen-Ia complex. Here we report attempts to determine whether purified Ia glycoproteins have an affinity for polypeptide antigens presented by intact cells in an Ia-restricted manner. We first identified the epitope of a peptide antigen involved in presentation. Several laboratories have shown that globular proteins are altered (processed) in intracellular vesicles of the antigen-presenting cell before antigen presentation. A major component of the T-cell response is directed toward determinants found in the unfolded or denatured molecule, and our laboratory has shown that the determinant of the hen-egg lysozyme protein (HEL), presented in H-2k mice to T cells, is a sequence of only 10 amino acids. This portion resides in an area of the native molecule partially buried inside the molecule, in a beta-sheet conformation. To be presented, intact or native HEL must first be processed in acidic intracellular vesicles. Having isolated the peptide responsible for T-cell recognition of HEL, we sought a physical association of this peptide with purified, detergent-solubilized I-Ak molecules from B-hybridoma cells. We have found such an association, which may explain the role of the Ia glycoproteins in cellular interactions.
Riboswitches are metabolite-sensing RNAs, typically located in the non-coding portions of messenger RNAs, that control the synthesis of metabolite-related proteins. Here we describe a 2.05 angstroms crystal structure of a riboswitch domain from the Escherichia coli thiM mRNA that responds to the coenzyme thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP). TPP is an active form of vitamin B1, an essential participant in many protein-catalysed reactions. Organisms from all three domains of life, including bacteria, plants and fungi, use TPP-sensing riboswitches to control genes responsible for importing or synthesizing thiamine and its phosphorylated derivatives, making this riboswitch class the most widely distributed member of the metabolite-sensing RNA regulatory system. The structure reveals a complex folded RNA in which one subdomain forms an intercalation pocket for the 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine moiety of TPP, whereas another subdomain forms a wider pocket that uses bivalent metal ions and water molecules to make bridging contacts to the pyrophosphate moiety of the ligand. The two pockets are positioned to function as a molecular measuring device that recognizes TPP in an extended conformation. The central thiazole moiety is not recognized by the RNA, which explains why the antimicrobial compound pyrithiamine pyrophosphate targets this riboswitch and downregulates the expression of thiamine metabolic genes. Both the natural ligand and its drug-like analogue stabilize secondary and tertiary structure elements that are harnessed by the riboswitch to modulate the synthesis of the proteins coded by the mRNA. In addition, this structure provides insight into how folded RNAs can form precision binding pockets that rival those formed by protein genetic factors.
Regulated intramembrane proteolysis by members of the site-2 protease (S2P) family is an important signaling mechanism conserved from bacteria to humans. Here we report the crystal structure of the transmembrane core domain of an S2P metalloprotease from Methanocaldococcus jannaschii. The protease consists of six transmembrane segments, with the catalytic zinc atom coordinated by two histidine residues and one aspartate residue approximately 14 angstroms into the lipid membrane surface. The protease exhibits two distinct conformations in the crystals. In the closed conformation, the active site is surrounded by transmembrane helices and is impermeable to substrate peptide; water molecules gain access to zinc through a polar, central channel that opens to the cytosolic side. In the open conformation, transmembrane helices alpha1 and alpha6 separate from each other by 10 to 12 angstroms, exposing the active site to substrate entry. The structure reveals how zinc embedded in an integral membrane protein can catalyze peptide cleavage.
Highly extensible Escherichia coli DNA molecules in planar extensional flow were visualized in dilute solution by fluorescence microscopy. For a narrow range of flow strengths, the molecules were found in either a coiled or highly extended conformation, depending on the deformation history of the polymer. This conformation hysteresis persists for many polymer relaxation times and is due to conformation-dependent hydrodynamic forces. Polymer conformational free-energy landscapes were calculated from computer simulations and show two free-energy minima for flow strengths near the coil-stretch transition. Hysteresis cycles may directly influence bulk-solution stresses and the development of stress-strain relations for dilute polymer flows.
Water molecules influence molecular interactions in all biological systems, yet it is extremely difficult to understand their effects in precise atomic detail. Here we present evidence, based on highly refined atomic structures of the complexes of the L-arabinose-binding protein with L-arabinose, D-fucose and D-galactose, that bound water molecules, coupled with localized conformational changes, can govern substrate specificity and affinity. The atoms common to the three sugars are identically positioned in the binding site and the same nine strong hydrogen bonds are formed in all three complexes. Two hydrogen-bonded water molecules in the site contribute further to tight binding of L-arabinose but create an unfavourable interaction with the methyl group of D-fucose. Equally tight binding of D-galactose is attained by the replacement of one of the hydrogen-bonded water molecules by its--CH2OH group, coordinated with localized structural changes which include a shift and redirection of the hydrogen-bonding interactions of the other water molecule. These observations illustrate how ordered water molecules can contribute directly to the properties of proteins by influencing their interaction with ligands.
RNAs that contain specific high-affinity binding sites for small molecule ligands immobilized on a solid support are present at a frequency of roughly one in 10(10)-10(11) in pools of random sequence RNA molecules. Here we describe a new in vitro selection procedure designed to ensure the isolation of RNAs that bind the ligand of interest in solution as well as on a solid support. We have used this method to isolate a remarkably small RNA motif that binds ATP, a substrate in numerous biological reactions and the universal biological high-energy intermediate. The selected ATP-binding RNAs contain a consensus sequence, embedded in a common secondary structure. The binding properties of ATP analogues and modified RNAs show that the binding interaction is characterized by a large number of close contacts between the ATP and RNA, and by a change in the conformation of the RNA.
Energy flow in solution between physically or chemically evolving solute molecules and the surrounding solvent significantly affects the nature of chemical dynamics in liquids. It determines the extent to which the statistical theory of reaction rates is valid; the transfer of energy between solute and solvent influences the ease with which the transition state evolves into the products--the process central to transition-state theory. But analysing the energy flow in liquid-phase dynamics is difficult because these systems are so complex, and the degrees of freedom are consequently so numerous. Here we present a way to address this challenge. We introduce an approach for visualizing the energy flow directly, and apply it to the isomerization of cyclohexane (between boat and chair conformations) in liquid carbon disulphide, a process for which detailed information about the molecular motions is available from molecular dynamics simulations. Our method reveals in pictorial form the formation and relaxation of a solvent cage, and shows that the relaxation has a strong effect on energy flow to and from the transition state on sub-picosecond timescales. We anticipate that this visualization approach will be generally useful for elucidating dynamical molecular processes in solution.
Circular dichroism, the unequal absorption of right and left circularly polarized light, is a manifestation of optical activity in the vicinity of absorption bands. To the experimental scientist interested in the conformation of macromolecules and in the sensitive response of optical activity to conformational alteration, it offers a relatively new and powerful means of understanding the environment of chromophoric residues. As a tool in the elucidation of electronic spectra, it should be useful to the theoretical scientist in identifying weakly allowed absorption bands as well as in providing rotational parameters which can be compared with the developing theory of optical activity. I have stressed application of circular dichroism, to experimental aspects of protein and nucleic acid conformation in solution. Much is still uncertain in particular quantitative details. However, even these early results shed new light and yield new information on the conformation of these molecules.
Theoretical investigations of the transition structures of additions and cycloadditions reveal details about the geometries of bond-forming processes that are not directly accessible by experiment. The conformational analysis of transition states has been developed from theoretical generalizations about the preferred angle of attack by reagents on multiple bonds and predictions of conformations with respect to partially formed bonds. Qualitative rules for the prediction of the stereochemistries of organic reactions have been devised, and semi-empirical computational models have also been developed to predict the stereoselectivities of reactions of large organic molecules, such as nucleophilic additions to carbonyls, electrophilic hydroborations and cycloadditions, and intramolecular radical additions and cycloadditions.
Virtually all of the 560 human proteases are stored as inactive proenyzmes and are strictly regulated. We report the identification and characterization of the first small molecules that directly activate proenzymes, the apoptotic procaspases-3 and -6. It is surprising that these compounds induce autoproteolytic activation by stabilizing a conformation that is both more active and more susceptible to intermolecular proteolysis. These procaspase activators bypass the normal upstream proapoptotic signaling cascades and induce rapid apoptosis in a variety of cell lines. Systematic biochemical and biophysical analyses identified a cluster of mutations in procaspase-3 that resist small-molecule activation both in vitro and in cells. Compounds that induce gain of function are rare, and the activators reported here will enable direct control of the executioner caspases in apoptosis and in cellular differentiation. More generally, these studies presage the discovery of other proenzyme activators to explore fundamental processes of proenzyme activation and their fate-determining roles in biology.
The human complement system is an important component of innate immunity. Complement-derived products mediate functions contributing to pathogen killing and elimination. However, inappropriate activation of the system contributes to the pathogenesis of immunological and inflammatory diseases. Complement component 3 (C3) occupies a central position because of the manifold biological activities of its activation fragments, including the major fragment, C3b, which anchors the assembly of convertases effecting C3 and C5 activation. C3 is converted to C3b by proteolysis of its anaphylatoxin domain, by either of two C3 convertases. This activates a stable thioester bond, leading to the covalent attachment of C3b to cell-surface or protein-surface hydroxyl groups through transesterification. The cleavage and activation of C3 exposes binding sites for factors B, H and I, properdin, decay accelerating factor (DAF, CD55), membrane cofactor protein (MCP, CD46), complement receptor 1 (CR1, CD35) and viral molecules such as vaccinia virus complement-control protein. C3b associates with these molecules in different configurations and forms complexes mediating the activation, amplification and regulation of the complement response. Structures of C3 and C3c, a fragment derived from the proteolysis of C3b, have revealed a domain configuration, including six macroglobulin domains (MG1-MG6; nomenclature follows ref. 5) arranged in a ring, termed the beta-ring. However, because neither C3 nor C3c is active in complement activation and regulation, questions about function can be answered only through direct observations on C3b. Here we present a structure of C3b that reveals a marked loss of secondary structure in the CUB (for 'complement C1r/C1s, Uegf, Bmp1') domain, which together with the resulting translocation of the thioester domain provides a molecular basis for conformational changes accompanying the conversion of C3 to C3b. The total conformational changes make many proposed ligand-binding sites more accessible and create a cavity that shields target peptide bonds from access by factor I. A covalently bound N-acetyl-l-threonine residue demonstrates the geometry of C3b attachment to surface hydroxyl groups.
The disulphide-bonded intermediates that accumulate in the oxidative folding of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) were characterized some time ago. Structural characterization of these intermediates would provide an explanation of the kinetically preferred pathways of folding for BPTI. When folding occurs under strongly oxidizing conditions, more than half the molecules become trapped in an intermediate, designated N*, which is similar to the native protein but lacks the 30-51 disulphide bond. We have tested the hypothesis that the precursor to N* is the one-disulphide intermediate [5-55], which contains the most stable disulphide in BPTI, and present evidence here that this is the case. A peptide model of [5-55], corresponding to a subdomain of BPTI, seems to fold into a native-like conformation, explaining why [5-55] does not lead to native protein and why it folds rapidly to N*. A native-like subdomain structure in a peptide model of [30-51], the other crucial one-disulphide intermediate, may explain the route by which [30-51] folds to native protein. Thus, much of the folding pathway of BPTI can be explained by the formation of a native-like subdomain in these two early intermediates. This suggests that a large part of the protein folding problem can be reduced to identifying and understanding subdomains of native proteins.
Ligand binding to structural elements in the non-coding regions of messenger RNA modulates gene expression. Ligands such as free metabolites or other small molecules directly bind and induce conformational changes in regulatory RNA elements known as riboswitches. Other types of RNA switches are activated by complexed metabolites-for example, RNA-ligated metabolites such as aminoacyl-charged transfer RNA in the T-box system, or protein-bound metabolites in the glucose- or amino-acid-stimulated terminator-anti-terminator systems. All of these switch types are found in bacteria, fungi and plants. Here we report an RNA switch in human vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGFA, also known as VEGF) mRNA 3' untranslated region (UTR) that integrates signals from interferon (IFN)-gamma and hypoxia to regulate VEGFA translation in myeloid cells. Analogous to riboswitches, the VEGFA 3' UTR undergoes a binary conformational change in response to environmental signals. However, the VEGFA 3' UTR switch is metabolite-independent, and the conformational change is dictated by mutually exclusive, stimulus-dependent binding of proteins, namely, the IFN-gamma-activated inhibitor of translation complex and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L (HNRNPL, also known as hnRNP L). We speculate that the VEGFA switch represents the founding member of a family of signal-mediated, protein-dependent RNA switches that evolved to regulate gene expression in multicellular animals in which the precise integration of disparate inputs may be more important than the rapidity of response.
Crystals of n-alkanes show a remarkable series of solid-solid phase transitions. In the odd n-alkanes C(25), C(27), and C(29) a previously unknown transition is found by both calorimetry and infrared spectroscopy. The ubiquitous presence of nonplanar conformations of the chains is shown by infrared spectroscopy. The nonplanar conformers constitute approximately half the molecules in the highest temperature solid phase of C(29).
Experiments on individual molecules using scanning probe microscopies have demonstrated an exciting diversity of physical, chemical, mechanical, and electronic phenomena. They have permitted deeper insight into the quantum electronics of molecular systems and have provided unique information on their conformational and mechanical properties. Concomitant developments in experimentation and theory have allowed a diverse range of molecules to be studied, varying in complexity from simple diatomics to biomolecular systems. At the level of an individual molecule, the interplays of mechanical and electronical behavior and chemical properties manifest themselves in an unusually clear manner. In revealing the crucial role of thermal, stochastic, and quantum-tunneling processes, they suggest that dynamics is inescapable and may play a decisive role in the evolution of nanotechnology.
The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) has a central role in coordinating the adaptive response in situations of decreased water availability as well as the regulation of plant growth and development. Recently, a 14-member family of intracellular ABA receptors, named PYR/PYL/RCAR, has been identified. These proteins inhibit in an ABA-dependent manner the activity of a family of key negative regulators of the ABA signalling pathway: the group-A protein phosphatases type 2C (PP2Cs). Here we present the crystal structure of Arabidopsis thaliana PYR1, which consists of a dimer in which one of the subunits is bound to ABA. In the ligand-bound subunit, the loops surrounding the entry to the binding cavity fold over the ABA molecule, enclosing it inside, whereas in the empty subunit they form a channel leaving an open access to the cavity, indicating that conformational changes in these loops have a critical role in the stabilization of the hormone-receptor complex. By providing structural details on the ABA-binding pocket, this work paves the way for the development of new small molecules able to activate the plant stress response.
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors (NMDARs) are a major class of excitatory neurotransmitter receptors in the central nervous system. They form glutamate-gated ion channels that are highly permeable to calcium and mediate activity-dependent synaptic plasticity. NMDAR dysfunction is implicated in multiple brain disorders, including stroke, chronic pain and schizophrenia. NMDARs exist as multiple subtypes with distinct pharmacological and biophysical properties that are largely determined by the type of NR2 subunit (NR2A to NR2D) incorporated in the heteromeric NR1/NR2 complex. A fundamental difference between NMDAR subtypes is their channel maximal open probability (P(o)), which spans a 50-fold range from about 0.5 for NR2A-containing receptors to about 0.01 for receptors containing NR2C and NR2D; NR2B-containing receptors have an intermediate value (about 0.1). These differences in P(o) confer unique charge transfer capacities and signalling properties on each receptor subtype. The molecular basis for this profound difference in activity between NMDAR subtypes is unknown. Here we show that the subunit-specific gating of NMDARs is controlled by the region formed by the NR2 amino-terminal domain (NTD), an extracellular clamshell-like domain previously shown to bind allosteric inhibitors, and the short linker connecting the NTD to the agonist-binding domain (ABD). The subtype specificity of NMDAR P(o) largely reflects differences in the spontaneous (ligand-independent) equilibrium between open-cleft and closed-cleft conformations of the NR2-NTD. This NTD-driven gating control also affects pharmacological properties by setting the sensitivity to the endogenous inhibitors zinc and protons. Our results provide a proof of concept for a drug-based bidirectional control of NMDAR activity by using molecules acting either as NR2-NTD 'closers' or 'openers' promoting receptor inhibition or potentiation, respectively.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a factory where secretory proteins are manufactured, and where stringent quality-control systems ensure that only correctly folded proteins are sent to their final destinations. The changing needs of the ER factory are monitored by integrated signalling pathways that constantly adjust the levels of folding assistants. ER chaperones and signalling molecules are emerging as drug targets in amyloidoses and other protein-conformational diseases.
Cytidylic acid "a" (cytidine 2'-monophosphate) crystallizes in the triclinic space group P1 with two molecules of cytidine monophosphate (C(9)H(14)O(8)N(3)P) and six molecules of water in the unit cell. X-ray analysis of this crystal shows that in both molecules, the base is in the anti conformation, the ribose ring is C(2')-endo puckered, and the hydroxyl O(5') is gauche-gauche. The two molecules are linked by a short hydrogen bond through the phosphate oxygens.
The elementary voltage pulses ("shot effects") produced by the action of acetylcholine molecules on the receptor were studied by analyzing the membrane voltage fluctuations ("noise") after acetylcholine application at the frog neuromuscular junction. The amplitude of these pulses was decreased after treatment with a disulfide-bond reducing agent. The shot effect may thus depend on the structure or conformation of the receptor molecule.
The biological function of biomacromolecules such as DNA and enzymes depends on their ability to perform and control molecular association, catalysis, self-replication or other chemical processes. In the case of proteins in particular, the dependence of these functions on the three-dimensional protein conformation is long known and has inspired the development of synthetic oligomers and polymers with the capacity to fold in a controlled manner, but it remains challenging to design these so-called 'foldamers' so that they are capable of inducing or controlling chemical processes and interactions. Here we show that the stability gained from folding can be used to control the synthesis of oligomers from short chain segments reversibly ligated through an imine metathesis reaction. That is, folding shifts the ligation equilibrium in favour of conformationally ordered sequences, so that oligomers having the most stable solution structures form preferentially. Crystallization has previously been used to shift an equilibrium in order to indirectly influence the synthesis of small molecules, but the present approach to selectively prepare macromolecules with stable conformations directly connects folding and synthesis, emphasizing molecular function rather than structure in polymer synthesis.
Analysis of messenger RNA splicing in yeast and in metazoa has led to the identification of an RNA molecule in a lariat conformation. This structure has been found as an mRNA splicing intermediate in vitro and identical molecules have been identified in vivo. Lariat formation involves cleavage of the precursor at the 5' splice site (5' SS) and the formation of a 2'-5' phosphodiester bond between the guanosine residue at the 5' end of the intron and an adenosine within the intron. The yeast branchpoint is located within the absolutely conserved TACTAAC box (that is, the last A of the TACTAAC box is the site of formation of the 2'-5' phosphodiester bond with the 5' end of the intron)3,4. Moreover, efficient 5' SS cleavage and lariat formation require proper sequences at the 5' splice junction and within the TACTAAC box. Here we demonstrate that 5' SS cleavage and lariat formation take place in vitro in the absence of the 3' SS and much of the 3' junction. These results are discussed in light of possible differences between yeast and metazoan mRNA splicing.
For the scientist who wishes to synthesize complex organic compounds, the most difficult problem is often establishing the correct configuration at the various chiral centers as the synthesis is being carried out. In the past decade, there has been an increasing effort to find direct solutions to this problem, which is particularly acute in the synthesis of acyclic and other conformationally flexible molecules. One of the oldest organic reactions, the aldol condensation, is emerging as a powerful tool for use in achieving such stereocontrol.
Tunneling electrons from a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) were used to excite photon emission from individual porphyrin molecules adsorbed on an ultrathin alumina film grown on a NiAl(110) surface. Vibrational features were observed in the light-emission spectra that depended sensitively on the different molecular conformations and corresponding electronic states obtained by scanning tunneling spectroscopy. The high spatial resolution of the STM enabled the demonstration of variations in light-emission spectra from different parts of the molecule. These experiments realize the feasibility of fluorescence spectroscopy with the STM and enable the integration of optical spectroscopy with a nanoprobe for the investigation of single molecules.
The nuclear pore complex (NPC) is essential for the transit of molecules between the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm of a cell and until recently was thought to allow intermediate-sized molecules (relative molecular mass of approximately 10,000) to diffuse freely across the nuclear envelope. However, the depletion of calcium from the nuclear envelope of Xenopus laevis oocytes was shown to regulate the passage of intermediate-sized molecules. Two distinct conformational states of the NPC were observed by field emission scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy. A central plug occluded the NPC channel after nuclear calcium stores had been depleted and free diffusion of intermediate-sized molecules had been blocked. Thus, the NPC conformation appears to gate molecular movement across the nuclear envelope.
A naturally occurring (dT-dC)18:(dA-dG)18 repeat in the H conformation of DNA was shown to contain single-stranded nucleotides in the center of the TC18 repeat and on one half of the AG18 repeat. These results support the model that H-DNA is a structure containing both triple-stranded and single-stranded regions. The stability of this structure was affected by both pH and the degree of negative supercoiling: at pH 7.6 to 7.7, a high level of supercoiling was needed to keep about half of the molecules in the H conformation; at pH 6 and pH 5, normal levels of supercoiling supported H-DNA; and at pH 4, no supercoiling was required. At mildly alkaline pH, the TC/AG18 repeat assumed a novel conformation called J-DNA that differed from both the B and H forms. A three-dimensional model for the structure of H-DNA is proposed that accounts both for the single-strandedness of the nucleotides and for the influence of supercoiling on H-DNA formation. This model predicts and evidence is presented that H-DNA introduces a sharp kink in the DNA. Moreover, the angle of this kink appears not to be fixed, so that H-DNA is also a hinged-DNA.
Two independent, three-dimensional structures of yeast tRNAAsp, mainly differing by the conformation of the D loop, have been obtained from a multiple isomorphous replacement (MIR) X-ray analysis at 3.5-A resolution. The folding of the ribose-phosphate backbone is similar to that found for tRNAPhe; major differences concern the relative positioning of the acceptor and anticodon stems, and the conformation of the loops in the two molecules. Crystal packing involves self-complementary GUC anticodon interactions.
High-resolution transmission electron microscopy revealed nearly atomically precise images of stepping conformational change and translational motion of single hydrocarbon molecules confined in carbon nanotubes. One or two C12 or C22 alkyl chains were tethered to a carborane end group and then embedded in the nanotubes. Images of the hydrocarbon chains interacting with each other and with a graphitic surface provide information on three-dimensional structures and dynamic molecular interactions that cannot be obtained by other analytical methods.
Recent developments in piconewton instrumentation allow the manipulation of single molecules and measurements of intermolecular as well as intramolecular forces. Dextran filaments linked to a gold surface were probed with the atomic force microscope tip by vertical stretching. At low forces the deformation of dextran was found to be dominated by entropic forces and can be described by the Langevin function with a 6 angstrom Kuhn length. At elevated forces the strand elongation was governed by a twist of bond angles. At higher forces the dextran filaments underwent a distinct conformational change. The polymer stiffened and the segment elasticity was dominated by the bending of bond angles. The conformational change was found to be reversible and was corroborated by molecular dynamics calculations.
M1 protein, a major virulence factor of the leading invasive strain of group A Streptococcus, is sufficient to induce toxic-shock-like vascular leakage and tissue injury. These events are triggered by the formation of a complex between M1 and fibrinogen that, unlike M1 or fibrinogen alone, leads to neutrophil activation. Here we provide a structural explanation for the pathological properties of the complex formed between streptococcal M1 and human fibrinogen. A conformationally dynamic coiled-coil dimer of M1 was found to organize four fibrinogen molecules into a specific cross-like pattern. This pattern supported the construction of a supramolecular network that was required for neutrophil activation but was distinct from a fibrin clot. Disruption of this network into other supramolecular assemblies was not tolerated. These results have bearing on the pathophysiology of streptococcal toxic shock.
Accurate translation of genetic information into protein sequence depends on complete messenger RNA molecules. Truncated mRNAs cause synthesis of defective proteins, and arrest ribosomes at the end of their incomplete message. In bacteria, a hybrid RNA molecule that combines the functions of both transfer and messenger RNAs (called tmRNA) rescues stalled ribosomes, and targets aberrant, partially synthesized, proteins for proteolytic degradation. Here we report the 3.2-A-resolution structure of the tRNA-like domain of tmRNA (tmRNA(Delta)) in complex with small protein B (SmpB), a protein essential for biological functions of tmRNA. We find that the flexible RNA molecule adopts an open L-shaped conformation and SmpB binds to its elbow region, stabilizing the single-stranded D-loop in an extended conformation. The most striking feature of the structure of tmRNA(Delta) is a 90 degrees rotation of the TPsiC-arm around the helical axis. Owing to this unusual conformation, the SmpB-tmRNA(Delta) complex positioned into the A-site of the ribosome orients SmpB towards the small ribosomal subunit, and directs tmRNA towards the elongation-factor binding region of the ribosome. On the basis of this structure, we propose a model for the binding of tmRNA on the ribosome.
The crystal structure of restriction endonuclease Bam HI complexed to DNA has been determined at 2.2 angstrom resolution. The DNA binds in the cleft and retains a B-DNA type of conformation. The enzyme, however, undergoes a series of conformational changes, including rotation of subunits and folding of disordered regions. The most striking conformational change is the unraveling of carboxyl-terminal alpha helices to form partially disordered "arms." The arm from one subunit fits into the minor groove while the arm from the symmetry related subunit follows the DNA sugar-phosphate backbone. Recognition of DNA base pairs occurs primarily in the major groove, with a few interactions occurring in the minor groove. Tightly bound water molecules play an equally important role as side chain and main chain atoms in the recognition of base pairs. The complex also provides new insights into the mechanism by which the enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of DNA phosphodiester groups.
Much evidence supports the hypothesis that the infectious agents of prion diseases are devoid of nucleic acid, and instead are composed of a specific infectious protein. This protein, PrP(Sc), seems to be generated by template-induced conformational change of a normally expressed glycoprotein, PrP(C) (ref. 2). Although numerous studies have established the conversion of PrP(C) to PrP(Sc) as the central pathogenic event of prion disease, it is unknown whether cellular factors other than PrP(C) might be required to stimulate efficient PrP(Sc) production. We investigated the biochemical amplification of protease-resistant PrP(Sc)-like protein (PrPres) using a modified version of the protein-misfolding cyclic amplification method. Here we report that stoichiometric transformation of PrP(C) to PrPres in vitro requires specific RNA molecules. Notably, whereas mammalian RNA preparations stimulate in vitro amplification of PrPres, RNA preparations from invertebrate species do not. Our findings suggest that host-encoded stimulatory RNA molecules may have a role in the pathogenesis of prion disease. They also provide a practical approach to improve the sensitivity of diagnostic techniques based on PrPres amplification.
Members of the epidermal growth factor receptor family (EGFR/ERBB1, ERBB2/HER2, ERBB3/HER3 and ERBB4/HER4) are key targets for inhibition in cancer therapy. Critical for activation is the formation of an asymmetric dimer by the intracellular kinase domains, in which the carboxy-terminal lobe (C lobe) of one kinase domain induces an active conformation in the other. The cytoplasmic protein MIG6 (mitogen-induced gene 6; also known as ERRFI1) interacts with and inhibits the kinase domains of EGFR and ERBB2 (refs 3-5). Crystal structures of complexes between the EGFR kinase domain and a fragment of MIG6 show that a approximately 25-residue epitope (segment 1) from MIG6 binds to the distal surface of the C lobe of the kinase domain. Biochemical and cell-based analyses confirm that this interaction contributes to EGFR inhibition by blocking the formation of the activating dimer interface. A longer MIG6 peptide that is extended C terminal to segment 1 has increased potency as an inhibitor of the activated EGFR kinase domain, while retaining a critical dependence on segment 1. We show that signalling by EGFR molecules that contain constitutively active kinase domains still requires formation of the asymmetric dimer, underscoring the importance of dimer interface blockage in MIG6-mediated inhibition.
The lens-specific water pore aquaporin-0 (AQP0) is the only aquaporin known to form membrane junctions in vivo. We show here that AQP0 from the lens core, containing some carboxy-terminally cleaved AQP0, forms double-layered crystals that recapitulate in vivo junctions. We present the structure of the AQP0 membrane junction as determined by electron crystallography. The junction is formed by three localized interactions between AQP0 molecules in adjoining membranes, mainly mediated by proline residues conserved in AQP0s from different species but not present in most other aquaporins. Whereas all previously determined aquaporin structures show the pore in an open conformation, the water pore is closed in AQP0 junctions. The water pathway in AQP0 also contains an additional pore constriction, not seen in other known aquaporin structures, which may be responsible for pore gating.
We report the design of surfaces that exhibit dynamic changes in interfacial properties, such as wettability, in response to an electrical potential. The change in wetting behavior was caused by surface-confined, single-layered molecules undergoing conformational transitions between a hydrophilic and a moderately hydrophobic state. Reversible conformational transitions were confirmed at a molecular level with the use of sum-frequency generation spectroscopy and at a macroscopic level with the use of contact angle measurements. This type of surface design enables amplification of molecular-level conformational transitions to macroscopic changes in surface properties without altering the chemical identity of the surface. Such reversibly switching surfaces may open previously unknown opportunities in interfacial engineering.
To establish productive infection, a retrovirus must insert a DNA replica of its genome into host cell chromosomal DNA. This process is operated by the intasome, a nucleoprotein complex composed of an integrase tetramer (IN) assembled on the viral DNA ends. The intasome engages chromosomal DNA within a target capture complex to carry out strand transfer, irreversibly joining the viral and cellular DNA molecules. Although several intasome/transpososome structures from the DDE(D) recombinase superfamily have been reported, the mechanics of target DNA capture and strand transfer by these enzymes remained unclear. Here we report crystal structures of the intasome from prototype foamy virus in complex with target DNA, elucidating the pre-integration target DNA capture and post-catalytic strand transfer intermediates of the retroviral integration process. The cleft between IN dimers within the intasome accommodates chromosomal DNA in a severely bent conformation, allowing widely spaced IN active sites to access the scissile phosphodiester bonds. Our results resolve the structural basis for retroviral DNA integration and provide a framework for the design of INs with altered target sequences.
Secondary transporters are workhorses of cellular membranes, catalyzing the movement of small molecules and ions across the bilayer and coupling substrate passage to ion gradients. However, the conformational changes that accompany substrate transport, the mechanism by which a substrate moves through the transporter, and principles of competitive inhibition remain unclear. We used crystallographic and functional studies on the leucine transporter (LeuT), a model for neurotransmitter sodium symporters, to show that various amino acid substrates induce the same occluded conformational state and that a competitive inhibitor, tryptophan (Trp), traps LeuT in an open-to-out conformation. In the Trp complex, the extracellular gate residues arginine 30 and aspartic acid 404 define a second weak binding site for substrates or inhibitors as they permeate from the extracellular solution to the primary substrate site, which demonstrates how residues that participate in gating also mediate permeation.
Rates of protein folding reactions vary considerably. Some denatured proteins regain the native conformation within milliseconds or seconds, whereas others refold very slowly in the time range of minutes or hours. Varying folding rates are observed not only for different proteins, but can also be detected for single polypeptide species. This originates from the co-existence of fast- and slow-folding forms of the unfolded protein, which regain the native state with different rates. The proline hypothesis provides a plausible explanation for this heterogeneity. It assumes that the slow-folding molecules possess non-native isomers of peptide bonds between proline and another residue, and that crucial steps in the refolding of the slow-folding molecules are limited in rate by the slow reisomerization of such incorrect proline peptide bonds. Recently the enzyme peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) was discovered and purified from pig kidney. It catalyses efficiently the cis in equilibrium trans isomerization of proline imidic peptide bonds in oligopeptides. Here we show that it also catalyses slow steps in the refolding of a number of proteins of which fast- and slow-folding species have been observed and where it was suggested that proline isomerization was involved in slow refolding. The efficiency of catalysis depends on the accessibility for the isomerase of the particular proline peptide bonds in the refolding protein chain.
Precision scale models of sickle-cell hemoglobin molecules indicate that the genetic substitution of valine for glutamic acid at the 6th position in the two beta chains allows an intramolecular hydrophobic bond to form. This changes the conformation in such a way as to allow molecular stacking. Optical rotatory dispersion studies and the restilts of suLbjection of Hb S solution to temperature change and to propane are consistent with the presence of such a bond. Examination of sickled erythrocytes in a magnetic field and in polarized light indicates that the Hb S molecules are aligned iiz sitil. Filaments interpreted as hollow cables of six Hb S monofilaments have been demonstrated by electron microscopy.
Studies by electron microscopy, fluorescence polarization, hydro-dynamics and X-ray crystallography have demonstrated the ability of different parts of immunoglobulin molecules to move relative to each other. This movement facilitates the multiple interactions that antibodies make with polyvalent antigens and effector proteins. Comparisons of the atomic structures of immunoglobulins of the same sequence in different crystal environments, and of those with different sequences, have shown that the movements involve local changes in the conformation of the peptides linking different domains. These changes occur in (1) the hinge regions that link the Fab fragment to the Fc, and (2) the switch regions that link the VL-VH dimer to the CL-CH1 dimer. We show here that in immunoglobulins of known structure, the movement of the VL-VH dimer relative to the CL-CH1 dimer also involves the interactions of three VH and two CH1 residues that form the molecular equivalent of a ball-and-socket joint. The almost absolute conservation in the sequences of immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors of the residues that form these interactions suggests that this is a general feature of functional importance.
The active steering of the pathways taken by chemical reactions and the optimization of energy conversion processes provide striking examples of the coherent control of quantum interference through the use of shaped laser pulses. Experimentally, coherence is usually established by synchronizing a subset of molecules in an ensemble with ultra-short laser pulses. But in complex systems where even chemically identical molecules exist with different conformations and in diverse environments, the synchronized subset will have an intrinsic inhomogeneity that limits the degree of coherent control that can be achieved. A natural-and, indeed, the ultimate-solution to overcoming intrinsic inhomogeneities is the investigation of the behaviour of one molecule at a time. The single-molecule approach has provided useful insights into phenomena as diverse as biomolecular interactions, cellular processes and the dynamics of supercooled liquids and conjugated polymers. Coherent state preparation of single molecules has so far been restricted to cryogenic conditions, whereas at room temperature only incoherent vibrational relaxation pathways have been probed. Here we report the observation and manipulation of vibrational wave-packet interference in individual molecules at ambient conditions. We show that adapting the time and phase distribution of the optical excitation field to the dynamics of each molecule results in a high degree of control, and expect that the approach can be extended to achieve single-molecule coherent control in other complex inhomogeneous systems.
In solution, biopolymers commonly fold into well-defined three-dimensional structures, but only recently has analogous behavior been explored in synthetic chain molecules. An aromatic hydrocarbon backbone is described that spontaneously acquires a stable helical conformation having a large cavity. The chain does not form intramolecular hydrogen bonds, and solvophobic interactions drive the folding transition, which is sensitive to chain length, solvent quality, and temperature.
The stretching of individual polymers in a spatially homogeneous velocity gradient was observed through use of fluorescently labeled DNA molecules. The probability distribution of molecular extension was determined as a function of time and strain rate. Although some molecules reached steady state, the average extension did not, even after a approximately 300-fold distortion of the underlying fluid element. At the highest strain rates, distinct conformational shapes with differing dynamics were observed. There was considerable variation in the onset of stretching, and chains with a dumbbell shape stretched more rapidly than folded ones. As the strain rate was increased, chains did not deform with the fluid element. The steady-state extension can be described by a model consisting of two beads connected by a spring representing the entropic elasticity of a worm-like chain, but the average dynamics cannot.
Since it was first suggested that a single molecule might function as an active electronic component, a number of techniques have been developed to measure the charge transport properties of single molecules. Although scanning tunnelling microscopy observations under high vacuum conditions can allow stable measurements of electron transport, most measurements of a single molecule bonded in a metal-molecule-metal junction exhibit relatively large variations in conductance. As a result, even simple predictions about how molecules behave in such junctions have still not been rigorously tested. For instance, it is well known that the tunnelling current passing through a molecule depends on its conformation; but although some experiments have verified this effect, a comprehensive mapping of how junction conductance changes with molecular conformation is not yet available. In the simple case of a biphenyl--a molecule with two phenyl rings linked by a single C-C bond--conductance is expected to change with the relative twist angle between the two rings, with the planar conformation having the highest conductance. Here we use amine link groups to form single-molecule junctions with more reproducible current-voltage characteristics. This allows us to extract average conductance values from thousands of individual measurements on a series of seven biphenyl molecules with different ring substitutions that alter the twist angle of the molecules. We find that the conductance for the series decreases with increasing twist angle, consistent with a cosine-squared relation predicted for transport through pi-conjugated biphenyl systems.
The crystal structure of alamethicin in nonaqueous solvent has been determined, and refined at 1.5-A resolution. The molecular conformation of the three crystallographically independent molecules is largely alpha-helical with a bend in the helix axis at an internal proline residue. The helix structure is highly amphipathic as most of the solvent-accessible polar atoms lie on a narrow strip of surface parallel to the helix axis. Molecular models for the voltage-gated ion channel, with n-fold symmetry and based on the molecular conformations observed in the crystal, are characterized by strong surface complementarity, a hydrophilic interior and a hydrophobic exterior. The channel structures are stabilized by a hydrated annulus of hydrogen-bonded glutamine residues which produce the greatest restriction in the channel diameter.
Proteins of the transferrin family, which contains serum transferrin and lactoferrin, control iron levels in higher animals through their very tight (Kapp approximately 10(20)) but reversible binding of iron. These bilobate molecules have two binding sites, one per lobe, each housing one Fe3+ and the synergistic CO3(2-) ion. Crystallographic studies of human lactoferrin and rabbit serum transferrin in their iron-bound forms have characterized their binding sites and protein structure. Physical studies show that a substantial conformational change accompanies iron binding and release. We have addressed this phenomenon through crystal structure analysis of human apolactoferrin at 2.8 A resolution. In this structure the N-lobe binding cleft is wide open, following a domain rotation of 53 degrees, mediated by the pivoting of two helices and flexing of two interdomain polypeptide strands. Remarkably, the C-lobe cleft is closed, but unliganded. These observations have implications for transferrin function and for binding proteins in general.
The crystal structure of dihydrouridine hemihydrate has been determined by x-ray diffraction. Crystals of dihydrouridine contain two independent molecules in the asymmetric unit and a molecule of water. The x-ray structure determination has shown that the conformations of both molecules differ in important respects in the saturated base and the ribose. The molecular conformation of dihydrouridine has, for the first time, provided structural evidence that the rare nucleoside can proinote "loop" formation in the sugar-phosphate chain.
Vesicular stomatitis virus is a negative-stranded RNA virus. Its nucleoprotein (N) binds the viral genomic RNA and is involved in multiple functions including transcription, replication, and assembly. We have determined a 2.9 angstrom structure of a complex containing 10 molecules of the N protein and 90 bases of RNA. The RNA is tightly sequestered in a cavity at the interface between two lobes of the N protein. This serves to protect the RNA in the absence of polynucleotide synthesis. For the RNA to be accessed, some conformational change in the N protein should be necessary.
Protein photosensors from all kingdoms of life use bound organic molecules, known as chromophores, to detect light. A specific double bond within each chromophore is isomerized by light, triggering slower changes in the protein as a whole. The initial movements of the chromophore, which can occur in femtoseconds, are tightly constrained by the surrounding protein, making it difficult to see how isomerization can occur, be recognized, and be appropriately converted into a protein-wide structural change and biological signal. Here we report how this dilemma is resolved in the photoactive yellow protein (PYP). We trapped a key early intermediate in the light cycle of PYP at temperatures below -100 degrees C, and determined its structure at better than 1 A resolution. The 4-hydroxycinnamoyl chromophore isomerizes by flipping its thioester linkage with the protein, thus avoiding collisions resulting from large-scale movement of its aromatic ring during the initial light reaction. A protein-to-chromophore hydrogen bond that is present in both the preceding dark state and the subsequent signalling state of the photosensor breaks, forcing one of the hydrogen-bonding partners into a hydrophobic pocket. The isomerized bond is distorted into a conformation resembling that in the transition state. The resultant stored energy is used to drive the PYP light cycle. These results suggest a model for phototransduction, with implications for bacteriorhodopsin, photoactive proteins, PAS domains, and signalling proteins.
Propelling single molecules in a controlled manner along an unmodified surface remains extremely challenging because it requires molecules that can use light, chemical or electrical energy to modulate their interaction with the surface in a way that generates motion. Nature's motor proteins have mastered the art of converting conformational changes into directed motion, and have inspired the design of artificial systems such as DNA walkers and light- and redox-driven molecular motors. But although controlled movement of single molecules along a surface has been reported, the molecules in these examples act as passive elements that either diffuse along a preferential direction with equal probability for forward and backward movement or are dragged by an STM tip. Here we present a molecule with four functional units--our previously reported rotary motors--that undergo continuous and defined conformational changes upon sequential electronic and vibrational excitation. Scanning tunnelling microscopy confirms that activation of the conformational changes of the rotors through inelastic electron tunnelling propels the molecule unidirectionally across a Cu(111) surface. The system can be adapted to follow either linear or random surface trajectories or to remain stationary, by tuning the chirality of the individual motor units. Our design provides a starting point for the exploration of more sophisticated molecular mechanical systems with directionally controlled motion.
In the energy transduction of muscle contraction, it is important to know the nature and extent of conformational changes of the head portion of the myosin molecules. In the presence of magnesium adenosine triphosphate (MgATP), fairly large conformational changes of the myosin head [subfragment-1 (S1)] in solution were observed by small-angle x-ray scattering with the use of synchrotron radiation as an intense and stable x-ray source. The presence of MgATP reduced the radius of gyration of the molecule by about 3 angstrom units and the maximum chord length by about 10 angstroms, showing that the shape of S1 becomes more compact or round during hydrolysis of MgATP. Comparison with various nucleotide-bound S1 complexes that correspond to the known intermediate states during ATP hydrolysis indicates that the shape of S1 in a key intermediate state, S1-bound adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and phosphate [S1**.ADP.P(i)], differs significantly from the shape in the other intermediate states of the S1 adenosine triphosphatase cycle as well as that of nucleotide-free S1.
There is considerable interest in the existence and significance of alternative conformations of DNA to the right-handed B-form described originally by Watson and Crick. The indirect immunofluorescence observations of Nordheim et al., Arndt-Jovin et al. and Lemeunier et al. that antibodies against left-handed Z-DNA bind to polytene chromosomes have thus assumed considerable importance. However, there is a paradox: some workers observe Z-DNA in interbands and others in bands. We report here that binding of Z-DNA antibodies to Drosophila polytene chromosomes prepared without acid fixation is at background level, and that following acid fixation the same antibody treatment leads to intense fluorescence. Depending on the extent of exposure to 45% acetic acid, fluorescence can occur primarily in interbands or in bands. Furthermore, antibody binding is dependent on elastic torsional strain in the DNA molecules.
The sodium-calcium exchanger is critical in the normal functioning of many cells. In heart muscle, it is the principal way by which the cells keep the concentration of intracellular calcium low, pumping out the Ca2+ that enters the cytosol through L-type Ca2+ channels. The exchanger may also contribute to the triggering of Ca2+ release during voltage-activated excitation-contraction coupling in heart. Time resolved examination of the conformational changes of macromolecules in living cells has so far been largely restricted to ion-channel proteins whose gating is voltage-dependent. We have now directly measured electrical currents arising from the molecular rearrangements of the sarcolemmal Na-Ca exchanger. Changes in the conformation of the exchanger protein were activated by a rapid increase in the intracellular calcium concentration produced by flash photolysis of caged calcium in voltage-clamped heart cells. Two components of membrane current were produced, reflecting a calcium-dependent conformational change of the transporter proteins and net transport of ions by the exchanger. The properties of these components provide evidence that the Na-Ca exchanger protein undergoes two consecutive membrane-crossing molecular transitions that each move charge, and that there are at least 250 exchangers per micron 2 turning over up to 2,500 times per second.
Single-molecule force spectroscopy allows superb mechanical control of protein conformation. We used a custom-built low-drift atomic force microscope to observe mechanically induced conformational equilibrium fluctuations of single molecules of the eukaryotic calcium-dependent signal transducer calmodulin (CaM). From this data, the ligand dependence of the full energy landscape can be reconstructed. We find that calcium ions affect the folding kinetics of the individual CaM domains, whereas target peptides stabilize the already folded structure. Single-molecule data of full length CaM reveal that a wasp venom peptide binds noncooperatively to CaM with 2:1 stoichiometry, whereas a target enzyme peptide binds cooperatively with 1:1 stoichiometry. If mechanical load is applied directly to the target peptide, real-time binding/unbinding transitions can be observed.
The structure of adenosine 3',5'-cyclic phosphate has been determined by single-crystal x-ray diffraction. The two molecules in the asymmetric unit show different conformation about the glycosidic bond, while other structural details are essentially the same. The furanose rings are puckered with the C(4') atom out of the best four-atom plane. The bond lengths and angles appear to be normal.
The assembly of nanoparticles into three-dimensional (3D) architectures could allow for greater control of the interactions between these particles or with molecules. DNA tubes are known to form through either self-association of multi-helix DNA bundle structures or closing up of 2D DNA tile lattices. By the attachment of single-stranded DNA to gold nanoparticles, nanotubes of various 3D architectures can form, ranging in shape from stacked rings to single spirals, double spirals, and nested spirals. The nanoparticles are active elements that control the preference for specific tube conformations through size-dependent steric repulsion effects. For example, we can control the tube assembly to favor stacked-ring structures using 10-nanometer gold nanoparticles. Electron tomography revealed a left-handed chirality in the spiral tubes, double-wall tube features, and conformational transitions between tubes.
X-ray diffraction analysis of crystals of the intercalative complex between the deoxyribonucleoside phosphate d(CpG) and the mutagen proflavine shows a highly structured arrangement of water molecules linked together by newtworks of hydrogen bonds to form four edge-linked pentagons per asymmetric unit. These pentagons have a general role in maximizing hydrogen bonding at 3.4-A intervals. The conformation of the deoxyribose sugar ring at the 3' end of one strand can depend on its local aqueous environment.
Four different crystals of d(CpGpCpGpCpG) have been solved by x-ray diffraction analysis and all form similar left-handed double helical Z-DNA molecules in the crystal lattice. Two different conformations are observed for the phosphates in the GpC sequences, as the phosphates are found either facing the helical groove or rotated away from it. The latter conformation is often found when hydrated magnesium ions are complexed to a phosphate oxygen atom. These different conformations may be used when right-handed B-DNA joins left-handed Z-DNA. Atomic coordinates and torsion angles are presented for both types of Z-DNA.
Stimuli-sensitive polymer hydrogels, which swell or shrink in response to changes in the environmental conditions, have been extensively investigated and used as 'smart' biomaterials and drug-delivery systems. Most of these responsive hydrogels are prepared from a limited number of synthetic polymers and their derivatives, such as copolymers of (meth)acrylic acid, acrylamide and N-isopropyl acrylamide. Water-soluble synthetic polymers have also been crosslinked with molecules of biological origin, such as oligopeptides and oligodeoxyribonucleotides, or with intact native proteins. Very often there are several factors influencing the relationship between structure and properties in these systems, making it difficult to engineer hydrogels with specified responses to particular stimuli. Here we report a hybrid hydrogel system assembled from water-soluble synthetic polymers and a well-defined protein-folding motif, the coiled coil. These hydrogels undergo temperature-induced collapse owing to the cooperative conformational transition of the coiled-coil protein domain. This system shows that well-characterized water-soluble synthetic polymers can be combined with well-defined folding motifs of proteins in hydrogels with engineered volume-change properties.
A measurement and interpretation on a molecular level of a phase transition in an ordered Langmuir monolayer is reported. The diagram of surface pressure (pi) versus molecular area of a monolayer of chiral (S)-[CF(3)-(CF(2))(9)-(CH(2))(2)-OCO-CH(2)-CH (NH(3)(+))CO(2)(-)] over water shows a change in slope at about pi(s)= 25 millinewtons per meter. Grazing-incidence x-ray diffraction and specular reflectivity measurements indicate a solid-solid phase transition at pi(s). The diffraction pattren at low pressures reveals two diffraction peaks of equal intensities, with lattice spacings d of 5.11 and 5.00 angstroms; these coalesce for pi >/=pi(s). Structural models that fit the diffraction data show that at pi> pi(s) the molecules pack in a two-dimensional crystal with the molecules aligned vertically. At pi < pi(s) there is a molecular tilt of 16 degrees +/- 7 degrees . Independent x-ray reflectivity data yield a tilt of 26 degrees +/- 7 degrees . Concomitant with the tilt, the diffraction data indicate a transition from a hexagonal to a distorted-hexagonal lattice. The hexagonal arrangement is favored because the -(CF(2))(9)CF(3) moiety adopts a helical conformation. Compression to 70 millinewtons per meter yields a unit cell with increased crystallinity and a coherence length exceeding 1000 angstroms.
Cytochrome P450BM-3, a bacterial fatty acid monoxygenase, resembles the eukaryotic microsomal P450's and their flavoprotein reductase in primary structure and function. The three-dimensional structure of the hemoprotein domain of P450BM-3 was determined by x-ray diffraction and refined to an R factor of 16.9 percent at 2.0 angstrom resolution. The structure consists of an alph and a beta domain. The active site heme is accessible through a long hydrophobic channel formed primarily by the beta domain and the B' and F helices of the alpha domain. The two molecules in the asymmetric unit differ in conformation around the substrate binding pocket. Substantial differences between P450BM-3 and P450cam, the only other P450 structure available, are observed around the substrate binding pocket and the regions important for redox partner binding. A general mechanism for proton transfer in P450's is also proposed.
Mixed sequence DNA can exist in two right-handed and one left-handed double helical conformations--A, B and Z. Under conditions of high water activity the B conformation prevails. If the water activity is reduced on addition of salt or organic solvents, transformation occurs to A-DNA or, in DNAs with alternating purine-pyrimidine sequences, to the left-handed Z-DNA. In crystal structure analyses of oligonucleotides, the free oxygen atoms of adjacent phosphate groups along the polynucleotide chain in B-DNA are found at least 6.6 A apart and individually hydrated whereas they are as close as 5.3 A in A-DNA and 4.4 A in Z-DNA, and bridged by water molecules. We suggest that this more economical hydration in A- and Z-DNA compared with B-DNA is the underlying cause of B----A and B----Z transitions.
Actin plays crucial parts in cell motility through a dynamic process driven by polymerization and depolymerization, that is, the globular (G) to fibrous (F) actin transition. Although our knowledge about the actin-based cellular functions and the molecules that regulate the G- to F-actin transition is growing, the structural aspects of the transition remain enigmatic. We created a model of F-actin using X-ray fibre diffraction intensities obtained from well oriented sols of rabbit skeletal muscle F-actin to 3.3 A in the radial direction and 5.6 A along the equator. Here we show that the G- to F-actin conformational transition is a simple relative rotation of the two major domains by about 20 degrees. As a result of the domain rotation, the actin molecule in the filament is flat. The flat form is essential for the formation of stable, helical F-actin. Our F-actin structure model provides the basis for understanding actin polymerization as well as its molecular interactions with actin-binding proteins.
A complete and accurate set of experimental crystallographic phases to a resolution of 1.8 angstroms was obtained for a 230-residue dimeric fragment of rat mannose-binding protein A with the use of multiwavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) phasing. An accurate image of the crystal structure could thus be obtained without resort to phases calculated from a model. Partially reduced disulfide bonds, local disorder, and differences in the mobility of chemically equivalent molecules are apparent in the experimental electron density map. A solvation layer is visible that includes well-ordered sites of hydration around polar and charged protein atoms, as well as diffuse, partially disordered solvent shells around exposed hydrophobic groups. Because the experimental phases and the resulting electron density map are free from the influence of a model, they provide a stringent test of theoretical models of macromolecular solvation, motion, and conformational heterogeneity.
Polymer dynamics are of central importance in materials science, mechanical engineering, biology and medicine. The dynamics of macromolecular solutions and melts in shear flow are typically studied using bulk experimental methods such as light and neutron scattering and birefringence. But the effect of shear on the conformation and dynamics of individual polymers is still not well understood. Here we describe observations of the real-time dynamics of individual, flexible polymers (fluorescently labelled DNA molecules) under a shear flow. The sheared polymers exhibit many types of extended conformation with an overall orientation ranging from parallel to perpendicular with respect to the flow direction. For shear rates much smaller than the inverse of the relaxation time of the molecule, the relative populations of these two main types of conformation are controlled by the rate of the shear flow. These results question the adequacy of assumptions made in standard models of polymer dynamics.
Ca(2+) channels and calmodulin (CaM) are two prominent signalling hubs that synergistically affect functions as diverse as cardiac excitability, synaptic plasticity and gene transcription. It is therefore fitting that these hubs are in some sense coordinated, as the opening of Ca(V)1-2 Ca(2+) channels are regulated by a single CaM constitutively complexed with channels. The Ca(2+)-free form of CaM (apoCaM) is already pre-associated with the isoleucine-glutamine (IQ) domain on the channel carboxy terminus, and subsequent Ca(2+) binding to this 'resident' CaM drives conformational changes that then trigger regulation of channel opening. Another potential avenue for channel-CaM coordination could arise from the absence of Ca(2+) regulation in channels lacking a pre-associated CaM. Natural fluctuations in CaM concentrations might then influence the fraction of regulable channels and, thereby, the overall strength of Ca(2+) feedback. However, the prevailing view has been that the ultrastrong affinity of channels for apoCaM ensures their saturation with CaM, yielding a significant form of concentration independence between Ca(2+) channels and CaM. Here we show that significant exceptions to this autonomy exist, by combining electrophysiology (to characterize channel regulation) with optical fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) sensor determination of free-apoCaM concentration in live cells. This approach translates quantitative CaM biochemistry from the traditional test-tube context into the realm of functioning holochannels within intact cells. From this perspective, we find that long splice forms of Ca(V)1.3 and Ca(V)1.4 channels include a distal carboxy tail that resembles an enzyme competitive inhibitor that retunes channel affinity for apoCaM such that natural CaM variations affect the strength of Ca(2+) feedback modulation. Given the ubiquity of these channels, the connection between ambient CaM levels and Ca(2+) entry through channels is broadly significant for Ca(2+) homeostasis. Strategies such as ours promise key advances for the in situ analysis of signalling molecules resistant to in vitro reconstitution, such as Ca(2+) channels.
Runs of adenines (adenine tracts) have been implicated as the main determinant of sequence-directed DNA bending. The most widely used experimental test for bending relies on the observation that bent DNA migrates more slowly than straight DNA on a polyacrylamide electrophoresis gel. It was shown recently that the polymer (GTTTTAAAAC)n runs with normal mobility on a gel, whereas (GAAAATTTTC)n runs more slowly and thus appears to be strongly bent. The observation that these similar sequences, which differ only in the order of the adenine and thymine tracts, adopt such different shapes offers a stringent test of theories to explain DNA bending. Although the wedge model for DNA bending has recently been elaborated to explain the gel mobilities of these molecules, we wished to determine experimentally the structural basis for the difference in bending. We report here measurements of the frequency of cleavage by the hydroxyl radical at each nucleotide of cloned versions of the two polymers (see Fig. 1). We show that the TTTTAAAA sequence does not display the cleavage pattern that is associated with bent DNA, whereas the AAAATTTT sequence does. The observed sequence dependence of the cleavage pattern of an adenine tract is at odds with current models for DNA bending, which assume that adenine tracts always adopt the same conformation.
Most, though not all, of the messenger RNAs of higher cells are composed of transcripts from two or more non-contiguous DNA segments that are 'spliced' together by mechanisms which are poorly understood. There has been recent speculation that small RNA molecules may play a part in the splicing reaction, acting as templates or adaptors to stabilize the appropriate conformation of a precursor RNA. Adenovirus-2 codes for two low molecular weight RNAs, the virus-associate (VA) RNAs I and II, major and minor species, respectively. These RNAs are about 160 nucleotides long and have both been sequenced. They originate from closely spaced genes which are transcribed by RNA polymerase III, but have not been definitively associated with any function. We have shown previously that a fraction of the VA RNA of infected cells is complexed with high molecular weight RNA in a denaturation-sensitive fashion. Results presented here show that the VA RNAs bind to unfractionated late virus mRNA and to a cloned copy of a single mRNA species, but not to corresponding cloned segments of viral genomic DNA. It is suggested that VA RNA may act as a template in the splicing reaction.
Ligand-gated ion channels transduce chemical signals into electrical impulses by opening a transmembrane pore in response to binding one or more neurotransmitter molecules. After activation, many ligand-gated ion channels enter a desensitized state in which the neurotransmitter remains bound but the ion channel is closed. Although receptor desensitization is crucial to the functioning of many ligand-gated ion channels in vivo, the molecular basis of this important process has until now defied analysis. Using the GluR2 AMPA-sensitive glutamate receptor, we show here that the ligand-binding cores form dimers and that stabilization of the intradimer interface by either mutations or allosteric modulators reduces desensitization. Perturbations that destabilize the interface enhance desensitization. Receptor activation involves conformational changes within each subunit that result in an increase in the separation of portions of the receptor that are linked to the ion channel. Our analysis defines the dimer interface in the resting and activated state, indicates how ligand binding is coupled to gating, and suggests modes of dimer dimer interaction in the assembled tetramer. Desensitization occurs through rearrangement of the dimer interface, which disengages the agonist-induced conformational change in the ligand-binding core from the ion channel gate.
The human Rad50/Mre11/Nbs1 complex (hR/M/N) functions as an essential guardian of genome integrity by directing the proper processing of DNA ends, including DNA breaks. This biological function results from its ability to tether broken DNA molecules. hR/M/N's dynamic molecular architecture consists of a globular DNA-binding domain from which two 50-nm-long coiled coils protrude. The coiled coils are flexible and their apices can self-associate. The flexibility of the coiled coils allows their apices to adopt an orientation favourable for interaction. However, this also allows interaction between the tips of two coiled coils within the same complex, which competes with and frustrates the intercomplex interaction required for DNA tethering. Here we show that the dynamic architecture of hR/M/N is markedly affected by DNA binding. DNA binding by the hR/M/N globular domain leads to parallel orientation of the coiled coils; this prevents intracomplex interactions and favours intercomplex associations needed for DNA tethering. The hR/M/N complex thus is an example of a biological nanomachine in which binding to its ligand, in this case DNA, affects the functional conformation of a domain located 50 nm distant.
The lymphocyte function-associated molecule LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18) plays a key part in lymphocyte adhesion. Lymphocytes do not adhere spontaneously; activation of protein kinase C (PKC) by phorbol esters, however, gives rise to strong LFA-1-dependent adhesion, indicating that activation of LFA-1 is required to induce cell adhesion. We have now investigated whether the functionally important CD2 and CD3 surface structures on T lymphocytes are involved in the activation of LFA-1. The stimulation of these molecules, which causes activation of PKC, strongly promoted LFA-1-dependent adhesion. Furthermore, we demonstrate by using cells from an LFA-1-deficient patient that this enhanced lymphocyte adhesion is caused by activation of the LFA-1 molecule and not by activation of its ligands. LFA-1 was persistently activated by triggering through CD2 but only transiently by triggering through CD3. We postulate that CD2 and CD3 can differentially regulate the affinity of LFA-1 for its ligands by modulating its molecular conformation through PKC-dependent mechanisms.
The molecule r(GCG)d(TATACGC) is self-complementary and forms two DNA--RNA hybrid segments surrounding a central region of double helical DNA; its molecular structure has been solved by X-ray analysis. All three parts of the molecule adopt a conformation which is close to that seen in the 11-fold RNA double helix. The conformation of the ribonucleotides is partly determined by water molecules bridging between the ribose O2' hydroxyl group and cytosine O2. The hybrid-DNA duplex junction contains no structural discontinuities. However, the central DNA TATA sequence has some structural irregularities.
The effects of various neutral salts on the temperature of the thermally-induced denaturation of the globular protein ribonuclease are described and compared with the effects of these salts on helix-coil transition temperatures in other macromolecules. These agents affect the stability of the native form of macromolecules as diverse as ribonuclease, collagen, DNA, and myosin in very similar ways; salts such as KSCN and CaCl(2) serve as very potent general structural destabilizers or denaturants, while salts such as (NH(4))(2)SO(4) and K(2)HPO(4) strongly stabilize the native conformation. The effectiveness of the neutral salts as ribonuclease destabilizers is compared with that of urea and the guanidinium salts.
Neurotrophins (NTs) are important regulators for the survival, differentiation and maintenance of different peripheral and central neurons. NTs bind to two distinct classes of glycosylated receptor: the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75(NTR)) and tyrosine kinase receptors (Trks). Whereas p75(NTR) binds to all NTs, the Trk subtypes are specific for each NT. The question of whether NTs stimulate p75(NTR) by inducing receptor homodimerization is still under debate. Here we report the 2.6-A resolution crystal structure of neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) complexed to the ectodomain of glycosylated p75(NTR). In contrast to the previously reported asymmetric complex structure, which contains a dimer of nerve growth factor (NGF) bound to a single ectodomain of deglycosylated p75(NTR) (ref. 3), we show that NT-3 forms a central homodimer around which two glycosylated p75(NTR) molecules bind symmetrically. Symmetrical binding occurs along the NT-3 interfaces, resulting in a 2:2 ligand-receptor cluster. A comparison of the symmetrical and asymmetric structures reveals significant differences in ligand-receptor interactions and p75(NTR) conformations. Biochemical experiments indicate that both NT-3 and NGF bind to p75(NTR) with 2:2 stoichiometry in solution, whereas the 2:1 complexes are the result of artificial deglycosylation. We therefore propose that the symmetrical 2:2 complex reflects a native state of p75(NTR) activation at the cell surface. These results provide a model for NTs-p75(NTR) recognition and signal generation, as well as insights into coordination between p75(NTR) and Trks.
Controlled mechanical movement in molecular-scale devices has been realized in a variety of systems-catenanes and rotaxanes, chiroptical molecular switches, molecular ratchets and DNA-by exploiting conformational changes triggered by changes in redox potential or temperature, reversible binding of small molecules or ions, or irradiation. The incorporation of such devices into arrays could in principle lead to complex structural states suitable for nanorobotic applications, provided that individual devices can be addressed separately. But because the triggers commonly used tend to act equally on all the devices that are present, they will need to be localized very tightly. This could be readily achieved with devices that are controlled individually by separate and device-specific reagents. A trigger mechanism that allows such specific control is the reversible binding of DNA strands, thereby 'fuelling' conformational changes in a DNA machine. Here we improve upon the initial prototype system that uses this mechanism but generates by-products, by demonstrating a robust sequence-dependent rotary DNA device operating in a four-step cycle. We show that DNA strands control and fuel our device cycle by inducing the interconversion between two robust topological motifs, paranemic crossover (PX) DNA and its topoisomer JX2 DNA, in which one strand end is rotated relative to the other by 180 degrees. We expect that a wide range of analogous yet distinct rotary devices can be created by changing the control strands and the device sequences to which they bind.
X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance measurements provide us with atomically resolved structures of an ever-growing number of biomolecules. These static structural snapshots are important to our understanding of biomolecular function, but real biomolecules are dynamic entities that often exploit conformational changes and transient molecular interactions to perform their tasks. Nuclear magnetic resonance methods can follow such structural changes, but only on millisecond timescales under non-equilibrium conditions. Time-resolved X-ray crystallography has recently been used to monitor the photodissociation of CO from myoglobin on a subnanosecond timescale, yet remains challenging to apply more widely. In contrast, two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy, which maps vibrational coupling between molecular groups and hence their relative positions and orientations, is now routinely used to study equilibrium processes on picosecond timescales. Here we show that the extension of this method into the non-equilibrium regime allows us to observe in real time in a short peptide the weakening of an intramolecular hydrogen bond and concomitant opening of a beta-turn. We find that the rate of this process is two orders of magnitude faster than the 'folding speed limit' established for contact formation between protein side chains.
CHANGES in transcriptional activity at defined loci are often correlated with significant local structural changes in the genome(1), and in polytene chromosomes, such changes are thought to be associated with compositional or conformational changes in the protein complement at these particular bands(2,3). Thus, various studies on Balfoiani rings and specific 'puffs' in such chromosomes are useful for elucidating the role of defined chromosomal components in both chromosome structure and gene activity. Such studies require specific probes which will allow in situ localisation of a chromosomal component during the various stages of puffing. Antibodies specific to purified histone fractions(4-7), HMG proteins(8), RNA polymerase(9) and non-histone protein subfractions(10) have been used in studies on chromatin and chromosome structure. We reported previously that concanavalin A (Con A) specifically binds to three types of non-histone proteins present in chromatin purified from rat liver nuclei and suggested that derivatives of Con A might serve as specific probes to study the in situ organisation of these non-histone proteins(11). We have now reacted fluorescein-labelled Con A with polytene chromosomes isolated from different developmental stages of Chironomus thummi and visualised the location of the bound Con A by fluorescence microscopy. We observed that the fluorescent lectin, which has an affinity for glucose- and mannose-containing molecules, specifically bound to the transcriptionally active regions of chromosome IV. The extent of binding of Con A to the Balbiani rings present in regions b and c of chromosome IV is proportional to the size of the respective ring. Our results indicate that glucose- or mannose-containing molecules are present in these Balbiani rings and that the availability of these sugars to interact with Con A can be correlated with the developmental stage of a puff. We suggest that lectins can be useful cytological tools with which to study the in situ organisation of defined chromosomal components during various functional states of the genome.
The structure of a protein triple helix has been determined at 1.9 angstrom resolution by x-ray crystallographic studies of a collagen-like peptide containing a single substitution of the consensus sequence. This peptide adopts a triple-helical structure that confirms the basic features determined from fiber diffraction studies on collagen: supercoiling of polyproline II helices and interchain hydrogen bonding that follows the model II of Rich and Crick. In addition, the structure provides new information concerning the nature of this protein fold. Each triple helix is surrounded by a cylinder of hydration, with an extensive hydrogen bonding network between water molecules and peptide acceptor groups. Hydroxyproline residues have a critical role in this water network. The interaxial spacing of triple helices in the crystal is similar to that in collagen fibrils, and the water networks linking adjacent triple helices in the crystal structure are likely to be present in connective tissues. The breaking of the repeating (X-Y-Gly)n pattern by a Gly-->Ala substitution results in a subtle alteration of the conformation, with a local untwisting of the triple helix. At the substitution site, direct interchain hydrogen bonds are replaced with interstitial water bridges between the peptide groups. Similar conformational changes may occur in Gly-->X mutated collagens responsible for the diseases osteogenesis imperfecta, chondrodysplasias, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome IV.
Recent experiments have implicated intracellular events in the formation of the MHC class II-peptide complexes recognized by CD4-positive T cells. These data raise the possibility that the intracellular association of class II with the non-polymorphic glycoprotein, invariant chain (Ii), may regulate the interaction between processed antigen and MHC class II molecules. To address this possibility, we have generated a series of transfected fibroblast cell lines that express class II with and without Ii. Although the presence of Ii does not seem to affect the ability of the cells to process and present intact antigen, Ii-negative cells express an altered form of class II at the cell surface. This modified conformation of class II in Ii-negative cells is detectable by an increase in the ability to present antigenic peptides to T cells and a decrease in the binding of several class II-specific monoclonal antibodies.
Kinesin is a double-headed motor protein that moves along microtubules in 8-nanometer steps. Two broad classes of model have been invoked to explain kinesin movement: hand-over-hand and inchworm. In hand-over-hand models, the heads exchange leading and trailing roles with every step, whereas no such exchange is postulated for inchworm models, where one head always leads. By measuring the stepwise motion of individual enzymes, we find that some kinesin molecules exhibit a marked alternation in the dwell times between sequential steps, causing these motors to "limp" along the microtubule. Limping implies that kinesin molecules strictly alternate between two different conformations as they step, indicative of an asymmetric, hand-over-hand mechanism.
Structural characterization of biomolecules in solution by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is based primarily on the use of interproton distances derived from homonuclear cross-relaxation experiments. Information about short time-scale dynamics, on the other hand, is obtained from relaxation rates of heteronuclear spin pairs such as 15N-1H. By combining the two types of data and utilizing the dependence of heteronuclear NMR relaxation rates on anisotropic diffusional rotational tumbling, it is possible to obtain structural information about long-range motional correlations between protein domains. This approach was applied to characterize the relative orientations and mobilities of the first three zinc-finger domains of the Xenopus transcription factor TFIIIA in aqueous solution. The data indicate that the motions of the individual zinc-finger domains are highly correlated on time scales shorter than 10 nanoseconds and that the average conformation of the three-finger polypeptide is elongated.
Phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) is a monomeric protein composed of two domains of approximately equal size, connected by a hinge. Substrate-induced conformational change results in the closure of the active site cleft, which is situated between these two domains. In a study of the relations between structure and function of this enzyme, two interspecies hybrids were constructed, each composed of one domain from the human enzyme and one domain from the yeast enzyme. Despite a 35% difference in the amino acid composition between human and yeast PGK, catalytic properties of the hybrid enzymes are very similar to those of the parental proteins. This result demonstrates that the evolutionary substitutions within these two distantly related molecules do not significantly affect formation of the active site cleft, mechanism of domain closure, or enzyme activity itself.
The kinesin superfamily is a class of microtubule-based mechano-enzymes involved in intracellular transport and chromosome movements. Molecules that move towards either the plus end or the minus end of microtubules are represented within the family. The motor domains of these molecules exhibit considerable sequence homology and contain both the ATP- and microtubule-binding sites (reviewed in refs 1, 2). Here we focus on non-claret disjunctional (ncd), a minus-end-directed motor involved in chromosome segregation in meiosis and early mitosis in Drosophila. We have calculated a three-dimensional map of tubulin sheets decorated with monomeric recombinant ncd motor domains by negative-stain electron microscopy and image analysis. Comparisons with a control structure of tubulin alone reveal that each motor domain binds to the crest of a single protofilament, making extensive contacts with both the alpha and beta tubulin monomers. Binding of the motor domain results in significant conformational changes in both of the tubulin monomers.
The inhibitor-of-apoptosis proteins (IAPs) regulate programmed cell death by inhibiting members of the caspase family of enzymes. Recently, a mammalian protein called Smac (also named DIABLO) was identified that binds to the IAPs and promotes caspase activation. Although undefined in the X-ray structure, the amino-terminal residues of Smac are critical for its function. To understand the structural basis for molecular recognition between Smac and the IAPs, we determined the solution structure of the BIR3 domain of X-linked IAP (XIAP) complexed with a functionally active nine-residue peptide derived from the N terminus of Smac. The peptide binds across the third beta-strand of the BIR3 domain in an extended conformation with only the first four residues contacting the protein. The complex is stabilized by four intermolecular hydrogen bonds, an electrostatic interaction involving the N terminus of the peptide, and several hydrophobic interactions. This structural information, along with the binding data from BIR3 and Smac peptide mutants reported here, should aid in the design of small molecules that may be used for the treatment of cancers that overexpress IAPs.
The crystal and molecular structure of the naturally occurring deoxyribose dinucleotide sodium thymidylyl-(5'-->3')-thymidylate-5' has been determined by x-ray diffraction. There are four molecules of dinucleotide and 52 water molecules in an orthorhombic unit cell of dimensions (in angstroms) a = 16.06, b = 15.13, c = 15.65, space group P2(1)2(1)2. There is a very high degree of conformational consistency between the two halves of the molecule when the dinucleotide is viewed as the combination of two 5'-mononucleotides. The planes of the two thymines are not parallel, but are tilted 38 degrees with respect to each other. An extensive system of hydrogen bonding exists involving the bases, waters, phosphates, and sodiums; no base-base hydrogen bonding occurs. The dinucleotide structural parameters should be of assistance in interpreting DNA fiber diagrams in terms of possible structures.
Scalable parallel computer architectures provide the computational performance needed for advanced biomedical computing problems. The National Institutes of Health have developed a number of parallel algorithms and techniques useful in determining biological structure and function. These applications include processing electron micrographs to determine the three-dimensional structure of viruses, calculating the solvent-accessible surface area of proteins to help predict the three-dimensional conformation of these molecules from their primary structures, and searching for homologous DNA or amino acid sequences in large biological databases. Timing results demonstrate substantial performance improvements with parallel implementations compared with conventional sequential systems.
Determination of the molecular structure and properties of allergens that elicit severe immediate-type hypersensitivity diseases in humans and a knowledge of the structure of their antibody-binding sites should provide new insight into the pathogenetic mechanisms of allergic diseases. Monomeric and homodimeric hemoglobins (CTT I to X) have been identified as potent allergenic components of Chironomidae, a family of Diptera. Immunologic investigations of peptides of three of these hemoglobins (CTT IV, CTT VI, and CTT VIII) showed that human antibodies of the E and G classes recognize at least two different sites within each molecule. Individual hemoglobin peptides were aligned with homologous regions of chironomid hemoglobin CTT III, whose tertiary structure has been determined by x-ray analysis at a resolution of 1.4 angstroms. The antigenic site CTT IV(91 to 101) showed the following characteristics: (i) seven polar or hydroxylated amino acids, from a total of eleven, occupying predominantly superficial regions; (ii) the property of linkage to other molecules by hydrogen bonds or solvent clusters; and (iii) high thermal mobility factors. In contrast, peptide CTT IV(102 to 108), which does not bind human antibodies, contained no polar amino acids and had low thermal mobility factors. These results support the idea that the antigenicity of clinically relevant proteins is related to regions with a predominance of polar amino acids and with low energy barriers between different conformations, which allow high flexibility, including site-specific adaptation in antibody binding.
Most plasmalemmal proteins organize in submicrometer-sized clusters whose architecture and dynamics are still enigmatic. With syntaxin 1 as an example, we applied a combination of far-field optical nanoscopy, biochemistry, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) analysis, and simulations to show that clustering can be explained by self-organization based on simple physical principles. On average, the syntaxin clusters exhibit a diameter of 50 to 60 nanometers and contain 75 densely crowded syntaxins that dynamically exchange with freely diffusing molecules. Self-association depends on weak homophilic protein-protein interactions. Simulations suggest that clustering immobilizes and conformationally constrains the molecules. Moreover, a balance between self-association and crowding-induced steric repulsions is sufficient to explain both the size and dynamics of syntaxin clusters and likely of many oligomerizing membrane proteins that form supramolecular structures.
The structure of poly(dA).poly(dT) currently arouses great interest, mainly because dAn.dTn stretches are associated with considerable DNA bending. Until recently the heteronomous DNA described by Arnott et al., with the poly(dA) and poly(dT) chains in A and B conformations respectively, was the only detailed model of this structure. Following our earlier studies of the interaction of DNA and monovalent ions, we examined the X-ray diffraction of the bivalent Ca2+ salt of poly(dA).poly(dT) (Ca-poly(dA).poly(dT)) and found no sign of a heteronomous structure: Ca-poly(dA).poly(dT) in fibres shows fully equivalent B-type conformations of the opposite sugar-phosphate chains. A revision of the structure of the sodium salt, Na-poly(dA).poly(dT), based on this result, yields only a slightly heteronomous structure with each chain in a B-type conformation, which is in much better agreement with the experimental data underlying the original heteronomous model. Both structures, Ca- and Na-poly(dA).poly(dT), have a minor groove narrower than that of the B form: this peculiarity seems to be very important for the interaction of poly(dA).poly(dT) and biologically significant molecules (including proteins and antibiotics). The specific base-pair positions in poly(dA).poly(dT) may account for the DNA bending adjacent to dAn.dTn tracts.
A discussion of drug-receptor theory is used to show that the three-dimensional structure, or shape, of molecules is important for biological activity. The computer-assisted molecular modeling system at Merck is described, and it is shown that this system is useful for generating and storing molecular structures, determining preferred conformation, comparing molecular shapes, and computing molecular properties. Applications of the system to the study of anti-inflammatory drugs, somatostatin-like compounds, and dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors are summarized.
The oxygen affinity of hemoglobin varies linearly with the chemical potential of water in the bathing medium, as seen from the osmotic effect of several neutral solutes, namely sucrose, stachyose, and two polyethyleneglycols (molecular weights of 150 and 400). The data, analyzed either by Wyman linkage equations or by Gibbs-Duhem relations, show that approximately 60 extra water molecules bind to hemoglobin during the transition from the fully deoxygenated tense (T) state to the fully oxygenated relaxed (R) state. This number, independent of the nature of the solute, agrees with the difference in water-accessible surface areas previously computed for the two conformations. The work of solvation in allosteric regulation can no longer go unrecognized.
The crystal structure of the extracellular portion of the beta chain of a murine T cell antigen receptor (TCR), determined at a resolution of 1.7 angstroms, shows structural homology to immunoglobulins. The structure of the first and second hypervariable loops suggested that, in general, they adopt more restricted sets of conformations in TCR beta chains than those found in immunoglobulins; the third hypervariable loop had certain structural characteristics in common with those of immunoglobulin heavy chain variable domains. The variable and constant domains were in close contact, presumably restricting the flexibility of the beta chain. This may facilitate signal transduction from the TCR to the associated CD3 molecules in the TCR-CD3 complex.
The class I molecules of the major histocompatibility complex (H-2 in mouse, HLA in man) are membrane proteins composed of a polymorphic heavy chain associated with beta-2-microglobulin. Recent studies suggest that class I molecules present peptides derived from processed antigens to the receptor of cytolytic T cells. In particular, in the H-2d haplotype, synthetic HLA peptides can be recognized on Kd-bearing target cells by Kd-restricted cytolytic T cells specific for HLA. Here we analyse the specificity of presentation of two HLA peptides by a set of chimaeric Kd/Dd molecules to four different cytolytic T-cell clones. We identify two distinct regions within the second external (alpha 2) domain of Kd that contribute to its specificity as a restriction element. Our results indicate that the binding of an immunogenic peptide by a class I molecule is not always sufficient for its recognition by the T-cell antigen receptor. This suggests that the major histocompatibility complex restriction element either interacts with the T-cell antigen receptor or induces the recognized conformation of the peptide.
Crystallization of macromolecules for structural studies has long been a hit-or-miss process. The crystallization of hexanucleotides as Z-DNA was studied, and it was shown that the cation concentration for crystal formation could be predicted from solvation free energy (SFE) calculations. Solution studies on the conformation and solubilities of the hexanucleotides showed that a critical concentration of the DNA in the Z-conformation must be present in solution to effect crystallization. The SFE calculations therefore predict the propensity of the hexanucleotides to adopt the left-handed conformation and the driving force required to reach this critical concentration relative to the intrinsic solubility of Z-DNA for crystallization.
The crystal structure of ferrichrome A (C(41)H(58)N(9)O(20)Fe.4H(2)O) has been determined by x-ray diffraction. The amino acid sequence in the hexapeptide ring is confirmed to be -Orn-Orn-Orn-Ser-Ser-Gly-, and the conformation of this ring is trans at each peptide linkage. The absolute configuration of the three hydroxamate rings at the iron atom is that of a left-handed propeller. Disorder is found concerning the positions of some of the side chains and one of the four water molecules.
Phosphorylation of the 20,000-molecular weight (Mr) light chains of vertebrate non-muscle (thymus) and smooth muscle (gizzard) myosins regulates the assembly of these myosins into filaments in vitro. At physiological ionic strength and pH, nonphosphorylated smooth muscle and non-muscle myosin filaments are disassembled by stoichiometric levels of MgATP, forming species having sedimentation coefficients of approximately 11S (range 10-12S; myosin monomers in high salt sediment at 6S). When the 20,000 (20K)-Mr light chains on these 11S myosin species are phosphorylated by the light-chain kinase/calmodulin-Ca2+ complex, the inhibitory effect of the light chains on filament formation is removed and the myosins reassemble into filaments which are stable in MgATP. It was originally suggested that the 11S myosin species was a dimer, previously suggested as a building block for smooth muscle and non-muscle myosin filaments. It has since been shown, however, that 11S smooth muscle myosin is monomeric and has a folded conformation rather than the extended shape characteristic of monomeric myosin in high salt. Here we show that 11S non-muscle myosin is also folded and that phosphorylation of the 20K-Mr light chains of both vertebrate non-muscle (thymus) and vertebrate smooth muscle (gizzard) myosins causes these folded 11S molecules to unfold into the conventional extended monomeric form, which is able to assemble into filaments.
