Conflict monitoring by the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) has been posited to signal a need for greater cognitive control, producing neural and behavioral adjustments. However, the very occurrence of behavioral adjustments after conflict has been questioned, along with suggestions that there is no direct evidence of ACC conflict-related activity predicting subsequent neural or behavioral adjustments in control. Using the Stroop color-naming task and controlling for repetition effects, we demonstrate that ACC conflict-related activity predicts both greater prefrontal cortex activity and adjustments in behavior, supporting a role of ACC conflict monitoring in the engagement of cognitive control.
Neuregulins (also known as ARIA, NDF, heregulin, GGF) are a family of widely expressed growth and differentiation factors. Neuregulins secreted from motor neurons accumulate at maturing neuromuscular junctions, where they stimulate transcription of genes encoding specific acetylcholine receptors. How these factors function at central synapses, however, is unknown. In the maturing cerebellum, neuregulins are concentrated in glutamatergic mossy fibres that innervate granule cells in the internal granule-cell layer. We have analysed the effects of neuregulins on the expression of genes encoding NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors in the cerebellum, because receptor composition changes dramatically as expression of the receptor NR2C subunit is specifically induced in neurons in the internal granule-cell layer during synaptogenesis. Here we report that addition of a neuregulin-beta isoform to cultured cerebellar slices specifically increases the expression of NR2C messenger RNAs by at least 100-fold; effects are only minor with a neuregulin-alpha isoform. This stimulation of NR2C expression requires synaptic activity by NMDA receptors, as well as neuregulin-beta. Addition of the NMDA-receptor-channel blocker AP-5 prevents upregulation of the NR2C subunit by neuregulin, whereas an AMPA/kainate-receptor antagonist does not. Consistent with these effects of neuregulin, we find that granule cells express its receptors ErbB2 and ErbB4 before the NR2C subunit of the NMDA receptor. Our results indicate that neuregulins regulate the composition of neurotransmitter receptors in maturing synapses in the brain, in a manner analogous to the neuromuscular junction.
Many structural features of the mammalian central nervous system can be explained by a morphogenetic mechanism that involves mechanical tension along axons, dendrites and glial processes. In the cerebral cortex, for example, tension along axons in the white matter can explain how and why the cortex folds in a characteristic species-specific pattern. In the cerebellum, tension along parallel fibres can explain why the cortex is highly elongated but folded like an accordion. By keeping the aggregate length of axonal and dendritic wiring low, tension should contribute to the compactness of neural circuitry throughout the adult brain.
Converging evidence and new research methodologies from across the neurosciences permit the neuroscientific study of the role of sleep in off-line memory reprocessing, as well as the nature and function of dreaming. Evidence supports a role for sleep in the consolidation of an array of learning and memory tasks. In addition, new methodologies allow the experimental manipulation of dream content at sleep onset, permitting an objective and scientific study of this dream formation and a renewed search for the possible functions of dreaming and the biological processes subserving it.
As a consequence of alternative RNA processing events, a single rat gene can generate messenger RNA's (mRNA's) encoding either calcitonin or a neuropeptide referred to as alpha-type calcitonin gene-related peptide (alpha-CGRP). An mRNA product of a related gene has been identified in rat brain and thyroid encoding the protein precursor of a peptide differing from alpha-CGRP by only a single amino acid. The RNA encoding this peptide, which is referred to as beta-CGRP, appears to be the only mature transcript of the beta-CGRP gene. Hybridization histochemistry reveals a similar distribution of alpha- and beta-CGRP mRNA's, but their relative levels of expression vary in different cranial nerve nuclei. Thus beta-CGRP is a new member of a family of related genes with potential functions in regulating the transduction of sensory and motor information.
bcl-x is a member of the bcl-2 gene family, which may regulate programmed cell death. Mice were generated that lacked Bcl-x. The Bcl-x-deficient mice died around embryonic day 13. Extensive apoptotic cell death was evident in postmitotic immature neurons of the developing brain, spinal cord, and dorsal root ganglia. Hematopoietic cells in the liver were also apoptotic. Analyses of bcl-x double-knockout chimeric mice showed that the maturation of Bcl-x-deficient lymphocytes was diminished. The life-span of immature lymphocytes, but not mature lymphocytes, was shortened. Thus, Bcl-x functions to support the viability of immature cells during the development of the nervous and hematopoietic systems.
Choline acetyltransferase was demonstrated in neuronal structures of the rodent central nervous system by immunohistochemistry through the application of Fab fragments obtained from monospecific antiserums to human choline acetyltransferase. The specificity of the antiserum for the enzyme was confirmed by the staining of both the ventral horn motor neurons in the rat spinal cord and the neuromuscular junction of the guinea pig diaphragm. Enzyme-containing cell bodies were observed in frontal sections of rat and guinea pig brain in the neostriatum, accumbens, nucleus of the diagonal band, medial septum, and olfactory tubercle. Positively staining fibers and probable nerve terminals were also found in the olfactory tubercle field and other areas of the basal forebrain. The results provide information on the distribution of the cholinergic systems in the rostral forebrain of the rodent.
The neocortex receives a major cholinergic innervation from magnocellular neurones in the basal forebrain. However, an ascending cholinergic reticular system has also been postulated to arise from acetylcholinesterase (AChE)-containing neurones in the midbrain and pontine tegmentum. Lesions of this region decrease both AChE and choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) in various forebrain areas, and recent immunohistochemical studies have identified a group of ChAT-containing cell bodies in the midbrain reticular formation and dorsolateral pontine tegmentum. Here we have combined retrograde tracing with ChAT immunohistochemistry to demonstrate that this tegmental cholinergic cell group also directly innervates the cerebral cortex. Other immunohistochemical studies have indicated that the neuropeptide substance P is also present in certain cells in the laterodorsal tegmentum, and these too appear to project to the forebrain. We have therefore performed immunohistochemistry for both ChAT and substance P and have discovered that a subpopulation of the ascending cholinergic reticular neurones contains substance P. Thus, peptide-cholinergic coexistence, previously noted in peripheral neurones, also occurs in the brain.
Schizophrenia (SCZD) is a debilitating neurological disorder with a world-wide prevalence of 1%; there is a strong genetic component, with an estimated heritability of 80-85%. Although post-mortem studies have revealed reduced brain volume, cell size, spine density and abnormal neural distribution in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of SCZD brain tissue and neuropharmacological studies have implicated dopaminergic, glutamatergic and GABAergic activity in SCZD, the cell types affected in SCZD and the molecular mechanisms underlying the disease state remain unclear. To elucidate the cellular and molecular defects of SCZD, we directly reprogrammed fibroblasts from SCZD patients into human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) and subsequently differentiated these disorder-specific hiPSCs into neurons (Supplementary Fig. 1). SCZD hiPSC neurons showed diminished neuronal connectivity in conjunction with decreased neurite number, PSD95-protein levels and glutamate receptor expression. Gene expression profiles of SCZD hiPSC neurons identified altered expression of many components of the cyclic AMP and WNT signalling pathways. Key cellular and molecular elements of the SCZD phenotype were ameliorated following treatment of SCZD hiPSC neurons with the antipsychotic loxapine. To date, hiPSC neuronal pathology has only been demonstrated in diseases characterized by both the loss of function of a single gene product and rapid disease progression in early childhood. We now report hiPSC neuronal phenotypes and gene expression changes associated with SCZD, a complex genetic psychiatric disorder.
An amyloid protein that precipitates in the cerebral vessel walls of Dutch patients with hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis is similar to the amyloid protein in vessel walls and senile plaques in brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease, Down syndrome, and sporadic cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Cloning and sequencing of the two exons that encode the amyloid protein from two patients with this amyloidosis revealed a cytosine-to-guanine transversion, a mutation that caused a single amino acid substitution (glutamine instead of glutamic acid) at position 22 of the amyloid protein. The mutation may account for the deposition of this amyloid protein in the cerebral vessel walls of these patients, leading to cerebral hemorrhages and premature death.
Angiogenesis--the growth of new blood vessels--is a crucial force for shaping the nervous system and protecting it from disease. Recent advances have improved our understanding of how the brain and other tissues grow new blood vessels under normal and pathological conditions. Angiogenesis factors, especially vascular endothelial growth factor, are now known to have roles in the birth of new neurons (neurogenesis), the prevention or mitigation of neuronal injury (neuroprotection), and the pathogenesis of stroke, Alzheimer's disease and motor neuron disease. As our understanding of pathophysiology grows, these developments may point the way towards new molecular and cell-based therapies.
A common feature of general anaesthetic agents is their ability to potentiate neuronal inhibition through GABA(A) (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptors. At concentrations relevant to clinical anaesthesia, these agents cause a dramatic stimulation of the chloride currents that are evoked by the binding of the natural ligand, GABA. Although there is widespread evidence that the sensitivity of GABA(A) receptors to anaesthetic agents is heterogeneous, the structural basis of these differences is largely unknown. Variations in subunit composition can have profound effects on the sensitivity of GABA(A) receptors to modulatory agents such as benzodiazepines. However, strict subunit specificity has not been demonstrated for the potentiating effects of anaesthetic agents. Here we describe a new class of human GABA(A) receptor subunit (epsilon) that can assemble with alpha- and beta-subunits and confer an insensitivity to the potentiating effects of intravenous anaesthetic agents. The epsilon-subunit also abolishes the normal outward rectification of recombinant receptors in which it assembles. The expression pattern of this subunit in the brain suggests a new target for manipulation of neuronal pathways within the basal ganglia.
A simple quantitative autoradiographic technique for the study of neurotransmitter receptors that includes the use of a tritium-sensitive film permits saturation, kinetic, and competition studies of brain samples as small as 0.01 cubic millimeter. This technique was used to study [3H]muscimol binding in rat brain. Unilateral gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor supersensitivity was observed in the substantia nigra pars reticulata after production of localized lesions of the ipsilateral corpus striatum.
Dopaminergic dysregulation remains an empirical cornerstone for theories concerning the causation of schizophrenia. Evidence for a dopamine system dysfunction in schizophrenia includes the psychosis-inducing effects of dopaminergic agonists and the antipsychotic potency of dopaminergic antagonists. Here we use positron emission tomography (PET) to examine the regulatory role of dopamine on cortical function in normal subjects and unmedicated schizophrenic patients. Using a factorial experimental design, we compared the effect of dopaminergic manipulation with apomorphine on a neural response to a cognitive task. In the schizophrenic patients, relative to controls, an impaired cognitive activation of the anterior cingulate cortex was significantly modulated by a manipulation of dopaminergic neurotransmission. Thus, after apomorphine, the schizophrenic subjects displayed a significantly enhanced cognitive activation of the anterior cingulate cortex relative to the controls. These data provide in vivo evidence that an impaired cognitive-task-induced activation of the anterior cingulate cortex in schizophrenic patients can be significantly modulated by a dopaminergic manipulation.
Cortical neurons form specific circuits, but the functional structure of this microarchitecture and its relation to behaviour are poorly understood. Two-photon calcium imaging can monitor activity of spatially defined neuronal ensembles in the mammalian cortex. Here we applied this technique to the motor cortex of mice performing a choice behaviour. Head-fixed mice were trained to lick in response to one of two odours, and to withhold licking for the other odour. Mice routinely showed significant learning within the first behavioural session and across sessions. Microstimulation and trans-synaptic tracing identified two non-overlapping candidate tongue motor cortical areas. Inactivating either area impaired voluntary licking. Imaging in layer 2/3 showed neurons with diverse response types in both areas. Activity in approximately half of the imaged neurons distinguished trial types associated with different actions. Many neurons showed modulation coinciding with or preceding the action, consistent with their involvement in motor control. Neurons with different response types were spatially intermingled. Nearby neurons (within approximately 150 mum) showed pronounced coincident activity. These temporal correlations increased with learning within and across behavioural sessions, specifically for neuron pairs with similar response types. We propose that correlated activity in specific ensembles of functionally related neurons is a signature of learning-related circuit plasticity. Our findings reveal a fine-scale and dynamic organization of the frontal cortex that probably underlies flexible behaviour.
Although the parietal cortex has been implicated in the neural processes underlying visual attention, the nature of its contribution is not well understood. We tracked attention in the monkey and correlated the activity of neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) with the monkey's attentional performance. The ensemble activity in LIP across the entire visual field describes the spatial and temporal dynamics of a monkey's attention. Activity subtending a single location in the visual field describes the attentional priority at that area but does not predict that the monkey will actually attend to or make an eye movement to that location.
Infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is frequently accompanied by the AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) dementia complex. The role of specific HIV genetic elements in the pathogenesis of central nervous system (CNS) disease is not clear. Transgenic mice were constructed that contained the long terminal repeats (LTRs) of two CNS-derived strains and a T cell tropic strain of HIV-1. Only mice generated with CNS-derived LTRs directed expression in the CNS, particularly in neurons. Thus, some strains of HIV-1 have a selective advantage for gene expression in the brain, and neurons can supply the cellular factors necessary for their transcription.
Octopamine is highly concentrated in neurones of several invertebrate species. Unlike in mammals, octopaminergic neurones in invertebrates are spatially separated from catecholaminergic neurons. In identified nerve cells of Aplysia, however, this amine coexists with other putative neurotransmitters. Octopamine is synthesized in nerves from tyrosine and tyramine and metabolised mainly by monoamine oxidase. When lobster nerves are depolarized, octopamine is liberated by a Ca2+-dependent process. A specific adenylate cyclase is stimulated by octopamine in several invertebrates to activate phosphorylase in the cockroach, induce a light-flash in firefly lattern or inhibit rhythm contractions in locust muscle. All of these observations provide compelling evidence that octopamine is a neurotransmitter in invertebrates. In mammals octopamine is localised in nerves in peripheral tissues and brain where it seems to coexist with noradrenaline, the catecholamine being present in much higher concentrations. Octopamine is released from nerves together with noradrenaline and it may under certain conditions modify the actions of the adrenergic neurotransmitter. Octopamine is present in unusually high concentrations in certain neurological and hepatic diseases and may have a pathophysiological role.
This report concerns the origin and mechanism of fibrillation potentials. It is proposed that these potentials do not necessarily arise from degenerated endplate organs. The precursor is the rhythmic oscillations of the membrane potential. This mechanism may also occur in the case of epileptic discharges from epileptic cells in the cerebral cortex.
The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is a critical component of the human mediofrontal neural circuit that monitors ongoing processing in the cognitive system for signs of erroneous outcomes. Here, we show that the consumption of alcohol in moderate doses induces a significant deterioration of the ability to detect the activation of erroneous responses as reflected in the amplitude of brain electrical activity associated with the ACC. This impairment was accompanied by failures to instigate performance adjustments after these errors. These findings offer insights into how the effects of alcohol on mediofrontal brain function may result in compromised performance.
Changes in neural responses based on spatial attention have been demonstrated in many areas of visual cortex, indicating that the neural correlate of attention is an enhanced response to stimuli at an attended location and reduced responses to stimuli elsewhere. Here we demonstrate non-spatial, feature-based attentional modulation of visual motion processing, and show that attention increases the gain of direction-selective neurons in visual cortical area MT without narrowing the direction-tuning curves. These findings place important constraints on the neural mechanisms of attention and we propose to unify the effects of spatial location, direction of motion and other features of the attended stimuli in a 'feature similarity gain model' of attention.
A "recptor unit" for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which includes brainlike receptor binding sites for tritium-labeled GABA and benzodiazepines (diazepam, clonazepam, and flunitrazepam) and a thermostable endogenous protein (GABA modulin) that inhibits both GABA and benzodiazepine binding, has been demonstrated in membranes prepared from NB2a neuroblastoma and C6 glioma clonal cell lines. In these cells, as in brain, diazepam (1 micromolar) prevents the effect of GABA modulin, and in turn GABA (0.oma and, to a lesser extent, the glioma cells represent a suitable model to study the interactions and the sequence of membrane and intracellular events triggered by the stimulation of benzodiazepine and GABA receptors.
Bidirectional signaling between neocortex and limbic cortex has been hypothesized to contribute to the retrieval of long-term memory. We tested this hypothesis by comparing the time courses of perceptual and memory-retrieval signals in two neighboring areas in temporal cortex, area TE (TE) and perirhinal cortex (PRh), while monkeys were performing a visual pair-association task. Perceptual signal reached TE before PRh, confirming its forward propagation. In contrast, memory-retrieval signal appeared earlier in PRh, and TE neurons were then gradually recruited to represent the sought target. A reasonable interpretation of this finding is that the rich backward fiber projections from PRh to TE may underlie the activation of TE neurons that represent a visual object retrieved from long-term memory.
The role of serotonin axons in modulating the norepinephrine neurotransmission system in rat brain was investigated. Selective lesions of the forebrain serotonergic system were made by injecting 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine into the midbrain raphe nuclei. Four to six weeks after the lesion, the uptake of 3H-labeled serotonin in the frontal cortex and the hippocampus was reduced by more than 90 percent, while neither the uptake of 3H-labeled norepinephrine nor the content of norepinephrine was affected in either tissue. The number of beta-adrenergic receptors, as measured by radioligand binding with 3H-labeled dihydroalprenolol, was increased in the frontal cortex and hippocampus of rats with lesions. Similarly, specific lesions of central serotonin axons produced by systemically administered p-chloramphetamine resulted in an increase in the binding of 3H-labeled dihydroalprenolol to beta-adrenergic receptors and in the production of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate in response to isoproterenol. These results indicate that serotonin axons may regulate beta-adrenergic receptor number and function in brain.
The frontopolar cortex (FPC), the most anterior part of the frontal lobes, forms the apex of the executive system underlying decision-making. Here, we review empirical evidence showing that the FPC function enables contingent interposition of two concurrent behavioral plans or mental tasks according to respective reward expectations, overcoming the serial constraint that bears upon the control of task execution in the prefrontal cortex. This function is mechanistically explained by interactions between FPC and neighboring prefrontal regions. However, its capacity appears highly limited, which suggests that the FPC is efficient for protecting the execution of long-term mental plans from immediate environmental demands and for generating new, possibly more rewarding, behavioral or cognitive sequences, rather than for complex decision-making and reasoning.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is rapidly developing as a powerful, non-invasive tool for studying the human brain. A pulsed magnetic field creates current flow in the brain and can temporarily excite or inhibit specific areas. TMS of motor cortex can produce a muscle twitch or block movement; TMS of occipital cortex can produce visual phosphenes or scotomas. TMS can also alter the functioning of the brain beyond the time of stimulation, offering potential for therapy.
Deprivation of afferent inputs in neural circuits leads to diverse plastic changes in both pre- and postsynaptic elements that restore neural activity. The axon initial segment (AIS) is the site at which neural signals arise, and should be the most efficient site to regulate neural activity. However, none of the plasticity currently known involves the AIS. We report here that deprivation of auditory input in an avian brainstem auditory neuron leads to an increase in AIS length, thus augmenting the excitability of the neuron. The length of the AIS, defined by the distribution of voltage-gated Na(+) channels and the AIS anchoring protein, increased by 1.7 times in seven days after auditory input deprivation. This was accompanied by an increase in the whole-cell Na(+) current, membrane excitability and spontaneous firing. Our work demonstrates homeostatic regulation of the AIS, which may contribute to the maintenance of the auditory pathway after hearing loss. Furthermore, plasticity at the spike initiation site suggests a powerful pathway for refining neuronal computation in the face of strong sensory deprivation.
Hallucinations, perceptions in the absence of external stimuli, are prominent among the core symptoms of schizophrenia. The neural correlates of these brief, involuntary experiences are not well understood, and have not been imaged selectively. We have used new positron emission tomography (PET) methods to study the brain state associated with the occurrence of hallucinations in six schizophrenic patients. Here we present a group study of five patients with classic auditory verbal hallucinations despite medication, demonstrating activations in subcortical nuclei (thalamic, striatal), limbic structures (especially hippocampus), and paralimbic regions (parahippocampal and cingulate gyri, as well as orbitofrontal cortex). We also present a case study of a unique, drug-naive patient with visual as well as auditory verbal hallucinations, demonstrating activations in visual and auditory/linguistic association cortices as part of a distributed cortical-subcortical network. Activity in deep brain structures, identified with group analysis, may generate or modulate hallucinations, and the particular neocortical regions entrained in individual patients may affect their specific perceptual content. The interaction of these distributed neural systems provides a biological basis for the bizarre reports of schizophrenic patients.
Choosing an action that leads to a desired goal requires an understanding of the linkages between actions and their outcomes. We investigated neural mechanisms of such goal-based action selection. We trained monkeys on a task in which the relation between visual cues, action types, and reward conditions changed regularly, such that the monkeys selected their actions based on anticipated reward conditions. A significant number of neurons in the medial prefrontal cortex were activated, after cue presentation and before motor execution, only by particular action-reward combinations. This prefrontal activity is likely to underlie goal-based action selection.
Neurons in area 7a of the posterior parietal cortex of monkeys respond to both the retinal location of a visual stimulus and the position of the eyes and by combining these signals represent the spatial location of external objects. A neural network model, programmed using back-propagation learning, can decode this spatial information from area 7a neurons and accounts for their observed response properties.
Spleen cells from mice immunized with a cultured human neuroblastoma were hybridized with the mouse plasmacytoma P3X63Ag8. Hybrid myelomas were screened for production of antibodies that reacted with human neuroblastomas but not with cells from other tissues. One of these hybridoma antibodies reacted with an antigen present on the six human neuroblastomas tested, one of two retinoblastomas, a glioblastoma, and fetal brain, but did not react with other tumors or tissues including adult human brain.
Ligand-gated ion channels gated by glutamate constitute the major excitatory neurotransmitter system in the mammalian brain. The functional modulation of GluR6, a kainate-activated glutamate receptor, by adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) was examined with receptors expressed in human embryonic kidney cells. Kainate-evoked currents underwent a rapid desensitization that was blocked by lectins. Kainate currents were potentiated by intracellular perfusion of PKA, and this potentiation was blocked by co-application of an inhibitory peptide. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to identify the site or sites of phosphorylation on GluR6. Although mutagenesis of two serine residues, Ser684 and Ser666, was required for complete abolition of the PKA-induced potentiation, Ser684 may be the preferred site of phosphorylation in native GluR6 receptor complexes. These results indicate that glutamate receptor function can be directly modulated by protein phosphorylation and suggest that a dynamic regulation of excitatory receptors could be associated with some forms of learning and memory in the mammalian brain.
The extent of cortical representation of the peripheral sensory field depends on its importance for species behavior. The orientation sound of the mustache bat (Pteronotus parnellii rubiginosus) invariably consists of long constant-frequency and short frequency-modulated components and is indispensable for its survival. A disproportionately large part of the auditory cortex of this bat is occupied by neurons processing the predominant components in the orientation signal and Doppler-shifted echoes. This disproportionate cortical representation related to features of biologically significant signals is comparable to that in the somatosensory and visual systems in many mammals, but it has not previously been observed in the auditory system.
The primary motor cortex (M1) is thought to control movements of different body parts from somatotopically organized cortical territories. Electrical stimulation suggests, however, that territories controlling different fingers overlap. Such overlap might be artifactual or else might indicate that activation of M1 to produce a finger movement occurs over a more widespread cortical area than usually assumed. These possibilities were distinguished in monkeys moving different fingers. Recordings showed that single M1 neurons were active with movements of different fingers. Neuronal populations active with movements of different fingers overlapped extensively. Control of any finger movement thus appears to utilize a population of neurons distributed throughout the M1 hand area rather than a somatotopically segregated population.
Among various neuropeptides present in the central nervous system (CNS), substance P, an undecapeptide, is of great interest as a putative pain neurotransmitter. Substance P is present within numerous intrinsic neural pathways throughout the CNS. Several groups have attempted to label substance P receptors on brain membranes by ligand binding techniques; only one study used native 3H-labelled substance P as the ligand and the precise anatomical distribution of substance P receptors has not yet been described. Here we report the autoradiographic localization of 3H-labelled substance P receptors in rat brain using the in vitro autoradiographic technique developed recently. 3H-substance P binds specifically to an apparently single class of sites on slide-mounted brain sections (Kd = 0.52 nM; Bmax = 21.6 fmol per mg protein). The ligand selectivity pattern suggests that 3H-substance P binding sites are similar to those found in other assays. 3H-substance P receptors are highly concentrated in the external layers of the olfactory bulb, medial amygdala, dentate gyrus, superior colliculus, dorsal parabrachial nucleus and locus coeruleus, with moderate densities being found in the nucleus accumbens, striatum, periaqueductal grey and subiculum. The distribution of 3H-substance P receptors suggests that substance P is probably involved in the control of sensory processes such as pain, vision, audition and olfaction.
Tau proteins aggregate as cytoplasmic inclusions in a number of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease and hereditary frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). Over 10 exonic and intronic mutations in the tau gene have been identified in about 20 FTDP-17 families. Analyses of soluble and insoluble tau proteins from brains of FTDP-17 patients indicated that different pathogenic mutations differentially altered distinct biochemical properties and stoichiometry of brain tau isoforms. Functional assays of recombinant tau proteins with different FTDP-17 missense mutations implicated all but one of these mutations in disease pathogenesis by reducing the ability of tau to bind microtubules and promote microtubule assembly.
A major event of nervous system development is the migration of granule cell neurones, during the early postnatal development of the cerebellar cortex, from their germinating zone in the external granular layer to their final location in the internal granular layer. During migration, many granule cells are seen in direct cell-surface contact with processes of Bergmann glia, a subclass of astrocytes. In the neurological mutant mouse weaver, however, migration of granule cells is impaired, probably due to a deficit in cell-cell interactions. To gain insight into the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in granule cell migration, we have used a modification of an in vitro assay system, previously described by Moonen et al., which displays migratory behaviour in small tissue explants during several days of suspension culture. The aim of this study was to investigate the process of granule cell migration by using antibodies directed against cell-surface components of developing neural cells. We report here that migration of 3H-thymidine-labelled granule cell neurones can be modified by Fab fragments of both mono- and polyclonal L1 antibodies, but not by Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies prepared against mouse liver membranes, which also react with cerebellar cell surfaces.
Constitutive Hedgehog (Hh) pathway activity is associated with initiation of neoplasia, but its role in the continued growth of established tumors is unclear. Here, we investigate the therapeutic efficacy of the Hh pathway antagonist cyclopamine in preclinical models of medulloblastoma, the most common malignant brain tumor in children. Cyclopamine treatment of murine medulloblastoma cells blocked proliferation in vitro and induced changes in gene expression consistent with initiation of neuronal differentiation and loss of neuronal stem cell-like character. This compound also caused regression of murine tumor allografts in vivo and induced rapid death of cells from freshly resected human medulloblastomas, but not from other brain tumors, thus establishing a specific role for Hh pathway activity in medulloblastoma growth.
Volado is a new memory mutant of Drosophila. The locus encodes two isoforms of a new alpha-integrin, a molecule that dynamically mediates cell adhesion and signal transduction. The Volado gene is expressed preferentially in mushroom body cells, which are neurons known to mediate olfactory learning in insects. Volado proteins are concentrated in the mushroom body neuropil, brain areas that contain mushroom body processes in synaptic contact with other neurons. Volado mutants display impaired olfactory memories within 3 min of training, indicating that the integrin is required for short-term memory processes. Conditional expression of a Volado transgene during adulthood rescues the memory impairment. This rescue of memory is reversible, fading over time along with expression of the transgene. Thus the Volado integrin is essential for the physiological processes underlying memory. We propose a model in which integrins act as dynamic regulators of synapse structure or the signalling events underlying short-term memory formation.
Furchgott and Zawadski have shown that acetylcholine (ACh) does not act directly on the smooth muscle of blood vessel walls, but rather via receptors on the endothelial cells lining the lumen, to release an endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF). As it is very unlikely that neurotransmitter released from the periarterial nerves, which are confined to the adventitial-medial border, diffuses all the way through the medial muscle coat before acting on endothelial cells to release EDRF to produce vasodilatation, this discovery has been regarded as an indication of a pathophysiological mechanism, rather than a physiological one (see refs 2, 3). ACh is rapidly degraded in the blood by acetylcholinesterase, so that ACh must be released locally to be effective on endothelial cells. Here we demonstrate the immunocytochemical localization of choline acetyltransferase in endothelial cells of small brain vessels, which is consistent with the view that the ACh originates from endothelial cells that can synthesize and store it. We suggest that release of ACh following damage to endothelial cells during ischaemia contributes to a pathophysiological mechanism of vasodilation which protects that segment of vessel from further damage as well as brain cells from hypoxia.
The role of neurotrophins as target-derived proteins that promote neuron survival following their retrograde transport from the terminals to the cell bodies of neurons has been firmly established in the developing peripheral nervous system. However, neurotrophins appear to have more diverse functions, particularly in the adult central nervous system. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), for example, produces a variety of neuromodulatory effects in the brain that are more consistent with local actions than with long-distance retrograde signalling. Here we show that BDNF is widely distributed in nerve terminals, even in brain areas such as the striatum that lack BDNF messenger RNA, and that inhibition of axonal transport or deafferentation depletes BDNF. The number of striatal neurons that contain the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin was decreased in BDNF+/- and BDNF-/- mice in direct proportion to the loss of BDNF protein, which is consistent with anterogradely supplied BDNF having a functional role in development or maintenance. Thus the anterograde transport of BDNF from neuron cell bodies to their terminals may be important for the trafficking of BDNF in the brain.
Sustained viability of the primate brain, as a totally isolated organ preparation, was achieved by utilizing an extracorporeal (compatible donor) circulation. Five rhesus monkey brains, completely isolated neurogenically and vascularly, were perfused in vitro for 30 to 180 minutes. Retention of biological activity was evidenced by: (i) persistent electrocortical activity, and (ii) significant mean A-Vo(o2) (5.8 volumes percent) and V-Aco(co2) (5.0 volumes percent) differences across the isolated brain.
Cross-correlation analysis reveals a close correlation between the waves in an electroencephalogram and slow membrane transients of single neurons of the sensorimotor cortex of cats during spontaneous activity, augmenting and recruiting responses, and after local application of strychnine. Time-series correlation coefficients up to 0.7 have been computed. It is suggested that the waves of the electroencephalogram reflect an integration of the changes of membrane potentials in both the cell bodies and dendrites of cortical neurons.
Recent neurophysiological findings have demonstrated that abstinent chronic alcoholics manifest deficits in event-related brain potentials. To explore possible biological antecedents of alcoholism the present study examined boys at high risk for alcoholism. Event-related brain potentials were recorded from biological sons of alcoholic fathers and matched control boys. Differences in the P3 component of the potentials were obtained between the high-risk and control subjects.
Human speech and animal sounds contain phonemes with prominent and meaningful harmonics. The biosonar signals of the mustache bat also contain up to four harmonics, and each consists of a long constant-frequency component followed by a short frequency-modulated component. Neurons have been found in a large cluster within auditory cortex of this bat whose responses are facilitated by combinations of two or more harmonically related tones. Moreover, the best frequencies for excitation of these neurons are closely associated with the constant-frequency components of the biosonar signals. The properties of these neurons make them well suited for identifying the signals produced by other echolocating mustache bats. They also show how meaningful components of sound are assembled by neural circuits in the central nervous system and suggest a method by which sounds with important harmonics (or formants) may be detected and recognized by the brain in other species, including humans.
The high-affinity binding sites for mianserin and imipramine appear to be locate in different neurons of rat brain. Studies in which lesions were produced with 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine and other studies in which the 5-hydroxytryptamine content was decreased with p-chlorophenylalanine indicate that some of the imipramine binding sites are on serotonin axon terminals and others are on nonserotonergic synapses. The sites that bind mianserin are on postsynaptic serotonin sites as well as on synapses of other neuronal systems.
The N-myc gene, which is distantly related to the proto-oncogene c-myc, was first detected as an amplified sequence in human neuroblastoma cell lines and tumours. It has since been revealed that there is up to a 300-fold amplification of N-myc DNA in almost 50% of advanced metastatic human neuroblastomas, whereas amplification is not detected in less advanced tumours that have a better prognosis (ref.3 and M.S., unpublished data). Although expression of N-myc is detectable in all neuroblastoma cell lines and tumours examined, its level is greatly enhanced when the N-myc gene is amplified. Recently, it has been shown that on co-transfection with the c-Ha-ras (EJ) gene, N-myc can induce the malignant transformation of rat embryo fibroblasts. Taken together, these data imply a function for N-myc in the development and/or progression of human neuroblastomas. Surveys indicate that N-myc also may be amplified and/or expressed in two other types of human tumours and cell lines derived from them: retinoblastomas and small cell lung cancers. Here, we report that N-myc is expressed at high levels in mouse and human teratocarcinoma stem cells, thus identifying another tumour cell type that expresses the N-myc gene. In addition, we found that N-myc is abundantly expressed in mouse embryos at mid-gestation and that its expression appears to decrease as the embryo approaches term. In the adult mouse, N-myc is expressed at an approximately fivefold lower level in the brain than in teratocarcinoma stem cells and embryos, and at even lower levels in the adult testis and kidney. Our data represent the first demonstration of expression of the N-myc gene in normal cells, and suggest that N-myc may be involved in mammalian embryogenesis.
The myelination of axons by glial cells was the last major step in the evolution of cells in the vertebrate nervous system, and white-matter tracts are key to the architecture of the mammalian brain. Cell biology and mouse genetics have provided insight into axon-glia signalling and the molecular architecture of the myelin sheath. Glial cells that myelinate axons were found to have a dual role by also supporting the long-term integrity of those axons. This function may be independent of myelin itself. Myelin abnormalities cause a number of neurological diseases, and may also contribute to complex neuropsychiatric disorders.
The cerebellar cortex is implicated in the learning of complex motor skills. This learning may require synaptic remodeling of Purkinje cell inputs. An extracellular serine protease, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), is involved in remodeling various nonneural tissues and is associated with developing and regenerating neurons. In situ hybridization showed that expression of tPA messenger RNA was increased in the Purkinje neurons of rats within an hour of their being trained for a complex motor task. Antibody to tPA also showed the induction of tPA protein associated with cerebellar Purkinje cells. Thus, the induction of tPA during motor learning may play a role in activity-dependent synaptic plasticity.
The use of Gurdon's Xenopus oocyte translation system has allowed the production of neurotransmitter receptors in a foreign cell membrane, following the translation of microinjected mRNA isolated from various sources. This very accessible and relatively simple preparation permits the study of the requirements for receptor-ionophore function, assembly and membrane integration. This analysis is presently feasible for the peripheral nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, the chick brain gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA) receptor and the rat brain serotonin receptor. We now report the novel and successful expression of the GABA, glycine, glutamate and related acidic amino acid receptors of mammalian brain, and show that they exhibit pharmacologically separate identities when their mRNAs are processed in the amphibian oocyte.
It has often been proposed that one way of replacing degenerating neurons in the brain is to implant embryonic neurons of the same type. However, in the case of so-called 'point-to-point' systems, as opposed to the 'paracrine' systems which mainly involve local release of neurotransmitter, functional recovery requires a precise re-establishment of the missing circuitry. We recently showed that in one point-to-point system, the cerebellum of adult mice homozygous for the mutation Purkinje cell degeneration (pcd)2, missing Purkinje cells can be replaced by grafting cerebellar primordia from normal mouse embryos. Here, we present studies of the cellular mechanisms underlying this successful replacement. Grafted Purkinje cells leave the graft to migrate along stereotyped pathways to their final position in the deficient molecular layer, where they receive synaptic contacts from adult host neurons. Both the detailed timetable and the precise cellular interactions observed are remarkably similar to those occurring during normal development. Our results suggest that the deficient molecular layer exerts a selective neurotropic effect on neurons of the missing category, and that the embryonic neurons are able to respond to this signal during a period defined by their own internal clock. We also raise the possibility that embryonic Purkinje cells can induce in adult neural cells a new type of plasticity, that of recreating a permissive microenvironment for the integration of embryonic neurons.
The vertebrate brain continues to produce new neurons throughout life. In the rat hippocampus, several thousand are produced each day, many of which die within weeks. Associative learning can enhance their survival; however, until now it was unknown whether new neurons are involved in memory formation. Here we show that a substantial reduction in the number of newly generated neurons in the adult rat impairs hippocampal-dependent trace conditioning, a task in which an animal must associate stimuli that are separated in time. A similar reduction did not affect learning when the same stimuli are not separated in time, a task that is hippocampal-independent. The reduction in neurogenesis did not induce death of mature hippocampal neurons or permanently alter neurophysiological properties of the CA1 region, such as long-term potentiation. Moreover, recovery of cell production was associated with the ability to acquire trace memories. These results indicate that newly generated neurons in the adult are not only affected by the formation of a hippocampal-dependent memory, but also participate in it.
In Parkinson's disease, brain dopamine neurons degenerate most prominently in the substantia nigra. Neurotrophic factors promote survival, differentiation and maintenance of neurons in developing and adult vertebrate nervous system. The most potent neurotrophic factor for dopamine neurons described so far is the glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF). Here we have identified a conserved dopamine neurotrophic factor (CDNF) as a trophic factor for dopamine neurons. CDNF, together with its previously described vertebrate and invertebrate homologue the mesencephalic-astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor, is a secreted protein with eight conserved cysteine residues, predicting a unique protein fold and defining a new, evolutionarily conserved protein family. CDNF (Armetl1) is expressed in several tissues of mouse and human, including the mouse embryonic and postnatal brain. In vivo, CDNF prevented the 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-induced degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in a rat experimental model of Parkinson's disease. A single injection of CDNF before 6-OHDA delivery into the striatum significantly reduced amphetamine-induced ipsilateral turning behaviour and almost completely rescued dopaminergic tyrosine-hydroxylase-positive cells in the substantia nigra. When administered four weeks after 6-OHDA, intrastriatal injection of CDNF was able to restore the dopaminergic function and prevent the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra. Thus, CDNF was at least as efficient as GDNF in both experimental settings. Our results suggest that CDNF might be beneficial for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Synaptosomes from rat brain accumulate choline by two kinetically distinct processes, a high-affinity uptake system [Michaelis constant (K(m)) = 1 x 10(-6)M], and a low-affinity system (K(m) = 9 x 10(-5)M). The high-affinity uptake system requires sodium, and is associated with considerable formation of acetylcholine. The low-affinity uptake system is less dependent on sodium, and does not appear to be associated with a marked degree of acetylcholine formation. The high-affinity choline uptake appears to represent selective choline accumulation by cholinergic neurons.
Microtubules are involved in several forms of intracellular motility, including mitosis and organelle movement. Fast axonal transport is a highly ordered form of organelle motility that operates in both the anterograde (outwards from the cell body) and retrograde (from the periphery towards the cell body) direction. Similar microtubule-associated movement is observed in non-neuronal cells, and might be involved in secretion, endocytosis and the positioning of organelles within the cell. Kinesin is a mechanochemical protein that produces force along microtubules in an anterograde direction. We recently found that the brain microtubule-associated protein MAP 1C (ref. 7) is a microtubule-activated ATPase and, like kinesin, can translocate microtubules in an in vitro assay for microtubule-associated motility. MAP 1C seemed to be related to the ciliary and flagellar ATPase, dynein, which is thought to produce force in a direction opposite to that observed for kinesin. Here we report that MAP 1C, in fact, acts in a direction opposite to kinesin, and has the properties of a retrograde translocator.
Total contralateral hemianopia follows unilateral removal of the entire occipito-temporal neocortex in the cat. This deficit is classically ascribed to interruption of visual radiations serving cortical function ("cortical blindness") and is considered permanent. Return of vision to the hemianopic field after subsequent removal of the superior colliculus contralateral to the cortical lesion demonstrates that neither assumption is correct. The initial hemianopia is apparently due to depression of function of the colliculus ipsilateral to the cortical lesion, a de- pression maintained by influx of inhibition from the crossed colliculus. Thus, removal of the contralateral tectum, or splitting of the collicular commissure, abolishes this inhibition and allows the return of function in the ipsilateral colliculus, and with it the recovery fronm hemianopia. These findings emphasize that visually guided behavior is mediated at both cortical and midbrain levels, and that there is a marked interaction between these sites.
A soluble form of tryptophan-5-hydroxylase activity was found to be present in areas rich in serotonergic terminals (colliculi, hippocampus, septal area, and remaining telencephalon) as well as in brainstem, an area rich in cell bodies. The enzymatic activity in all brain regions, except the septal area, was inhibited to varying degrees following administration of parachlorophenylalanine. Destruction of the raphe nuclei in the midbrain led to a large and comparable decrease in both serotonin content and tryptophan hydroxylase activity of the hippocampus. In contrast, these lesions did not significantly affect the enzymatic activity of the septal area although the serotonin content was decreased by 72 percent. These findings suggest that the major portion of the tryptophan hydroxylase activity of the septal area is uniquely different from that found in other telencephalic areas in that it is not localized in serotonergic nerve terminals nor is it inhibited by parachlorophenylalanine.
Borna disease virus (BDV) causes a rare neurological disease in horses and sheep. The virus has not been classified because neither an infectious particle nor a specific nucleic acid had been identified. To identify the genome of BDV, a subtractive complementary DNA expression library was constructed with polyadenylate-selected RNA from a BDV-infected MDCK cell line. A clone (B8) was isolated that specifically hybridized to RNA isolated from BDV-infected brain tissue and BDV-infected cell lines. This clone hybridized to four BDV-specific positive strand RNAs (10.5, 3.6, 2.1, and 0.85 kilobases) and one negative strand RNA (10.5 kilobases) in BDV-infected rat brain. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the clone suggested that it represented a full-length messenger RNA which contained several open reading frames. In vitro transcription and translation of the clone resulted in the synthesis of the 14- and 24-kilodalton BDV-specific proteins. The 24-kilodalton protein, when translated in vitro from the clone, was recognized by antibodies in the sera of patients (three of seven) with behavioral disorders. This BDV-specific clone will provide the means to isolate the other BDV-specific nucleic acids and to identify the virus responsible for Borna disease. In addition, the significance of BDV or a BDV-related virus as a human pathogen can now be more directly examined.
A single event may elicit several different sensory stimuli such as vision, sound, and touch. But how does the brain know which of the many different stimuli arriving in the sensory cortex of the brain are connected? In her Perspective, de Gelder discusses new findings showing that when a touch is applied on the same side of the body as a visual cue, vision is enhanced (Macaluso et al.). She explains that this effect is due to neurons projecting from the somatosensory (touch) area of the sensory cortex back to the visual cortex. These neurons keep the visual cortex informed about tactile stimuli elicited at the same time as the visual stimuli.
Antagonists of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of glutamate receptor, including phencyclidine (PCP) and ketamine, protect against brain damage in neurological disorders such as stroke. However, these agents have psychotomimetic properties in humans and morphologically damage neurons in the cerebral cortex of rats. It is now shown that the morphological damage can be prevented by certain anticholinergic drugs or by diazepam and barbiturates, which act at the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor-channel complex and are known to suppress the psychotomimetic symptoms caused by ketamine. Thus, it may be possible to prevent the unwanted side effects of NMDA antagonists, thereby enhancing their utility as neuroprotective drugs.
The potent alpha-cyano-3-phenoxybenzyl pyrethroids, including cypermethrin, deltamethrin, and fenvalerate, act stereospecifically to inhibit binding to rat brain synaptic membranes of sulfur-35-labeled t-butylbicyclophosphorothionate, a new radioligand for the picrotoxinin binding site. Scatchard analysis indicates that picrotoxinin inhibition of t-butylbicyclophosphorothionate binding is competitive whereas cypermethrin inhibition possibly involves a closely associated site in the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor-ionophore complex. Studies with 37 pyrethroids reveal an absolute correlation, that is, no false positives or negatives, between mouse intracerebral toxicity and in vitro inhibition: all toxic cyano compounds but none of their nontoxic stereoisomers are inhibitors; cis isomers are more potent than trans isomers as both toxicants and inhibitors; and noncyano pyrethroids are much less potent or are inactive.
The human demyelinative disorder central pontine myelinolysis may be an iatrogenic disease caused by a rapid rise in serum sodium, usually when hyponatremia is corrected. Rats treated with hypertonic saline after 3 days of vasopressin-induced hyponatremia had demyelinative lesions in the corpus striatum, lateral hemispheric white matter, cerebral cortex, hippocampal fimbria, anterior commissure, thalamus, brainstem tegmentum, and cerebellum. Thus, rapid correction of hyponatremia can lead to demyelinative lesions and may be the cause of central pontine myelinolysis in man.
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases are associated with the formation in the brain of amyloid fibrils from beta-amyloid and alpha-synuclein proteins, respectively. It is likely that oligomeric fibrillization intermediates (protofibrils), rather than the fibrils themselves, are pathogenic, but the mechanism by which they cause neuronal death remains a mystery. We show here that mutant amyloid proteins associated with familial Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases form morphologically indistinguishable annular protofibrils that resemble a class of pore-forming bacterial toxins, suggesting that inappropriate membrane permeabilization might be the cause of cell dysfunction and even cell death in amyloid diseases.
Gamma oscillations are thought to transiently link distributed cell assemblies that are processing related information, a function that is probably important for network processes such as perception, attentional selection and memory. This 'binding' mechanism requires that spatially distributed cells fire together with millisecond range precision; however, it is not clear how such coordinated timing is achieved given that the frequency of gamma oscillations varies substantially across space and time, from approximately 25 to almost 150 Hz. Here we show that gamma oscillations in the CA1 area of the hippocampus split into distinct fast and slow frequency components that differentially couple CA1 to inputs from the medial entorhinal cortex, an area that provides information about the animal's current position, and CA3, a hippocampal subfield essential for storage of such information. Fast gamma oscillations in CA1 were synchronized with fast gamma in medial entorhinal cortex, and slow gamma oscillations in CA1 were coherent with slow gamma in CA3. Significant proportions of cells in medial entorhinal cortex and CA3 were phase-locked to fast and slow CA1 gamma waves, respectively. The two types of gamma occurred at different phases of the CA1 theta rhythm and mostly on different theta cycles. These results point to routeing of information as a possible function of gamma frequency variations in the brain and provide a mechanism for temporal segregation of potentially interfering information from different sources.
Maps of sensory surfaces are a fundamental feature of sensory cortical areas of the brain. The relative roles of afferents and targets in forming neocortical maps in higher mammals can be examined in ferrets in which retinal inputs are directed into the auditory pathway. In these animals, the primary auditory cortex contains a systematic representation of the retina (and of visual space) rather than a representation of the cochlea (and of sound frequency). A representation of a two-dimensional sensory epithelium, the retina, in cortex that normally represents a one-dimensional epithelium, the cochlea, suggests that the same cortical area can support different types of maps. Topography in the visual map arises both from thalamocortical projections that are characteristic of the auditory pathway and from patterns of retinal activity that provide the input to the map.
Significant alcohol dehydrogenase activity has been demonstrated in the soluble fraction of rat brain and is very similar to the liver enzyme in kinetic properties and responses to inhibitors. A cerebral mechanism that oxidizes ethanol may play a significant role in local adjustments during exposure to ethanol and in the pathogenesis of the neural disorders associated with chronic alcohol ingestion or withdrawal.
Acetylcholine activates both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors in the central nervous system. Although the action of acetylcholine at muscarinic receptor has been well characterized, relatively little is known at the cellular level concerning nicotinic receptor stimulation in brain. Central nicotinic receptors have been implicated in Alzheimer's disease, seizure activity, the generation of slow-wave theta rhythm in the hippocampus and the potential abuse liability of nicotine. At the neuronal level, nicotinic agonists have been most often associated with postsynaptically mediated excitation and membrane depolarization at various sites, including Renshaw spinal motoneurons, locus coeruleus and the medial habenular nucleus. Nicotine acting presynaptically can produce either excitation or inhibition indirectly through the release of endogeneous transmitters or modulators. Whereas a direct inhibitory effect of nicotine has been suggested by one in vivo extracellular recording study in rat cerebellar Purkinje neurons, the mechanism(s) underlying this action is not yet known. We now report our findings obtained using in vitro intracellular methods in a submerged brain slice preparation in which application of nicotinic agonists to rat dorsolateral septal neurons reveal a direct membrane hyperpolarization mediated by an increase in potassium conductance.
The synchronized firing of neuronal populations is frequently observed in the mammalian central nervous system. The generation of motor activities such as locomotion and respiration requires the simultaneous activation of many neurones and synchronous firing also underlies the cortical alpha rhythm and the hippocampal theta rhythm. However the influence that single neurones may have on such neuronal population discharges is not clear. We have examined this question using small isolated segments of the CA3 region of the guinea pig hippocampus. We report here that in the presence of picrotoxin, a gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) antagonist, these segments spontaneously generate synchronized rhythmic bursts comparable with the interictal epileptiform discharges observed in the hippocampus and neocortex in the presence of penicillin. The activation of some individual neurones by intracellular current injection can partially entrain and reset the rhythm. The probability that a synchronized burst will follow stimulation of a single cell increases with time after a spontaneous synchronized discharge, suggesting that each population discharge is followed by a period of relative population refractoriness. A delay of 40-200 ms elapses between the activation of a single neurone and the synchronized discharge. We suggest that during this time activity elicited in one neurone spreads to other neurones through multisynaptic excitatory pathways and leads eventually to the participation of the whole population in a synchronous burst.
The mammalian hypothalamus strongly influences ingestive behaviour through several different signalling molecules and receptor systems. Here we show that CART (cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript), a brain-located peptide, is a satiety factor and is closely associated with the actions of two important regulators of food intake, leptin and neuropeptide Y. Food-deprived animals show a pronounced decrease in expression of CART messenger RNA in the arcuate nucleus. In animal models of obesity with disrupted leptin signalling, CART mRNA is almost absent from the arcuate nucleus. Peripheral administration of leptin to obese mice stimulates CART mRNA expression. When injected intracerebroventricularly into rats, recombinant CART peptide inhibits both normal and starvation-induced feeding, and completely blocks the feeding response induced by neuropeptide Y. An antiserum against CART increases feeding in normal rats, indicating that CART may be an endogenous inhibitor of food intake in normal animals.
Widespread loss of cerebral connectivity is assumed to underlie the failure of brain mechanisms that support communication and goal-directed behaviour following severe traumatic brain injury. Disorders of consciousness that persist for longer than 12 months after severe traumatic brain injury are generally considered to be immutable; no treatment has been shown to accelerate recovery or improve functional outcome in such cases. Recent studies have shown unexpected preservation of large-scale cerebral networks in patients in the minimally conscious state (MCS), a condition that is characterized by intermittent evidence of awareness of self or the environment. These findings indicate that there might be residual functional capacity in some patients that could be supported by therapeutic interventions. We hypothesize that further recovery in some patients in the MCS is limited by chronic underactivation of potentially recruitable large-scale networks. Here, in a 6-month double-blind alternating crossover study, we show that bilateral deep brain electrical stimulation (DBS) of the central thalamus modulates behavioural responsiveness in a patient who remained in MCS for 6 yr following traumatic brain injury before the intervention. The frequency of specific cognitively mediated behaviours (primary outcome measures) and functional limb control and oral feeding (secondary outcome measures) increased during periods in which DBS was on as compared with periods in which it was off. Logistic regression modelling shows a statistical linkage between the observed functional improvements and recent stimulation history. We interpret the DBS effects as compensating for a loss of arousal regulation that is normally controlled by the frontal lobe in the intact brain. These findings provide evidence that DBS can promote significant late functional recovery from severe traumatic brain injury. Our observations, years after the injury occurred, challenge the existing practice of early treatment discontinuation for patients with only inconsistent interactive behaviours and motivate further research to develop therapeutic interventions.
Seizures induced in the rat by electroshock or by injections of pentylenetetrazol increase the specific binding of diazepam to putative receptor sites in cerebral cortical membranes. The enhancement of diazepam binding results from a rapid increase in the number of available binding sites rather than a change in receptor affinity. The postictal increase in cortical benzodiazepine receptors suggests that the cerebral cortex might be more sensitive to the anticonvulsant effects of the benzodiazepines after seizures. This observation may be related to the mechanism of action of these drugs in the treatment of recurrent seizures such as status epilepticus.
A repeated 82 base pair sequence in genomic DNA of the rat was previously proposed as being a control element governing brain (neuron) specific genetic expression. This intronic sequence, termed the brain "identifier" (ID), is complementary to small RNA species localized in brain cytoplasm, and it was thought to be represented specifically in RNA produced by brain nuclei in vitro. The RNA blot analyses of total nuclear and polyadenylated heterogeneous nuclear RNA described in the present report show that this ID sequence is also present in the liver and kidney in abundances similar to those in the brain. This repeated sequence is not, therefore, restricted to transcripts produced in the brain as suggested from previous transcriptional "runoff" experiments. Measurements on rat and mouse nuclear RNA indicate that the abundance of ID sequence transcript is roughly proportional to the number of copies of this repeat in the respective genomes. This suggests a rather random genomic location and transcription of this sequence. From these results it seems improbable that the ID sequence functions as a transcriptional-level control element in genes expressed specifically in the brain.
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) activates a class of excitatory amino acid receptor involved in a variety of plastic and pathological processes in the brain. Quantitative study of the NMDA receptor has been difficult in mammalian neurons, because it usually exists with other excitatory amino acid receptors of overlapping pharmacological specificities. Xenopus oocytes injected with messenger RNA isolated from primary cultures of rat brain have now been used to study NMDA receptors. The distinguishing properties of neuronal NMDA receptors have been reproduced in this amphibian cell, including voltage-dependent block by magnesium, block by the NMDA receptor antagonist D-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid, and potentiation by glycine. This preparation should facilitate the quantitative study of the regulation of NMDA receptor activation and serve as a tool for purification of the encoding messenger RNA.
The degree of confidence in a decision provides a graded and probabilistic assessment of expected outcome. Although neural mechanisms of perceptual decisions have been studied extensively in primates, little is known about the mechanisms underlying choice certainty. We have shown that the same neurons that represent formation of a decision encode certainty about the decision. Rhesus monkeys made decisions about the direction of moving random dots, spanning a range of difficulties. They were rewarded for correct decisions. On some trials, after viewing the stimulus, the monkeys could opt out of the direction decision for a small but certain reward. Monkeys exercised this option in a manner that revealed their degree of certainty. Neurons in parietal cortex represented formation of the direction decision and the degree of certainty underlying the decision to opt out.
Amyloid-b oligomers may cause cognitive deficits in Alzheimer's disease by impairing neuronal NMDA-type glutamate receptors, whose function is regulated by the receptor tyrosine kinase EphB2. Here we show that amyloid-b oligomers bind to the fibronectin repeats domain of EphB2 and trigger EphB2 degradation in the proteasome. To determine the pathogenic importance of EphB2 depletions in Alzheimer's disease and related models, we used lentiviral constructs to reduce or increase neuronal expression of EphB2 in memory centres of the mouse brain. In nontransgenic mice, knockdown of EphB2 mediated by short hairpin RNA reduced NMDA receptor currents and impaired long-term potentiation in the dentate gyrus, which are important for memory formation. Increasing EphB2 expression in the dentate gyrus of human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice reversed deficits in NMDA receptor-dependent long-term potentiation and memory impairments. Thus, depletion of EphB2 is critical in amyloid-b-induced neuronal dysfunction. Increasing EphB2 levels or function could be beneficial in Alzheimer's disease.
Our decisions are guided by information learnt from our environment. This information may come via personal experiences of reward, but also from the behaviour of social partners. Social learning is widely held to be distinct from other forms of learning in its mechanism and neural implementation; it is often assumed to compete with simpler mechanisms, such as reward-based associative learning, to drive behaviour. Recently, neural signals have been observed during social exchange reminiscent of signals seen in studies of associative learning. Here we demonstrate that social information may be acquired using the same associative processes assumed to underlie reward-based learning. We find that key computational variables for learning in the social and reward domains are processed in a similar fashion, but in parallel neural processing streams. Two neighbouring divisions of the anterior cingulate cortex were central to learning about social and reward-based information, and for determining the extent to which each source of information guides behaviour. When making a decision, however, the information learnt using these parallel streams was combined within ventromedial prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest that human social valuation can be realized by means of the same associative processes previously established for learning other, simpler, features of the environment.
Retrotransposons are mobile genetic elements that use a germline 'copy-and-paste' mechanism to spread throughout metazoan genomes. At least 50 per cent of the human genome is derived from retrotransposons, with three active families (L1, Alu and SVA) associated with insertional mutagenesis and disease. Epigenetic and post-transcriptional suppression block retrotransposition in somatic cells, excluding early embryo development and some malignancies. Recent reports of L1 expression and copy number variation in the human brain suggest that L1 mobilization may also occur during later development. However, the corresponding integration sites have not been mapped. Here we apply a high-throughput method to identify numerous L1, Alu and SVA germline mutations, as well as 7,743 putative somatic L1 insertions, in the hippocampus and caudate nucleus of three individuals. Surprisingly, we also found 13,692 somatic Alu insertions and 1,350 SVA insertions. Our results demonstrate that retrotransposons mobilize to protein-coding genes differentially expressed and active in the brain. Thus, somatic genome mosaicism driven by retrotransposition may reshape the genetic circuitry that underpins normal and abnormal neurobiological processes.
Sensory experiences exert a powerful influence on the function and future performance of neuronal circuits in the mammalian neocortex. Restructuring of synaptic connections is believed to be one mechanism by which cortical circuits store information about the sensory world. Excitatory synaptic structures, such as dendritic spines, are dynamic entities that remain sensitive to alteration of sensory input throughout life. It remains unclear, however, whether structural changes at the level of dendritic spines can outlast the original experience and thereby provide a morphological basis for long-term information storage. Here we follow spine dynamics on apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons in functionally defined regions of adult mouse visual cortex during plasticity of eye-specific responses induced by repeated closure of one eye (monocular deprivation). The first monocular deprivation episode doubled the rate of spine formation, thereby increasing spine density. This effect was specific to layer-5 cells located in binocular cortex, where most neurons increase their responsiveness to the non-deprived eye. Restoring binocular vision returned spine dynamics to baseline levels, but absolute spine density remained elevated and many monocular deprivation-induced spines persisted during this period of functional recovery. However, spine addition did not increase again when the same eye was closed for a second time. This absence of structural plasticity stands out against the robust changes of eye-specific responses that occur even faster after repeated deprivation. Thus, spines added during the first monocular deprivation experience may provide a structural basis for subsequent functional shifts. These results provide a strong link between functional plasticity and specific synaptic rearrangements, revealing a mechanism of how prior experiences could be stored in cortical circuits.
Electrical stimulation of the substantia nigra, pars compacta, of albino rats while they were learning a simple foot shock task of withdrawal and response suppression disrupted retention of that task 24 hours after original learning. Stimulation in the reticular zone of the substantia nigra was without effect on retention performance. Stimulation through electrodes in the medial lemniscus, red nucleus, or brainstem regions surrounding the substantia nigra, pars compacta, was also ineffective. Original learning performance, measured as time to criterion, was unimpaired by the stimulation. Posttrial stimulation in the substantia nigra, pars compacta, but not in adjacent structures, also disrupted retention performance.
Orphan G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are cloned proteins with structural characteristics common to the GPCRs but that bind unidentified ligands. Orphan GPCRs have been used as targets to identify novel transmitter molecules. Here we describe the isolation from brain extracts and the characterization of the natural ligand of a particular orphan GPCR (SLC-1) that is sequentially homologous to the somatostatin receptors. We show that the natural ligand of this receptor is the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH). MCH is a cyclic peptide that regulates a variety of functions in the mammalian brain, in particular feeding behaviour. We demonstrate that nanomolar concentrations of MCH strongly activate SLC-1-related pathways through G(alpha)i and/or G(alpha)q proteins. We have analysed the tissue localization of the MCH receptor and find that it is expressed in several brain regions, in particular those involved in olfactory learning and reinforcement mechanisms, indicating that therapies targeting the MCH receptor should act on the neuronal regulation of food consumption.
The encoding of olfactory information in the central nervous system (CNS) depends on spatially distributed patterns of activity generated simultaneously in many neuronal circuits. Optical neurophysiological recording permits analysis of neural activity non-invasively and with high spatial and temporal resolution. Here, a video method for imaging voltage-sensitive dye fluorescence in vivo is used to map neuronal activity in local circuits of the salamander olfactory bulb. The method permits the imaging of simultaneous ensemble transmembrane activity in real time. After electrical stimulation of the olfactory nerve, activity spreads centripetally from the sites of synaptic input to generate nonhomogeneous response patterns that are presumably mediated by local circuits within the bulbar layers. The results also show the overlapping temporal sequences of activation of cell groups in each layer. The method thus provides high resolution, sequential video images of the spatial and temporal progression of transmembrane events in neuronal circuits after afferent stimulation and offers the opportunity for studying ensemble events in other brain regions.
The amino acids L-glutamic and L-aspartic acids form the most widespread excitatory transmitter network in mammalian brain. The excitation produced by L-glutamic acid is important in the early development of the nervous system, synaptic plasticity and memory formation, seizures and neuronal degeneration. The receptors activated by L-glutamic acid are a target for therapeutic intervention in neurodegenerative diseases, brain ischaemia and epilepsy. There are two types of receptors for the excitatory amino acids, those that lead to the opening of cation-selective channels and those that activate phospholipase C (ref. 11). The receptors activating ion channels are NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) and kainate/AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate)-sensitive receptors. The complementary DNAs for the kainate/AMPA receptor and for the metabotropic receptor have been cloned. We report here on the isolation and characterization of a protein complex of four major proteins that represents an intact complex of the NMDA receptor ion channel and on the cloning of the cDNA for one of the subunits of this receptor complex, the glutamate-binding protein.
Intraperitoneal administration of human recombinant interleukin-1 (IL-1) to rats can increase blood levels of corticosterone and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The route by which IL-1 affects pituitary-adrenal activity is unknown. That the IL-1-induced pituitary-adrenal activation involves an increased secretion of corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) is indicated by three lines of evidence. First, immunoneutralization of CRF markedly attenuated the IL-1-induced increase of ACTH blood levels. Second, after blockade of fast axonal transport in hypothalamic neurons by colchicine, IL-1 administration decreased the CRF immunostaining in the median eminence, indicating an enhanced release of CRF in response to IL-1. Third, IL-1 did not stimulate ACTH release from primary cultures of anterior pituitary cells. These data further support the notion of the existence of an immunoregulatory feedback circuit between the immune system and the brain.
Incubation of rat cerebral cortical slices with the beta-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol causes an increase in alpha 2-adrenergic receptor binding in addition to a decrease in beta-adrenergic receptor binding. The effects are rapid and reversible, show a parallel time course, and are blocked by sotalol, a beta-adrenergic receptor antagonist. The beta-mediated regulation of alpha 2-receptor sensitivity at brain norepinephrine synapses may be a mechanism for the homeostatic control of central noradrenergic activity.
Psilocybin, a hallucinogen, formed a blue color with a subfraction of rat-brain mitochondria believed to contain nerve-ending particles. Color formation increased with pH, did not require oxygen, and involved a component that could not be solubilized. The effect was not shown by chemically related neuroactive compounds, such as bufotenine and serotonin, and was antagonized by only tyramine or ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid.
The epithelial cell layer of human amnion membrane can be removed while the basement membrane and stromal surfaces remain morphologically intact. Such a preparation has been used as a substratum for the in vitro culture of dissociated neurons. Embryonic motor neurons from chick ciliary ganglion attached to both surfaces but grew extensive neurites only on the basement membrane. On cross sections of rolled amnion membranes, regenerating axons of cultured neurons were guided along pathways of basement membrane that were immunoreactive with an antibody to laminin. In addition, when rolled amnion membranes were implanted into a lesion cavity between the rat septum and hippocampus, cholinergic neurons extended axons through the longitudinally oriented implant into the hippocampus. Thus, this amnion preparation can serve as a bridge to promote axonal regeneration in vivo in damaged adult brain.
Intracellular recordings were made from locally thermosensitive preoptic neurons in the green sunfish, Lepomis cyanellus. Stable resting potentials, action potentials, and spontaneous synaptic activity were observed over approximately 4 degrees to 5 degrees C changes in local brain temperature. A small percentage of the warm-sensitive neurons showed exponential firing-rate responses to temperature. These cells discharged rhythmically, lacked visible synaptic input, and showed slowly depolarizing potentials leading to action potentials. Other linear and nonlinear warm-sensitive and cold-sensitive neurons showed spontaneous excitatory and inhibitory synaptic potentials giving rise to action potentials. Cells that appear to be endogenously active may be true thermodetectors, and other thermosensitive neuronal activity may be synaptically mediated.
In the mouse olfactory system, each olfactory sensory neuron (OSN) expresses only one odorant receptor (OR) gene in a monoallelic and mutually exclusive manner. Such expression forms the genetic basis for OR-instructed axonal projection of OSNs to the olfactory bulb of the brain during development. Here, we identify an upstream cis-acting DNA region that activates the OR gene cluster in mouse and allows the expression of only one OR gene within the cluster. Deletion of the coding region of the expressed OR gene or a naturally occurring frame-shift mutation allows a second OR gene to be expressed. We propose that stochastic activation of only one OR gene within the cluster and negative feedback regulation by that OR gene product are necessary to ensure the one receptor-one neuron rule.
Axonal transport studies and biochemical fractionation have led to the concept that the three 'triplet' proteins [approximate molecular weights 200,000 (200K), 145,000 (145K) and 68,000 (68K)] are the essential components of mammalian neurofilaments. Using a correlated biochemical and immunological approach, we have now shown that the 200K protein is under separate developmental control during rat brain differentiation and that the time of its expression differs in different regions. We were unable to detect 200K protein by immunofluorescence or in total brain filament preparations from prenatal rat brain, although the 145K and 68K proteins are both present in an apparently identical distribution. During development, progressively more 145K- and 68K-positive neurofilamentous bundles can be stained with 200K antibodies, paralleling the increasing quantities of this protein detected biochemically in brain filament preparations. We conclude that 200K protein probably has a more specialized role in neurofilament architecture and function than the other two triplet proteins.
Variants of the Dearing strain of reovirus type 3 with antigenically altered hemagglutinin proteins are much less neurovirulent than the parental virus. When injected intracerebrally into mice these variants infected a subset of the brain neurons that were infected by the parental virus. When injected intraperitoneally, the variants did not spread to the brain. These results indicate that minor modifications of the reovirus hemagglutinin dramatically alter the ability of the virus to spread into and injure the central nervous system.
We experience the visual world as being three-dimensional. A major source of depth information derives from the slightly different views of each eye, leading to small variations in the retinal images ('disparities'). Neurons sensitive to visual disparities are thought to form the neural basis of stereo vision. Barn owls as well as several mammalian species have neurons that are sensitive to visual disparities. But how visual disparities are represented in the brain has been a matter of discussion ever since the first disparity-sensitive neurons were found some 25 years ago. Here we adopt a new approach to this problem and study the neural computation of visual disparities with a paradigm borrowed from auditory research. The measurement of interaural time difference (ITD) has many similarities with the measurement of visual disparity on the formal, algorithmic level. We speculate that the similarities might extend to the level of neural computation. The neural representation of ITD is well understood, and we have studied the representation of disparities with visual stimuli analogous to those successfully used in acoustic experiments. For example, ITD is converted in the brain to a pathlength on an axon that, owing to the finite conduction velocity in neurons, exactly matches the external ITD. This pathlength is called 'characteristic delay'. Our results suggest that there is an analogue of the characteristic delay in stereo vision which we propose to call 'characteristic disparity'.
Currently Alzheimer's disease, which affects more than 20 million people worldwide, can only be definitely diagnosed by histological examination of brain tissue obtained at autopsy or biopsy. There is a great need for an early, noninvasive, sensitive, and easily administered diagnostic test of Alzheimer's disease. Here it is reported that patients diagnosed with probable Alzheimer's disease by standard clinical criteria exhibited a marked hypersensitivity in their pupil dilation response to a cholinergic antagonist, tropicamide, placed in their eyes. It was possible to distinguish 18 of 19 individuals (95%) either clinically diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease or classified as suspect Alzheimer's individuals by neuropsychological screening from 30 of 32 normal elderly controls (94%).
A critical step in the interpretation of the visual world is the integration of the various local motion signals generated by moving objects. This process is complicated by the fact that local velocity measurements can differ depending on contour orientation and spatial position. Specifically, any local motion detector can measure only the component of motion perpendicular to a contour that extends beyond its field of view. This "aperture problem" is particularly relevant to direction-selective neurons early in the visual pathways, where small receptive fields permit only a limited view of a moving object. Here we show that neurons in the middle temporal visual area (known as MT or V5) of the macaque brain reveal a dynamic solution to the aperture problem. MT neurons initially respond primarily to the component of motion perpendicular to a contour's orientation, but over a period of approximately 60 ms the responses gradually shift to encode the true stimulus direction, regardless of orientation. We also report a behavioural correlate of these neural responses: the initial velocity of pursuit eye movements deviates in a direction perpendicular to local contour orientation, suggesting that the earliest neural responses influence the oculomotor response.
The 11-hydroxy metabolites of Delta(8).- and Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol are more active than the parent compounds when administered to mice by either the intravenous or intracerebral route. Both Delta(8)- and Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol are rapidly and extensively metabolized by the liver and not by the brain. The hypothesis that the 11-hydroxy metabolites may be the active form of tetrahydrocannabinol is discussed
A fundamental issue in the study of cognition and the brain is the nature of mental computation. How far does this depend on internally represented systems of rules, expressed as strings of symbols with a syntax, as opposed to more distributed neural systems, operating subsymbolically and without syntax? The mental representation of the regular and irregular past tense of the English verb has become a crucial test case for this debate. Single-mechanism approaches argue that current multilayer connectionist networks can account for the learning and representation both of regular and of irregular forms. Dual-mechanism approaches, although accepting connectionist accounts for the irregular forms, argue that a symbolic, rule-based system is required to explain the properties of the regular past tense and, by extension, the properties of language and cognition in general. We show here that the regular and irregular past tense are supported by different neural systems, which can become dissociated by damage to the brain. This is evidence for functional and neurological distinctions in the types of mental computation that support these different aspects of linguistic and cognitive performance.
Although several studies of Alzheimer's disease suggest that the frequency of neuritic plaques in the cerebral cortex is correlated with the severity of dementia and with reduction in presynaptic cholinergic markers in the cortex, the relationship between cholinergic cortical innervation and the pathogenesis of plaques is unknown. The hypothesis was tested that the neurites in the plaque consist, in part, of presynaptic cholinergic axons, many of which arise from neurons in the basal forebrain. This hypothesis was tested by analyzing the character and distribution of plaques in monkeys, aged 4 to 31 years, with staining for acetylcholin-esterase and also with Congo red and silver stains. Immature and mature plaques were rich in acetylcholinesterase. As the plaques matured, the amount of amyloid increased, and the number of neurites and the activity of acetylcholinesterase decreased. End-stage amyloid-rich plaques lacked acetylcholinesterase. These observations indicate that changes in cortical cholinergic innervation are an important feature in the pathogenesis and evolution of the neuritic plaque.
The mushroom bodies in the protocerebrum are believed to be the structures of the insect brain most closely associated with higher-order sensory integration and learning. Drosophila melanogaster mutants with olfactory learning deficits have anatomically abnormal mushroom bodies or altered patterns of gene expression in mushroom body neurons. In addition, anatomical reorganization of the mushroom bodies occurs in adult flies, and possibly in adult honeybees; disturbance of electrical activity in this region disrupts memory formation in honeybees. Little is known, however, about the relationship of naturally occurring anatomical changes in the mushroom bodies to naturally occurring behavioural plasticity. We now report that age-based division of labour in adult worker honeybees (Apis mellifera) is associated with substantial changes in certain brain regions, notably the mushroom bodies. Moreover, these striking changes in brain structure are dependent, not on the age of the bee, but on its foraging experience, thus demonstrating a robust anatomical plasticity associated with complex behaviour in an adult insect.
Human listeners can localize sounds by the difference in both arrival time (phase) and loudness between the two ears. Movement of the sound source modulates these cues, and responses to moving sounds have been detected in animals in primary auditory cortex and in humans in other cortical areas. Here we show that detection of changes in the interaural phase or amplitude difference occurs through a mechanism distinct from that used to detect changes in one ear alone. Moreover, a patient with a right hemisphere stroke is unable to detect sound movement, regardless of whether it is defined by phase or by loudness cues. We propose that this deficit reflects damage to a distinct cortical area, outside the classical auditory areas, that is specialized for the detection of sound motion. The deficit is analagous to cerebral akinotopsia (motion blindness) in the visual system, and so the auditory system may, like the visual system, show localization of specialized functions to different cortical regions.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a degenerative disorder of motor neurons in the cortex, brainstem and spinal cord. Its cause is unknown and it is uniformly fatal, typically within five years. About 10% of cases are inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, with high penetrance after the sixth decade. In most instances, sporadic and autosomal dominant familial ALS (FALS) are clinically similar. We have previously shown that in some but not all FALS pedigrees the disease is linked to a genetic defect on chromosome 21q (refs 8, 9). Here we report tight genetic linkage between FALS and a gene that encodes a cytosolic, Cu/Zn-binding superoxide dismutase (SOD1), a homodimeric metalloenzyme that catalyzes the dismutation of the toxic superoxide anion O2.- to O2 and H2O2 (ref. 10). Given this linkage and the potential role of free radical toxicity in other neurodenegerative disorders, we investigated SOD1 as a candidate gene in FALS. We identified 11 different SOD1 missense mutations in 13 different FALS families.
Early visual processing is organized into a number of independent channels. In the retina, increments and decrements of brightness are processed independently by different groups of neurons. For psychophysical measurements of human vision, independence can be tested statistically. Using this criterion in a depth judgement task, we show here that, for binocular stereo vision, increments and decrements are treated independently, at least as far as the level at which information from the left and right eyes is first combined. At later stages of stereo processing, the information from the two channels is no longer independent. Because the signals for stereo vision are first combined at the visual cortex, these results suggest that the neural 'on' and 'off' channels remain independent right up to early cortical stages. Theoretical studies of stereo vision have proposed that visual features in the views of the two eyes are matched on the basis of 'similarity'. Our results show that stereo matching treats features as statistically independent (and therefore dissimilar) if they appear perceptually bright and dark relative to the background. If features differ perceptually but only in the degree of brightness or darkness, human stereo vision treats them as similar.
A decreased noradrenaline turnover in the hypothalami of rats was observed at the peak of the immune response to sheep red blood cells. The decrease in noradrenergic neuronal activity was mimicked by injection of soluble r mediators released by immunological cells activated in vitro. Noradrenaline also tended to decrease in the brainstem but not in the residual brain. It is suggested that products released from activated immunological cells during the immune response may induce the previously described autonomic and endocrine mechanisms that contribute to immunoregulation.
If a young monkey or kitten is monocularly deprived for a period of days of weeks, the ocular dominance stripes or patches formed in layer IV of the visual cortex by the geniculo-cortical afferents driven by that eye become smaller, while the patches formed by afferents from the other, experienced eye, spread out and increase in size. One explanation for this effect is that it results from a disturbance of competitive process which, during the first weeks of life, guides a "sorting out" of the initially intermixed right and left eye inputs into complementary, largely non-overlapping territories. One feature of this process may be a local interaction between right and left eye synapses in which like synapses reinforce each other's growth rates and cause rejection of the other eye's synapses. If this is the case, then the effect of monocular deprivation on the relative sizes of the two sets of columns can be explained by supposing that the strengths of the effects exerted by the deprived eye are reduced. This explanation has a testable consequence: if both eyes are deprived of vision then each eye should be made less effective in eliminating the other eye's inputs, and the overall rate at which the ocular dominance columns form should be decreased. Although LeVay et al. found that columns were present in a 7-week old monkey reared in the dark from the age of 3 days, this result does not necessarily imply that the rate of column formation had been normal, because in normal monkeys the columns are well developed by 3 or more weeks of age. I report here the results of transneuronal autoradiography in cats, which show that columns, as revealed anatomically, are undetectable in most parts of the visual cortex of cats reared in the dark for periods of up to 20 weeks, implying that visual experience is necessary for their proper formation.
How does the high selectivity to stimulus orientation emerge in the visual cortex? Thalamic feedforward-dominated models of orientation selectivity predict constant selectivity during the visual response, whereas intracortical recurrent models predict dynamic improvement in selectivity. We imaged the cat visual cortex with voltage-sensitive dyes to measure orientation-tuning dynamics of a large neuronal population. Tuning-curve width did not narrow after response onset, whereas the difference between preferred and orthogonal responses (modulation depth) first increased, then declined. We identified a suppression of the evoked responses, referred to as the evoked deceleration-acceleration (DA) notch, which was larger for the orthogonal response. Furthermore, peak selectivity of the tuning curves was contemporaneous with the evoked DA notch. These findings suggest that in the cat brain, sustained visual cortical processing does not narrow orientation tuning; rather, intracortical interactions may amplify modulation depth and suppress the orthogonal response relatively more than the preferred. Thus, feedforward models and recurrent models of orientation selectivity must be combined.
Patients with Alzheimer's disease or other neurodegenerative disorders show remarkable fluctuations in neurological functions, even during the same day. These fluctuations cannot be caused by sudden loss or gain of nerve cells. Instead, it is likely that they reflect variations in the activity of neural networks and, perhaps, chronic intoxication by abnormal proteins that the brain is temporarily able to overcome. These ideas have far-reaching therapeutic implications.
We often search for a face in a crowd or for a particular object in a cluttered environment. In this type of visual search, memory interacts with attention: the mediating neural mechanisms should include a stored representation of the object and a means for selecting that object from among others in the scene. Here we test whether neurons in inferior temporal cortex, an area known to be important for high-level visual processing, might provide these components. Monkeys were presented with a complex picture (the cue) to hold in memory during a delay period. The cue initiated activity that persisted through the delay among the neurons that were tuned to its features. The monkeys were then given 2-5 choice pictures and were required to make an eye movement to the one (the target) that matched the cue. About 90-120 milliseconds before the onset of the eye movement to the target, responses to non-targets were suppressed and the neuronal response was dominated by the target. The results suggest that inferior temporal cortex is involved in selecting the objects to which we attend and foveate.
This study provides evidence that the alpha 2-adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine ameliorates the cognitive deficits exhibited by aged nonhuman primates through drug actions at alpha 2 receptors. Furthermore, pharmacological profiles in animals with lesions restricted to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex indicate that this area may be the site of action for some of clonidine's beneficial effects. These results demonstrate that alpha-adrenergic systems contribute to cognitive function and suggest a new strategy for treating memory disorders in aged humans.
For nerve cells to develop their highly polarized form, appropriate structural molecules must be targeted to either axons or dendrites. This could be achieved by the synthesis of structural proteins in the cell body and their sorting to either axons or dendrites by specific transport mechanisms. For dendrites, an alternative possibility is that proteins could be synthesized locally in the dendritic cytoplasm. This is an attractive idea because it would allow regulation of the production of structural molecules in response to local demand during dendritic development. The feasibility of dendritic protein synthesis is suggested both by the existence of dendritic polyribosomes and by the recent demonstration that newly synthesized RNA is transported into the dendrites of neurons differentiating in culture. However, to date there has been no demonstration of the selective synthesis of an identified dendrite-specific protein in the dendritic cytoplasm. Here, we use in situ hybridization with specific complementary DNA probes to show that messenger RNA for the dendrite-specific microtubule-associated protein MAP2 (refs 3-5) is present in dendrites in the developing brain. By contrast the mRNA for tubulin, a protein present in both axons and dendrites is located exclusively in neuronal cell bodies.
Short-term synaptic plasticity, which is common in the central nervous system, may contribute to the signal processing functions of both temporal integration and coincidence detection. For temporal integrators, whose output firng rate depends on a running average of recent synaptic inputs, plasticity modulates input synaptic strength and thus may directly control signalling gain and the function of neural networks. But the firing probability of an ideal coincidence detector would depend on the temporal coincidence of events rather than on the average frequency of synaptic events. Here we have examined a specific case of how synaptic plasticity can affect temporal coincidence detection, by experimentally characterizing synaptic depression at the synapse between neurons in the nucleus magnocellularis and coincidence detection neurons in the nucleus laminaris in the chick auditory brainstem. We combine an empirical description of this depression with a biophysical model of signalling in the nucleus laminaris. The resulting model predicts that synaptic depression provides an adaptive mechanism for preserving interaural time-delay information (a proxy for the location of sound in space) despite the confounding effects of sound-intensity-related information. This mechanism may help nucleus laminaris neurons to pass specific sound localization information to higher processing centres.
Abuse of the dissociative anesthetic ketamine can lead to a syndrome indistinguishable from schizophrenia. In animals, repetitive exposure to this N-methyl-d-aspartate-receptor antagonist induces the dysfunction of a subset of cortical fast-spiking inhibitory interneurons, with loss of expression of parvalbumin and the gamma-aminobutyric acid-producing enzyme GAD67. We show here that exposure of mice to ketamine induced a persistent increase in brain superoxide due to activation in neurons of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase. Decreasing superoxide production prevented the effects of ketamine on inhibitory interneurons in the prefrontal cortex. These results suggest that NADPH oxidase may represent a novel target for the treatment of ketamine-induced psychosis.
An experiment with rats has demonstrated that Pavlovian conditioning factors determine the occurrence of tolerance to haloperidol catalepsy. Rats exhibited tolerance only in the environment previously associated with the drug. Previous research involving receptor binding techniques implicated an increase in the number of brain dopamine receptors as the mediator of neuroleptic tolerance. The present findings demonstrate that this change, by itself, cannot account for the conditional occurrence of such tolerance.
Immunohistochemical procedures revealed that the serotonin-containing cell situated in each metacerebral ganglion of the snail Helix also contains a cholecystokinin-like peptide, but is devoid of substance P. In radioimmunoassays the cholecystokinin-like material showed similarities to the carboxy terminal regions of mammalian cholecystokinin and gastrin. Since much is known about the morphology and synaptic connections of this serotonin neuron, the role of the cholecystokinin-like peptides can now be investigated by neurophysiological methods, thus opening the way to discovering whether a neuron can use more than one transmitter.
The shape of a neurone--the projection and branching pattern of axons and dendrites--appears to be determined by a combination of intrinisic and environmental influences. We have previously shown that striatal target neurones influence the biochemical maturation of ascending mesencephalic dopamine (DA) cells in culture, as well as the elongation rate of DA neurites. Using a similar approach in which the morphology of individual DA cells can be studied after 3H-DA uptake and autoradiography, we now report on in vitro neurone-glia interactions and show that glial cells exert a morphogenetic effect on DA neurones. Dopaminergic neurones from the mesencephalon were plated on glial monolayers prepared either from the striatal or the mesencephalic region of the embryonic brain. On mesencephalic glial cells the majority of DA neurones develop a great number of highly branched and varicose neurites, whereas on striatal glia they only exhibit one long, thin and rather linear neurite. These results demonstrate that glial cells from two different brain regions have distinct properties which could be used to define neuronal polarity observed in vivo.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-3 (NT3) are homologs of the well-known neurotrophic factor nerve growth factor. The three members of this family display distinct patterns of target specificity. To examine the distribution in brain of messenger RNA for these molecules, in situ hybridization was performed. Cells hybridizing intensely to antisense BDNF probe were located throughout the major targets of the rat basal forebrain cholinergic system, that is, the hippocampus, amygdala, and neocortex. Strongly hybridizing cells were also observed in structures associated with the olfactory system. The distribution of NT3 mRNA in forebrain was much more limited. Within the hippocampus, labeled cells were restricted to CA2, the most medial portion of CA1, and the dentate gyrus. In human hippocampus, cells expressing BDNF mRNA are distributed in a fashion similar to that observed in the rat. These findings point to both basal forebrain cholinergic cells and olfactory pathways as potential central targets for BDNF.
Discrete brain areas and sympathetic ganglia obtained at autopsy from patients with idiopathic orthostatic hypotension were assayed for tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine beta-hydroxylase. Dopamine beta-hydroxylase activity was decreased 7.5-fold in sympathetic ganglia, while tyrosine hydroxylase activity was reduced more than 50-fold in the pontine nucleus locus coeruleus. These observations indicate that noradrenergic neurons of both brain and ganglion are affected in idiopathic orthostatic hypotension, but suggest that the central and peripheral biochemical deficits differ.
Bilateral lesions of the nucleus locus coeruleus in rats deplete the cerebral cortex of norepinephrine and significantly diminish the rate of increase of running for food reward in a simple L-shaped runway. As assessed in this situation, learning was absent in those rats with the most complete ablations of the locus coeruleus, although these rats showed normal weight gain and normal motor and exploratory activity.
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) causes degeneration of the dopaminergic nigrostriatal pathway in several animal species, including humans, monkeys and mice. Changes observed after MPTP administration include marked decrements in the neostriatal content of dopamine and its major metabolites, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid and homovanillic acid, and a greatly diminished capacity of neostriatal synaptosomes to take up 3H-dopamine. In contrast, there is no pronounced loss of serotonin in the neostriatum or of dopamine and its metabolites in other brain areas in MPTP-treated animals. The oxidative metabolism of MPTP to 1-methyl-4-phenyl pyridine, a positively charged species, has been suggested as a critical feature in the neurotoxic process. Moreover, in rat brain preparations, the monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor pargyline and the specific MAO-B inhibitor deprenil can prevent the formation of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-pyridine from MPTP, while the specific MAO-A inhibitor clorgyline has no such effect, suggesting that MAO, and specifically MAO-B, is responsible for the oxidative metabolism of MPTP. We now report that pargyline, nialamide and tranylcypromine, which inhibit both MAO-A and MAO-B, when administered to mice before MPTP, protect against MPTP-induced dopaminergic neurotoxicity. Deprenil is also protective, but clorgyline is not. Our data are consistent with the premise that MAO-B has a crucial role in MPTP-induced degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic neuronal pathway.
Interactions between neurons and glial cells in the brain may serve important functions in the development, maintenance, and plasticity of neural circuits. Fast neuron-glia synaptic transmission has been found between hippocampal neurons and NG2 cells, a distinct population of macroglia-like cells widely distributed in the brain. We report that these neuron-glia synapses undergo activity-dependent modifications analogous to long-term potentiation (LTP) at excitatory synapses, a hallmark of neuronal plasticity. However, unlike the induction of LTP at many neuron-neuron synapses, both induction and expression of LTP at neuron-NG2 synapses involve Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors on NG2 cells.
Nicotine affects many aspects of behaviour including learning and memory through its interaction with neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR). Functional nAChRs are pentameric proteins containing at least one type of alpha-subunit and one type of beta-subunit. The involvement of a particular neuronal nicotinic subunit in pharmacology and behaviour was examined using gene targeting to mutate beta 2, the most widely expressed nAChR subunit in the central nervous system. We report here that high-affinity binding sites for nicotine are absent from the brains of mice homozygous for the beta 2-subunit mutation. Further, electrophysiological recording from brain slices reveals that thalamic neurons from these mice do not respond to nicotine application. Finally, behavioural tests demonstrate that nicotine no longer augments the performance of beta 2-1- mice on passive avoidance, a test of associative memory. Paradoxically, mutant mice are able to perform better than their non-mutant siblings on this task.
Electrical stimulation was delivered bilaterally to either the anterior or posterior cortex in rats from 0.1 second to 4 hours after a single training trial on an inhibitory avoidance task. As indicated by a retention test given 24 hours later, the length of the retrograde amnesia gradients ranged from 5 seconds to 240 minutes, depending on the brain region stimulated and the intensity of the stimulating current. The stimulation intensity that was threshold for amnesia varied directly with the length of the interval between training and treatment.
Novel motor skills are learned through repetitive practice and, once acquired, persist long after training stops. Earlier studies have shown that such learning induces an increase in the efficacy of synapses in the primary motor cortex, the persistence of which is associated with retention of the task. However, how motor learning affects neuronal circuitry at the level of individual synapses and how long-lasting memory is structurally encoded in the intact brain remain unknown. Here we show that synaptic connections in the living mouse brain rapidly respond to motor-skill learning and permanently rewire. Training in a forelimb reaching task leads to rapid (within an hour) formation of postsynaptic dendritic spines on the output pyramidal neurons in the contralateral motor cortex. Although selective elimination of spines that existed before training gradually returns the overall spine density back to the original level, the new spines induced during learning are preferentially stabilized during subsequent training and endure long after training stops. Furthermore, we show that different motor skills are encoded by different sets of synapses. Practice of novel, but not previously learned, tasks further promotes dendritic spine formation in adulthood. Our findings reveal that rapid, but long-lasting, synaptic reorganization is closely associated with motor learning. The data also suggest that stabilized neuronal connections are the foundation of durable motor memory.
Carboxypeptidase E (enkephalin convertase) was first identified as the carboxypeptidase B-like enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of enkephalin in bovine adrenal chromaffin granules. A similar enzyme is present in many brain regions and in purified secretory granules from rat pituitary and rat insulinoma. Within the secretory granules, carboxypeptidase E (CPE) activity is found in both a soluble and a membrane-bound form, which differ slightly in relative molecular mass (Mr). Here, to investigate whether the CPE activities in the various tissues are produced from a single gene, purified CPE was partially sequenced and oligonucleotide probes were used to isolate a clone encoding CPE from a bovine pituitary complementary DNA library. This cDNA hybridizes to bovine pituitary poly(A)+ RNAs of approximately 3.3, 2.6 and 2.1 kilobases (kb), with the 3.3-kb messenger RNA the predominant species. The predicted amino-acid sequence of the cDNA clone contains the partially determined sequences of CPE, several pairs of basic amino acids and displays some homology with both carboxypeptidases A and B. Restriction analysis of bovine genomic DNA suggests only one gene for CPE. This is consistent with a broad role for CPE in the biosynthesis of many neuropeptides.
A newly discovered class of neurons, ponto-geniculo-occipital (PGO) burst neurons, has PGO wave relationships of phase-leading, stereotyped discharge bursts, and the highest reported discharge specificity and coherence; these neurons thus fulfill correlative criteria for output generator neurons for PGO waves. The PGO burst neurons are recorded in a discrete dorsal brainstem area in apposition to the brachium conjunctivum.
Tourette's syndrome (TS) is a genetically influenced developmental neuropsychiatric disorder characterized by chronic vocal and motor tics. We studied Slit and Trk-like 1 (SLITRK1) as a candidate gene on chromosome 13q31.1 because of its proximity to a de novo chromosomal inversion in a child with TS. Among 174 unrelated probands, we identified a frameshift mutation and two independent occurrences of the identical variant in the binding site for microRNA hsa-miR-189. These variants were absent from 3600 control chromosomes. SLITRK1 mRNA and hsa-miR-189 showed an overlapping expression pattern in brain regions previously implicated in TS. Wild-type SLITRK1, but not the frameshift mutant, enhanced dendritic growth in primary neuronal cultures. Collectively, these findings support the association of rare SLITRK1 sequence variants with TS.
The control of RNA alternative splicing is critical for generating biological diversity. Despite emerging genome-wide technologies to study RNA complexity, reliable and comprehensive RNA-regulatory networks have not been defined. Here, we used Bayesian networks to probabilistically model diverse data sets and predict the target networks of specific regulators. We applied this strategy to identify approximately 700 alternative splicing events directly regulated by the neuron-specific factor Nova in the mouse brain, integrating RNA-binding data, splicing microarray data, Nova-binding motifs, and evolutionary signatures. The resulting integrative network revealed combinatorial regulation by Nova and the neuronal splicing factor Fox, interplay between phosphorylation and splicing, and potential links to neurologic disease. Thus, we have developed a general approach to understanding mammalian RNA regulation at the systems level.
Examination of temporal lobe structures from Alzheimer patients reveals a specific cellular pattern of pathology of the subiculum of the hippocampal formation and layers II and IV of the entorhinal cortex. The affected cells are precisely those that interconnect the hippocampal formation with the association cortices, basal forebrain, thalamus, and hypothalamus, structures crucial to memory. This focal pattern of pathology isolates the hippocampal formation from much of its input and output and probably contributes to the memory disorder in Alzheimer patients.
An essential function of the brain is to detect threats, such as those posed by objects or predators on a collision course. A wide-field, movement-sensitive visual neuron in the brain of the locust was studied by presenting simulated approaching, receding, and translating objects. The neuron's responses could be described simply by multiplying the velocity of the image edge (dtheta/dtau) with an exponential function of the size of the object's image on the retina (e-alpha theta). Because this product peaks before the image reaches its maximum size during approach, this neuron can anticipate collision. The neuron's activity peaks approximately when the approaching object reaches a certain angular size. Because this neuron receives distinct inputs about image size and velocity, the dendritic tree of a single neuron may function as a biophysical device that can carry out a multiplication of two independent input signals.
Over the past decade, genetic analyses have yielded a more molecular view of neuronal migration and its role in central nervous system development. We now realize that many of the molecular mechanisms that guide migrations in invertebrates are recapitulated in the vertebrate nervous system. These mechanisms guide dorsoventral and anterior-posterior migrations and merge with radial migratory pathways that are prominent in the development of the mammalian cortex. This review discusses the choreography of these different migratory mechanisms within the context of genetic approaches that have defined their molecular mechanisms.
Down's syndrome (DS) or trisomy 21 is the most common genetic cause of mental retardation. Development of the DS brain is associated with decreased neuronal number and abnormal neuronal differentiation, and adults with DS develop Alzheimer's disease. The cause of the neurodegenerative process in DS is unknown. Here we report that cortical neurons from fetal DS and age-matched normal brain differentiate normally in culture, but DS neurons subsequently degenerate and undergo apoptosis whereas normal neurons remain viable. Degeneration of DS neurons is prevented by treatment with free-radical scavengers or catalase. Furthermore, DS neurons exhibit a three- to fourfold increase in intracellular reactive oxygen species and elevated levels of lipid peroxidation that precede neuronal death. These results suggest that DS neurons have a defect in the metabolism of reactive oxygen species that causes neuronal apoptosis. This defect may contribute to mental retardation early in life and predispose to Alzheimer's disease in adults.
Lithium is a unique drug with therapeutic as well as prophylactic value for both manic and depressive phases of manic-depressive illness. The precise mechanisms of its clinical efficacy remain unknown, but there are two main theories of its biochemical action. One proposes that lithium inhibits adrenergically activated adenylate cyclase function whereas the other suggests that it inhibits phosphatidyl inositol turnover, which is known to be activated by cholinergic agonists. Neither mechanism alone, however, can explain both the antimanic and antidepressant effects of lithium. Because of the pivotal role of G proteins in post-receptor information transduction, we have investigated the interaction of lithium with G protein function. Lithium at therapeutically efficacious concentrations completely blocked both adrenergic and cholinergic agonist-induced increases in [3H]GTP binding to membranes from rat cerebral cortex, in both in vitro and ex vivo experiments. The same lithium treatments also abolished guanine nucleotide modulation of agonist binding. Our findings suggest G proteins (Gs and Gi or Go) as the molecular site of action for both the antimanic and antidepressant effects of lithium.
Behavioural studies indicate that a newly acquired motor skill is rapidly consolidated from an initially unstable state to a more stable state, whereas neuroimaging studies demonstrate that the brain engages new regions for performance of the task as a result of this consolidation. However, it is not known where a new skill is retained and processed before it is firmly consolidated. Some early aspects of motor skill acquisition involve the primary motor cortex (M1), but the nature of that involvement is unclear. We tested the possibility that the human M1 is essential to early motor consolidation. We monitored changes in elementary motor behaviour while subjects practised fast finger movements that rapidly improved in movement acceleration and muscle force generation. Here we show that low-frequency, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of M1 but not other brain areas specifically disrupted the retention of the behavioural improvement, but did not affect basal motor behaviour, task performance, motor learning by subsequent practice, or recall of the newly acquired motor skill. These findings indicate that the human M1 is specifically engaged during the early stage of motor consolidation.
Evoked responses, recorded from the visual cortex, are enhanced during positive (head to tail) acceleration, and during cerebral hypotension induced by hemorrhage. The phenomenon observed during positive acceleration may therefore be due, at least in part, to its hypotensive effect, but the increased somatic stimulation must also be considered.
Extracellular signalling by the purine nucleotide ATP has long been associated with sensory function. In the periphery, ATP mediates nociception, mechanosensitivity, thermal sensitivity and O2 chemosensitivity. These processes share a common mechanism that involves the release of ATP to excite afferent fibres via activation of ionotropic P2X and/or metabotropic P2Y receptors. Chemosensors located in the brainstem are crucial for the maintenance of physiological levels of blood gases through the regulation of breathing. Here we show that an increase in pCO2 in the arterial blood triggers the immediate release of ATP from three chemosensitive regions located on the ventral surface of the medulla oblongata. Blockade of ATP receptors at these sites diminishes the chemosensory control of breathing, suggesting that ATP release constitutes a key step in central chemosensory transduction. These new data suggest that ATP, a phylogenetically ancient, unique and simple molecule, has been widely used in the evolution of afferent systems to mediate distinct forms of sensory transduction not only in the periphery but also within the central nervous system.
During the development of the mammalian brain, neuronal precursors migrate to their final destination from their site of birth in the ventricular and subventricular zones (VZ and SVZ, respectively). SVZ cells in the walls of the lateral ventricle continue to proliferate in the brain of adult mice and can generate neurons in vitro, but their fate in vivo is unknown. Here SVZ cells from adult mice that carry a neuronal-specific transgene were grafted into the brain of adult recipients. In addition, the fate of endogenous SVZ cells was examined by microinjection of tritiated thymidine or a vital dye that labeled a discrete population of SVZ cells. Grafted and endogenous SVZ cells in the lateral ventricle of adult mice migrate long distances and differentiate into neurons in the olfactory bulb.
Although Parkinson's disease has traditionally been considered as a motor disorder, there has been much recent interest in the nature and the neural substrates of parkinsonian dementia and cognitive dysfunction. These disabilities, which can induce visuospatial impairment and visual 'neglect', may also have a bearing on the controversy about the normal functions of the nigrostriatal dopamine (DA) projection and the basal ganglia. The observations that neurones in both substantia nigra and striatum respond to sensory events in terms of neuronal firing or DA release, also suggest a role for striatum in sensorimotor integration. An important behavioural correlate of this integration is the 'sensorimotor neglect' syndrome in animals with unilateral lesions of the nigrostriatal projection who fail to orient to contralateral sensory events. However, this neglect may arise not from contralateral sensory inattention, but from an inability to express this sensory selection via motor output. We present here two lines of evidence that unilateral striatal DA depletion in the rat does not affect sensory attention to visual signals of reward, but rather impairs the initiation (though not the completion) of contralateral motor acts. These results not only help to clarify the function of the nigrostriatal DA projection, but also show that depletion in this system is linked specifically to a process of response initiation, which may be the fundamental impairment in Parkinson's disease.
It is now commonly accepted that planning and execution of movements are based on distributed processing by neuronal populations in motor cortical areas. It is less clear, though, how these populations organize dynamically to cope with the momentary computational demands. Simultaneously recorded activities of neurons in the primary motor cortex of monkeys during performance of a delayed-pointing task exhibited context-dependent, rapid changes in the patterns of coincident action potentials. Accurate spike synchronization occurred in relation to external events (stimuli, movements) and was commonly accompanied by discharge rate modulations but without precise time locking of the spikes to these external events. Spike synchronization also occurred in relation to purely internal events (stimulus expectancy), where firing rate modulations were distinctly absent. These findings indicate that internally generated synchronization of individual spike discharges may subserve the cortical organization of cognitive motor processes.
During tactile learning there is a transformation in the way the primary somatosensory cortex integrates, represents, and distributes information from the skin. To define this transformation, the site of earliest modification has been identified in rat somatosensory cortex after a change in sensory experience. Afferent activity was manipulated by clipping all except two whiskers on one side of the snout ("whisker pairing"), and the receptive fields of neurons at different cortical depths were mapped 24 hours later. Neurons in layer IV, the target of the primary thalamic pathway, were unaltered, whereas neurons located above and below layer IV showed significant changes. These changes were similar to those that occur in layer IV after longer periods of whisker pairing. The findings support the hypothesis that the layers of cortex contribute differently to plasticity. Neurons in the supragranular and infragranular layers respond rapidly to changes in sensory experience and may contribute to subsequent modification in layer IV.
Prolonged treatment with classical antipsychotic drugs decreased the number of spontaneously active dopamine neurons in both the substantia nigra (A9) and the ventral tegmental area (A10) of the rat brain. In contrast, treatment with atypical antipsychotic drugs selectively decreased the number of A10 dopamine neurons. Related drugs lacking antipsychotic efficacy failed to decrease dopamine activity. These findings suggest that the inability of atypical antipsychotic drugs to decrease A9 dopamine neuronal activity may be related to their lower potential for causing tardive dyskinesia and that the inactivation of A10 neurons may be involved in the delayed onset of therapeutic effects during treatment.
Glutamate and aspartate are known to be released in a calcium-dependent fashion by depolarizing stimulation of mammalian brain synaptosomes (isolated nerve endings), an observation which strengthens their claims to be neurotransmitter candidates. The source of these compounds has been interpreted as the exclusively glutamatergic or aspartatergic synaptosome sub-populations assumed to be present in the standard heterogeneous preparations from mammalian brain. Several neurotransmitter-specific synaptosomal surface markers have recently been identified by immunolysis studies and these have allowed separation of subpopulations of synaptosomes by an affinity purification method. These markers appear to be closely related to the biosynthetic enzyme for the principal neurotransmitter released by each sub-category of synaptosome. We have isolated highly purified, metabolically active, GABAergic and cholinergic synaptosomes from cerebral cortex using antisera recognizing either glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) or choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), in conjunction with magnetic microspheres covalently coupled to Protein A (ref. 8), and now report that these synaptosomes release both glutamate and aspartate, in addition to their principal neurotransmitter, when treated with chemical depolarizing agents.
During development, cells monitor and adjust their rates of accumulation to produce organs of predetermined size. We show here that central nervous system-specific deletion of the essential adherens junction gene, alphaE-catenin, causes abnormal activation of the hedgehog pathway, resulting in shortening of the cell cycle, decreased apoptosis, and cortical hyperplasia. We propose that alphaE-catenin connects cell-density-dependent adherens junctions with the developmental hedgehog pathway and that this connection may provide a negative feedback loop controlling the size of developing cerebral cortex.
In conjunction with histone modifications, DNA methylation plays critical roles in gene silencing through chromatin remodeling. Changes in DNA methylation perturb neuronal function, and mutations in a methyl-CpG-binding protein, MeCP2, are associated with Rett syndrome. We report that increased synthesis of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in neurons after depolarization correlates with a decrease in CpG methylation within the regulatory region of the Bdnf gene. Moreover, increased Bdnf transcription involves dissociation of the MeCP2-histone deacetylase-mSin3A repression complex from its promoter. Our findings suggest that DNA methylation-related chromatin remodeling is important for activity-dependent gene regulation that may be critical for neural plasticity.
Our cognitive abilities in performing tasks are influenced by experienced competition/conflict between behavioral choices. To determine the role of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in the conflict detection-resolution process, we conducted complementary lesion and single-cell recording studies in monkeys that were resolving a conflict between two rules. We observed conflict-induced behavioral adjustment that persisted after lesions within the ACC but disappeared after lesions within the DLPFC. In the DLPFC, activity was modulated in some cells by the current conflict level and in other cells by the conflict experienced in the previous trial. These results show that the DLPFC, but not the ACC, is essential for the conflict-induced behavioral adjustment and suggest that encoding and maintenance of information about experienced conflict is mediated by the DLPFC.
Two main forms of long-term potentiation (LTP)-a prominent model for the cellular mechanism of learning and memory-have been distinguished in the mammalian brain. One requires activation of postsynaptic NMDA (N-methyl d-aspartate) receptors, whereas the other, called mossy fibre LTP, has a principal presynaptic component. Mossy fibre LTP is expressed in hippocampal mossy fibre synapses, cerebellar parallel fibre synapses and corticothalamic synapses, where it apparently operates by a mechanism that requires activation of protein kinase A. Thus, presynaptic substrates of protein kinase A are probably essential in mediating this form of long-term synaptic plasticity. Studies of knockout mice have shown that the synaptic vesicle protein Rab3A is required for mossy fibre LTP, but the protein kinase A substrates rabphilin, synapsin I and synapsin II are dispensable. Here we report that mossy fibre LTP in the hippocampus and the cerebellum is abolished in mice lacking RIM1alpha, an active zone protein that binds to Rab3A and that is also a protein kinase A substrate. Our results indicate that the long-term increase in neurotransmitter release during mossy fibre LTP may be mediated by a unitary mechanism that involves the GTP-dependent interaction of Rab3A with RIM1alpha at the interface of synaptic vesicles and the active zone.
Stress proteins located in the cytosol or endoplasmic reticulum (ER) maintain cell homeostasis and afford tolerance to severe insults. In neurodegenerative diseases, several chaperones ameliorate the accumulation of misfolded proteins triggered by oxidative or nitrosative stress, or of mutated gene products. Although severe ER stress can induce apoptosis, the ER withstands relatively mild insults through the expression of stress proteins or chaperones such as glucose-regulated protein (GRP) and protein-disulphide isomerase (PDI), which assist in the maturation and transport of unfolded secretory proteins. PDI catalyses thiol-disulphide exchange, thus facilitating disulphide bond formation and rearrangement reactions. PDI has two domains that function as independent active sites with homology to the small, redox-active protein thioredoxin. During neurodegenerative disorders and cerebral ischaemia, the accumulation of immature and denatured proteins results in ER dysfunction, but the upregulation of PDI represents an adaptive response to protect neuronal cells. Here we show, in brains manifesting sporadic Parkinson's or Alzheimer's disease, that PDI is S-nitrosylated, a reaction transferring a nitric oxide (NO) group to a critical cysteine thiol to affect protein function. NO-induced S-nitrosylation of PDI inhibits its enzymatic activity, leads to the accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins, and activates the unfolded protein response. S-nitrosylation also abrogates PDI-mediated attenuation of neuronal cell death triggered by ER stress, misfolded proteins or proteasome inhibition. Thus, PDI prevents neurotoxicity associated with ER stress and protein misfolding, but NO blocks this protective effect in neurodegenerative disorders through the S-nitrosylation of PDI.
Knowledge or experience is voluntarily recalled from memory by reactivation of the neural representations in the cerebral association cortex. In inferior temporal cortex, which serves as the storehouse of visual long-term memory, activation of mnemonic engrams through electric stimulation results in imagery recall in humans, and neurons can be dynamically activated by the necessity for memory recall in monkeys. Neuropsychological studies and previous split-brain experiments predicted that prefrontal cortex exerts executive control upon inferior temporal cortex in memory retrieval; however, no neuronal correlate of this process has ever been detected. Here we show evidence of the top-down signal from prefrontal cortex. In the absence of bottom-up visual inputs, single inferior temporal neurons were activated by the top-down signal, which conveyed information on semantic categorization imposed by visual stimulus-stimulus association. Behavioural performance was severely impaired with loss of the top-down signal. Control experiments confirmed that the signal was transmitted not through a subcortical but through a fronto-temporal cortical pathway. Thus, feedback projections from prefrontal cortex to the posterior association cortex appear to serve the executive control of voluntary recall.
Amyloid-b (Ab) peptides, derived from the amyloid precursor protein, and the microtubule-associated protein tau are key pathogenic factors in Alzheimer's disease (AD). How exactly they impair cognitive functions is unknown. We assessed the effects of Ab and tau on axonal transport of mitochondria and the neurotrophin receptor TrkA, cargoes that are critical for neuronal function and survival and whose distributions are altered in AD. Ab oligomers rapidly inhibited axonal transport of these cargoes in wild-type neurons. Lowering tau levels prevented these defects without affecting baseline axonal transport. Thus, Ab requires tau to impair axonal transport, and tau reduction protects against Ab-induced axonal transport defects.
The question of whether nicotine, the neuroactive compound of tobacco, is addictive has been open to considerable scientific and public discussion. Although it can serve as a positive reinforcer in several animal species, including man, nicotine is thought to be a weak reinforcer in comparison with addictive drugs such as cocaine and heroin, and has been argued to be habit forming but not addictive. Here we report that intravenous nicotine in the rat, at doses known to maintain self-administration, stimulates local energy metabolism, as measured by 2-deoxyglucose autoradiography, and dopamine transmission, as estimated by brain microdialysis, in the shell of the nucleus accumbens. These neurochemical and metabolic effects are qualitatively similar to those of other drugs, such as cocaine, amphetamine and morphine, which have strong addictive properties. Our results provide functional and neurochemical evidence that there are specific neurobiological commonalities between nicotine and addictive drugs.
During stress, the activity of the sympathetic nervous system is changed in a global fashion, leading to an increase in cardiovascular function and a release of adrenal catecholamines. This response is thought to be regulated by a common set of brain neurons that provide a dual input to the sympathetic preganglionic neurons regulating cardiac and adrenal medullary functions. By using a double-virus transneuronal labeling technique, the existence of such a set of central autonomic neurons in the hypothalamus and brainstem was demonstrated. These neurons innervate both of the sympathetic outflow systems and likely function in circumstances where parallel sympathetic processing occurs, such as in the fight-or-flight response.
A potent neurotrophic factor that enhances survival of midbrain dopaminergic neurons was purified and cloned. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is a glycosylated, disulfide-bonded homodimer that is a distantly related member of the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily. In embryonic midbrain cultures, recombinant human GDNF promoted the survival and morphological differentiation of dopaminergic neurons and increased their high-affinity dopamine uptake. These effects were relatively specific; GDNF did not increase total neuron or astrocyte numbers nor did it increase transmitter uptake by gamma-aminobutyric-containing and serotonergic neurons. GDNF may have utility in the treatment of Parkinson's disease, which is marked by progressive degeneration of midbrain dopaminergic neurons.
Vasopressin and oxytocin strongly modulate autonomic fear responses, through mechanisms that are still unclear. We describe how these neuropeptides excite distinct neuronal populations in the central amygdala, which provides the major output of the amygdaloid complex to the autonomic nervous system. We identified these two neuronal populations as part of an inhibitory network, through which vasopressin and oxytocin modulate the integration of excitatory information from the basolateral amygdala and cerebral cortex in opposite manners. Through this network, the expression and endogenous activation of vasopressin and oxytocin receptors may regulate the autonomic expression of fear.
Somatostatin in a hypothalamic peptide hormone which inhibits growth hormone release from the anterior pituitary. However, biochemical and morphological investigations have revealed that somatostatin is located not only in the hypothalamus but also in other brain areas (for example the cerebral cortex) where it occurs and in nerve cell bodies and fibres from which it can be released in a Ca2+-dependent manner. It has therefore been suggested that the neuropeptide may have functions in the central nervous system other than its effect on growth hormone release; one possible action is that of a neuromodulator. Therefore, hypothalamic and cerebral cortical slices of the rat were used to examine whether somatostatin modifies the electrically or CaCl2-evoked release of tritiated monoamines from monoaminergic neurones. it is reported here that somatostatin inhibits 3H-noradrenaline release from the hypothalamus (but not from the cerebral cortex) but does not affect the release of 3H-dopamine and 3H-serotonin.
Many metabolic diseases affecting the central nervous system are refractory to treatment because the blood-brain barrier restricts entry of therapeutic molecules. It may be possible to deliver therapeutic gene products directly to the brain by transplantation of neural progenitor cells, which can integrate into the murine central nervous system in a cytoarchitecturally appropriate manner. We tested this approach in mucopolysaccharidosis VII (Sly disease), a lysosomal storage disorder of humans, dogs and mice caused by an inherited deficiency of beta-glucuronidase. Lysosomal accumulation of glycosaminoglycans occurs in the brain and other tissues, causing a fatal progressive degenerative disorder, including mental retardation. Treatments are designed to provide a source of normal enzyme for uptake by diseased cells. We report here that by transplanting beta-glucuronidase-expressing neural progenitors into the cerebral ventricles of newborn mice, donor cells engrafted throughout the neuraxis. At maturity, donor-derived cells were present as normal constituents of diverse brain regions. beta-Glucuronidase activity was expressed along the entire neuraxis, resulting in widespread correction of lysosomal storage in neurons and glia in affected mice.
In the mouse trigeminal pathway, sensory inputs from distinct facial structures, such as whiskers or lower jaw and lip, are topographically mapped onto the somatosensory cortex through relay stations in the thalamus and hindbrain. In the developing hindbrain, the mechanisms generating such maps remain elusive. We found that in the principal sensory nucleus, the whisker-related map is contributed by rhombomere 3-derived neurons, whereas the rhombomere 2-derived progeny supply the lower jaw and lip representation. Moreover, early Hoxa2 expression in neuroepithelium prevents the trigeminal nerve from ectopically projecting to the cerebellum, whereas late expression in the principal sensory nucleus promotes selective arborization of whisker-related afferents and topographic connectivity to the thalamus. Hoxa2 inactivation further results in the absence of whisker-related maps in the postnatal brain. Thus, Hoxa2- and rhombomere 3-dependent cues determine the whisker area map and are required for the assembly of the whisker-to-barrel somatosensory circuit.
A fundamental function of the visual system is to encode the building blocks of natural scenes-edges, textures and shapes-that subserve visual tasks such as object recognition and scene understanding. Essential to this process is the formation of abstract representations that generalize from specific instances of visual input. A common view holds that neurons in the early visual system signal conjunctions of image features, but how these produce invariant representations is poorly understood. Here we propose that to generalize over similar images, higher-level visual neurons encode statistical variations that characterize local image regions. We present a model in which neural activity encodes the probability distribution most consistent with a given image. Trained on natural images, the model generalizes by learning a compact set of dictionary elements for image distributions typically encountered in natural scenes. Model neurons show a diverse range of properties observed in cortical cells. These results provide a new functional explanation for nonlinear effects in complex cells and offer insight into coding strategies in primary visual cortex (V1) and higher visual areas.
OX2 (CD200) is a broadly expressed membrane glycoprotein, shown here to be important for regulation of the macrophage lineage. In mice lacking CD200, macrophage lineage cells, including brain microglia, exhibited an activated phenotype and were more numerous. Upon facial nerve transection, damaged CD200-deficient neurons elicited an accelerated microglial response. Lack of CD200 resulted in a more rapid onset of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Outside the brain, disruption of CD200-CD200 receptor interaction precipitated susceptibility to collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in mice normally resistant to this disease. Thus, in diverse tissues OX2 delivers an inhibitory signal for the macrophage lineage.
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies are associated with accumulation of PrP(Sc), a conformer of a cellular protein called PrP(C). PrP(Sc) is thought to replicate by imparting its conformation onto PrP(C) (ref. 1), yet conformational discrimination between PrP(C) and PrP(Sc) has remained elusive. Because deposition of PrP(Sc) alone is not enough to cause neuropathology, PrP(Sc) probably damages the brain by interacting with other cellular constituents. Here we find activities in human and mouse blood which bind PrP(Sc) and prion infectivity, but not PrP(C). We identify plasminogen, a pro-protease implicated in neuronal excitotoxicity, as a PrP(Sc)-binding protein. Binding is abolished if the conformation of PrP(Sc) is disrupted by 6M urea or guanidine. The isolated lysine binding site 1 of plasminogen (kringles I-III) retains this binding activity, and binding can be competed for with lysine. Therefore, plasminogen represents the first endogenous factor discriminating between normal and pathological prion protein. This unexpected property may be exploited for diagnostic purposes.
The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), on the medial surface of the frontal lobes of the brain, is widely believed to be involved in the regulation of attention. Beyond this, however, its specific contribution to cognition remains uncertain. One influential theory has interpreted activation within the ACC as reflecting 'selection-for-action', a set of processes that guide the selection of environmental objects as triggers of or targets for action. We have proposed an alternative hypothesis, in which the ACC serves not to exert top-down attentional control but instead to detect and signal the occurrence of conflicts in information processing. Here, to test this theory against the selection-for-action theory, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to measure brain activation during performance of a task where, for a particular subset of trials, the strength of selection-for-action is inversely related to the degree of response conflict. Activity within the ACC was greater during trials featuring high levels of conflict (and weak selection-for-action) than during trials with low levels of conflict (and strong selection-for-action), providing evidence in favour of the conflict-monitoring account of ACC function.
The sensation of flutter is produced when mechanical vibrations in the range of 5-50Hz are applied to the skin. A flutter stimulus activates neurons in the primary somatosensory cortex (S1) that somatotopically map to the site of stimulation. A subset of these neurons-those with quickly adapting properties, associated with Meissner's corpuscles-are strongly entrained by periodic flutter vibrations, firing with a probability that oscillates at the input frequency. Hence, quickly adapting neurons provide a dynamic representation of such flutter stimuli. However, are these neurons directly involved in the perception of flutter? Here we investigate this in monkeys trained to discriminate the difference in frequency between two flutter stimuli delivered sequentially on the fingertips. Microelectrodes were inserted into area 3b of S1 and the second stimulus was substituted with a train of injected current pulses. Animals reliably indicated whether the frequency of the second (electrical) signal was higher or lower than that of the first (mechanical) signal, even though both frequencies changed from trial to trial. Almost identical results were obtained with periodic and aperiodic stimuli of equal average frequencies. Thus, the quickly adapting neurons in area 3b activate the circuit leading to the perception of flutter. Furthermore, as far as can be psychophysically quantified during discrimination, the neural code underlying the sensation of flutter can be finely manipulated, to the extent that the behavioural responses produced by natural and artificial stimuli are indistinguishable.
The earliest stages of cortical visual processing in areas V1 and V2 of the macaque monkey contain internal subdivisions ('blobs' and 'interblobs' in layer 4B in V1; thin, thick and interstripes in V2) that are selectively interconnected and contain neurons with distinctive visual response properties. Here we use anatomical pathway tracing to demonstrate that higher visual areas, V4 and the ventral posterior inferotemporal cortex, each contain anatomical subdivisions that have distinct input and output projections. These findings, in conjunction with others, suggest that modularity and multistream processing within individual cortical areas are widespread features of neocortical organization.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, lethal neuromuscular disease that is associated with the degeneration of spinal and brainstem motor neurons, leading to atrophy of limb, axial, and respiratory muscles. The cause of ALS is unknown, and there is no effective therapy. Neurotrophic factors are candidates for therapeutic evaluation in ALS. Although chronic delivery of molecules to the central nervous system has proven difficult, we recently discovered that adeno-associated virus can be retrogradely transported efficiently from muscle to motor neurons of the spinal cord. We report that insulin-like growth factor 1 prolongs life and delays disease progression, even when delivered at the time of overt disease symptoms.
The ability to abstract principles or rules from direct experience allows behaviour to extend beyond specific circumstances to general situations. For example, we learn the 'rules' for restaurant dining from specific experiences and can then apply them in new restaurants. The use of such rules is thought to depend on the prefrontal cortex (PFC) because its damage often results in difficulty in following rules. Here we explore its neural basis by recording from single neurons in the PFC of monkeys trained to use two abstract rules. They were required to indicate whether two successively presented pictures were the same or different depending on which rule was currently in effect. The monkeys performed this task with new pictures, thus showing that they had learned two general principles that could be applied to stimuli that they had not yet experienced. The most prevalent neuronal activity observed in the PFC reflected the coding of these abstract rules.
The neural circuits that link the basal ganglia with the cerebral cortex are critically involved in the generation and control of voluntary movement. Retrograde transneuronal transport of herpes simplex virus type 1 was used to examine the organization of connections in the cebus monkey between an output nucleus of the basal ganglia, the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi), and three cortical areas: the primary motor cortex, the supplementary motor ara, and the ventral premotor area. Spatially separate regions of the GPi were labeled after virus injections into each cortical area. The GPi projects to multiple cortical motor areas, and this pallidal output is organized into discrete channels. This information provides a new anatomical framework for examining the function of the basal ganglia in skeletomotor control.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and other neurotrophins are essential for normal brain function. Many types of neurons in the central nervous system are excited by BDNF or neurotrophin-4/5, an action that has recently been implicated in synaptic plasticity. The mechanisms involved in this transmitter-like action of neurotrophins remains unclear. Here, by screening candidate genes with an antisense messenger RNA expression approach and by co-expressing the receptor tyrosine kinase TrkB and various sodium channels, we demonstrate that the tetrodotoxin-insensitive sodium channel Na(V)1.9 underlies the neurotrophin-evoked excitation. These results establish the molecular basis of neurotrophin-evoked depolarization and reveal a mechanism of ligand-mediated sodium channel activation.
Acetylcholine is vital for cognitive functions of the brain. Although its actions in the individual cell are known in some detail, its effects at the network level are poorly understood. The hippocampus, which receives a major cholinergic input from the medial septum/diagonal band, is important in memory and exhibits network activity at 40 Hz during relevant behaviours. Here we show that cholinergic activation is sufficient to induce 40-Hz network oscillations in the hippocampus in vitro. Oscillatory activity is generated spontaneously in the CA3 subfield and can persist for hours. During the oscillatory state, principal neurons fire action potentials that are phase-related to the extracellular oscillation, but each neuron fires in only a small proportion of the cycles. Both excitatory and inhibitory synaptic events participate during the network oscillation in a precise temporal pattern. These results indicate that subcortical cholinergic input can control hippocampal memory processing by inducing fast network oscillations.
The Drosophila fruitless (fru) gene product Fru has been postulated to be a neural sex determination factor that directs development of the central nervous system (CNS), thereby producing male-typical courtship behaviour and inducing male-specific muscle. Male-specific Fru protein is expressed in small groups of neurons scattered throughout the CNS of male, but not female, Drosophila. Collectively, these observations suggest that Fru 'masculinizes' certain neurons, thereby establishing neural substrates for male-typical behaviour. However, specific differences between neurons resulting from the presence or absence of Fru are unknown. Previous studies have suggested that Fru might result in sexual differences in the CNS at the functional level, as no overt sexual dimorphism in CNS structure was discernible. Here we identify a subset of fru-expressing interneurons in the brain that show marked sexual dimorphism in their number and projection pattern. We also demonstrate that Fru supports the development of neurons with male-specific dendritic fields, which are programmed to die during female development as a result of the absence of Fru. Thus, Fru expression can produce a male-specific neural circuit, probably used during heterosexual courtship, by preventing cell death in identifiable neurons.
Angelman syndrome is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder caused by deletion or mutation of the maternal allele of the ubiquitin protein ligase E3A (UBE3A). In neurons, the paternal allele of UBE3A is intact but epigenetically silenced, raising the possibility that Angelman syndrome could be treated by activating this silenced allele to restore functional UBE3A protein. Using an unbiased, high-content screen in primary cortical neurons from mice, we identify twelve topoisomerase I inhibitors and four topoisomerase II inhibitors that unsilence the paternal Ube3a allele. These drugs included topotecan, irinotecan, etoposide and dexrazoxane (ICRF-187). At nanomolar concentrations, topotecan upregulated catalytically active UBE3A in neurons from maternal Ube3a-null mice. Topotecan concomitantly downregulated expression of the Ube3a antisense transcript that overlaps the paternal copy of Ube3a. These results indicate that topotecan unsilences Ube3a in cis by reducing transcription of an imprinted antisense RNA. When administered in vivo, topotecan unsilenced the paternal Ube3a allele in several regions of the nervous system, including neurons in the hippocampus, neocortex, striatum, cerebellum and spinal cord. Paternal expression of Ube3a remained elevated in a subset of spinal cord neurons for at least 12  weeks after cessation of topotecan treatment, indicating that transient topoisomerase inhibition can have enduring effects on gene expression. Although potential off-target effects remain to be investigated, our findings suggest a therapeutic strategy for reactivating the functional but dormant allele of Ube3a in patients with Angelman syndrome.
The fundamental building block of every nervous system is the single neuron. Understanding how these exquisitely structured elements operate is an integral part of the quest to solve the mysteries of the brain. Quantitative mathematical models have proved to be an indispensable tool in pursuing this goal. We review recent advances and examine how single-cell models on five levels of complexity, from black-box approaches to detailed compartmental simulations, address key questions about neural dynamics and signal processing.
Neurotransmitter release at synapses between nerve cells is mediated by calcium-triggered exocytotic fusion of synaptic vesicles. Before fusion, vesicles dock at the presynaptic release site where they mature to a fusion-competent state. Here we identify Munc13-1, a brain-specific presynaptic phorbol ester receptor, as an essential protein for synaptic vesicle maturation. We show that glutamatergic hippocampal neurons from mice lacking Munc13-1 form ultrastructurally normal synapses whose synaptic-vesicle cycle is arrested at the maturation step. Transmitter release from mutant synapses cannot be triggered by action potentials, calcium-ionophores or hypertonic sucrose solution. In contrast, release evoked by alpha-latrotoxin is indistinguishable from wild-type controls, indicating that the toxin can bypass Munc13-1-mediated vesicle maturation. A small subpopulation of synapses of any given glutamatergic neuron as well as all synapses of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-containing neurons are unaffected by Munc13-1 loss, demonstrating the existence of multiple and transmitter-specific synaptic vesicle maturation processes in synapses.
Arm movement is well represented in populations of neurons recorded from the motor cortex. Cortical activity patterns have been used in the new field of brain-machine interfaces to show how cursors on computer displays can be moved in two- and three-dimensional space. Although the ability to move a cursor can be useful in its own right, this technology could be applied to restore arm and hand function for amputees and paralysed persons. However, the use of cortical signals to control a multi-jointed prosthetic device for direct real-time interaction with the physical environment ('embodiment') has not been demonstrated. Here we describe a system that permits embodied prosthetic control; we show how monkeys (Macaca mulatta) use their motor cortical activity to control a mechanized arm replica in a self-feeding task. In addition to the three dimensions of movement, the subjects' cortical signals also proportionally controlled a gripper on the end of the arm. Owing to the physical interaction between the monkey, the robotic arm and objects in the workspace, this new task presented a higher level of difficulty than previous virtual (cursor-control) experiments. Apart from an example of simple one-dimensional control, previous experiments have lacked physical interaction even in cases where a robotic arm or hand was included in the control loop, because the subjects did not use it to interact with physical objects-an interaction that cannot be fully simulated. This demonstration of multi-degree-of-freedom embodied prosthetic control paves the way towards the development of dexterous prosthetic devices that could ultimately achieve arm and hand function at a near-natural level.
Inhibitory interneurons are critical to sensory transformations, plasticity and synchronous activity in the neocortex. There are many types of inhibitory neurons, but their synaptic organization is poorly understood. Here we describe two functionally distinct inhibitory networks comprising either fast-spiking (FS) or low-threshold spiking (LTS) neurons. Paired-cell recordings showed that inhibitory neurons of the same type were strongly interconnected by electrical synapses, but electrical synapses between different inhibitory cell types were rare. The electrical synapses were strong enough to synchronize spikes in coupled interneurons. Inhibitory chemical synapses were also common between FS cells, and between FS and LTS cells, but LTS cells rarely inhibited one another. Thalamocortical synapses, which convey sensory information to the cortex, specifically and strongly excited only the FS cell network. The electrical and chemical synaptic connections of different types of inhibitory neurons are specific, and may allow each inhibitory network to function independently.
Neuropathic pain that occurs after peripheral nerve injury depends on the hyperexcitability of neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Spinal microglia stimulated by ATP contribute to tactile allodynia, a highly debilitating symptom of pain induced by nerve injury. Signalling between microglia and neurons is therefore an essential link in neuropathic pain transmission, but how this signalling occurs is unknown. Here we show that ATP-stimulated microglia cause a depolarizing shift in the anion reversal potential (E(anion)) in spinal lamina I neurons. This shift inverts the polarity of currents activated by GABA (gamma-amino butyric acid), as has been shown to occur after peripheral nerve injury. Applying brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) mimics the alteration in E(anion). Blocking signalling between BDNF and the receptor TrkB reverses the allodynia and the E(anion) shift that follows both nerve injury and administration of ATP-stimulated microglia. ATP stimulation evokes the release of BDNF from microglia. Preventing BDNF release from microglia by pretreating them with interfering RNA directed against BDNF before ATP stimulation also inhibits the effects of these cells on the withdrawal threshold and E(anion). Our results show that ATP-stimulated microglia signal to lamina I neurons, causing a collapse of their transmembrane anion gradient, and that BDNF is a crucial signalling molecule between microglia and neurons. Blocking this microglia-neuron signalling pathway may represent a therapeutic strategy for treating neuropathic pain.
A bacterial pyrogen acts on the brain by disturbing the natural balance between two essential cations in the cerebral region involved in thermoregulation. After typhoid vaccine is administered to the unanesthetized cat, (45)Ca(2+) efflux into the third cerebral ventricle increases while (22)Na(+) is retained in hypothalamic tissue at the same time that the set-point temperature begins to rise. The subsequent rates of (22)Na(+) and (45)Ca(2+) efflux parallel the course of the bacterial fever but in a reciprocal fashion. This supports the theory that a change in the set-point temperature is determined by an alteration in the inherent ratio of Na(+) to Ca(2+) ions in the hypothalamus.
Excitatory brain synapses are strengthened or weakened in response to specific patterns of synaptic activation, and these changes in synaptic strength are thought to underlie persistent pathologies such as drug addiction, as well as learning. In contrast, there are few examples of synaptic plasticity of inhibitory GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-releasing synapses. Here we report long-term potentiation of GABA(A)-mediated synaptic transmission (LTP(GABA)) onto dopamine neurons of the rat brain ventral tegmental area, a region required for the development of drug addiction. This novel form of LTP is heterosynaptic, requiring postsynaptic NMDA (N-methyl-d-aspartate) receptor activation at glutamate synapses, but resulting from increased GABA release at neighbouring inhibitory nerve terminals. NMDA receptor activation produces nitric oxide, a retrograde signal released from the postsynaptic dopamine neuron. Nitric oxide initiates LTP(GABA) by activating guanylate cyclase in GABA-releasing nerve terminals. Exposure to morphine both in vitro and in vivo prevents LTP(GABA). Whereas brief treatment with morphine in vitro blocks LTP(GABA) by inhibiting presynaptic glutamate release, in vivo exposure to morphine persistently interrupts signalling from nitric oxide to guanylate cyclase. These neuroadaptations to opioid drugs might contribute to early stages of addiction, and may potentially be exploited therapeutically using drugs targeting GABA(A) receptors.
The capacity to generate and analyze mental visual images is essential for many cognitive abilities. We combined triple-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (tpTMS) and repetitive TMS (rTMS) to determine which distinct aspect of mental imagery is carried out by the left and right parietal lobe and to reveal interhemispheric compensatory interactions. The left parietal lobe was predominant in generating mental images, whereas the right parietal lobe was specialized in the spatial comparison of the imagined content. Furthermore, in case of an rTMS-induced left parietal lesion, the right parietal cortex could immediately compensate such a left parietal disruption by taking over the specific function of the left hemisphere.
Several transcription factors are expressed at higher levels in the waking than in the sleeping brain. In experiments with rats, the locus coeruleus, a noradrenergic nucleus with diffuse projections, was found to regulate such expression. In brain regions depleted of noradrenergic innervation, amounts of c-Fos and nerve growth factor-induced A after waking were as low as after sleep. Phosphorylation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein was also reduced. In contrast, electroencephalographic activity was unchanged. The reduced activity of locus coeruleus neurons may explain why the induction of certain transcription factors, with potential effects on plasticity and learning, does not occur during sleep.
Independent groups of rats were deprived of sleep and treated with the anticoagulant drugs phenylindanedione or dicoumarol for 1 to 8 days. These animals developed an extremely severe anemia which was accelerated by p-chlorophenylalanine. The red cell count and amount of hemoglobin decreased to half of normal values. No decrease occurred in animals subjected to any one single treatment. Histological examination indicated hemolysis, hypoplasia of hemopoietic organs, slight hemorrhage, but no evidence of stress. The severity of the anemia was inversely related to the amount of sleep permitted during sleep deprivation. This new syndrome demonstrates marked effects of sleep deprivation on both maturation and destruction of red blood cells. Depletion of serotonin by injection of parachlorophenylalanine blocked the increase in amount of brain waves of the type commonly seen in slow wave sleep but did not eliminate the production of these waves. This result is at variance with the theory that serotonin is the neurochemical responsible for the "priming" of slow wave sleep.
The formation of photoreceptor cells (PRCs) in Drosophila serves as a paradigm for understanding neuronal determination and differentiation. During larval stages, a precise series of sequential inductive processes leads to the recruitment of eight distinct PRCs (R1-R8). But, final photoreceptor differentiation, including rhabdomere morphogenesis and opsin expression, is completed four days later, during pupal development. It is thought that photoreceptor cell fate is irreversibly established during larval development, when each photoreceptor expresses a particular set of transcriptional regulators and sends its projection to different layers of the optic lobes. Here, we show that the spalt (sal) gene complex encodes two transcription factors that are required late in pupation for photoreceptor differentiation. In the absence of the sal complex, rhabdomere morphology and expression of opsin genes in the inner PRCs R7 and R8 are changed to become identical to those of outer R1-R6 PRCs. However, these cells maintain their normal projections to the medulla part of the optic lobe, and not to the lamina where outer PRCs project. These data indicate that photoreceptor differentiation occurs as a two-step process. First, during larval development, the photoreceptor neurons become committed and send their axonal projections to their targets in the brain. Second, terminal differentiation is executed during pupal development and the photoreceptors adopt their final cellular properties.
Ungerstedt observed that the dopamine-containing innervation of the forebrain can be divided into two parts: a nigrostriatal system, originating mainly in the pars compacta of the substantia nigra and innervating the caudoputamen; and a mesolimbic system arising mainly in the ventral tegmental area and innervating the nucleus accumbens and olfactory tubercle. This classification has since been modified and extended with the discovery of the mesocortical dopamine system. The original distinction between nigrostriatal and mesolimbic systems nevertheless was pivotal in suggesting that the basal ganglia are related to limbic as well as to sensorimotor functions, and remains of interest because dopaminergic mechanisms may be implicated not only in the aetiology of sensorimotor impairments such as those of Parkinson's disease, but also in neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia. The striatal targets of the mesolimbic and nigrostriatal systems are now known to be distinct also in terms of forebrain connections, despite some overlap of fibre projections. The nucleus accumbens-olfactory tubercle region and abutting caudoputamen (together called the 'ventral' or 'limbic' striatum) are characteristically related to limbic parts of the forebrain, whereas the large remainder of the caudoputamen (the 'dorsal' or 'non-limbic' striatum) is most closely related to sensorimotor regions. We report here evidence that the mesolimbic and nigrostriatal systems are differentially affected in the mutant mouse weaver, and in particular that dopamine is severely depleted in the dorsal striatum of weaver but relatively spared in the ventral striatum. We conclude that dopamine-containing fibre systems innervating the limbic and non-limbic striatum can be influenced separately in genetic disease and that genetic control, whether direct or indirect, may be exerted at the single-gene level.
In the neocortex, each neuron receives thousands of synaptic inputs distributed across an extensive dendritic tree. Although postsynaptic processing of each input is known to depend on its dendritic location, it is unclear whether activity-dependent synaptic modification is also location-dependent. Here we report that both the magnitude and the temporal specificity of spike-timing-dependent synaptic modification vary along the apical dendrite of rat cortical layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons. At the distal dendrite, the magnitude of long-term potentiation is smaller, and the window of pre-/postsynaptic spike interval for long-term depression (LTD) is broader. The spike-timing window for LTD correlates with the window of action potential-induced suppression of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors; this correlation applies to both their dendritic location-dependence and pharmacological properties. Presynaptic stimulation with partial blockade of NMDA receptors induced LTD and occluded further induction of spike-timing-dependent LTD, suggesting that NMDA receptor suppression underlies LTD induction. Computer simulation studies showed that the dendritic inhomogeneity of spike-timing-dependent synaptic modification leads to differential input selection at distal and proximal dendrites according to the temporal characteristics of presynaptic spike trains. Such location-dependent tuning of inputs, together with the dendritic heterogeneity of postsynaptic processing, could enhance the computational capacity of cortical pyramidal neurons.
Since the initial observations in the 1950s a large number of neurotransmitters and hormones have been shown to influence phosphatidylinositol (PI) metabolism in brain and peripheral ganglia (see ref. 3 for review). This has led to the suggestion that PI is part of an intracellular second messenger system for some types of diffusible chemical factors. Consistent with this are recent reports that one of the products of PI turnover (diacylglycerol) stimulates the Ca-dependent phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (kinase C) while a second (inositol trisphosphate) causes the release of calcium from intracellular stores. Thus it is possible that at least some brain neurotransmitters utilize the PI system to produce functional effects that are in addition to and which outlast the very brief physiological responses they elicit. Although it had been anticipated that another class of receptors might inhibit receptor-mediated stimulation of PI breakdown, no clear examples of such effects have been described. We now report that acidic amino acids, which are that acidic amino acids, which are thought to be excitatory neurotransmitters at the majority of brain synapses, strongly inhibit the stimulation of PI metabolism elicited by carbachol, histamine, or by potassium-induced depolarization, without changing the response to noradrenaline. As well as indicating a novel function for the excitatory amino acids, these results suggest that the central nervous system possesses cell-cell interactions of a previously unsuspected type.
Subunits of guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins purified from bovine cerebral cortex were used to perfuse the intracellular surface of excised patches of chick embryonic atrial cells. Single-channel current measurements unexpectedly indicate that the beta gamma, and not the alpha subunits, are responsible for activating the muscarinic-gated potassium channel.
Although humans and their closest evolutionary relatives, the chimpanzees, are 98.7% identical in their genomic DNA sequences, they differ in many morphological, behavioral, and cognitive aspects. The underlying genetic basis of many of these differences may be altered gene expression. We have compared the transcriptome in blood leukocytes, liver, and brain of humans, chimpanzees, orangutans, and macaques using microarrays, as well as protein expression patterns of humans and chimpanzees using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. We also studied three mouse species that are approximately as related to each other as are humans, chimpanzees, and orangutans. We identified species-specific gene expression patterns indicating that changes in protein and gene expression have been particularly pronounced in the human brain.
Studies of the molecular basis of Alzheimer's disease exemplify the increasingly blurred distinction between basic and applied biomedical research. The four genes so far implicated in familial Alzheimer's disease have each been shown to elevate brain levels of the self-aggregating amyloid-beta protein, leading gradually to profound neuronal and glial alteration, synaptic loss and dementia. Progress in understanding this cascade has helped to identify specific therapeutic targets and provides a model for elucidating other neurodegenerative disorders.
The activity of Na+, K+-activated adenosinetriphosphatase and the uptake of a potassium analog, rubidium, were found to be similar in cerebral microvessels and choroid plexus when measured in vitro. This similarity suggests that sodium and potassium concentrations in the nascent brain extracellular fluid are determined by the same active process that regulates their concentration in nascent cerebrospinal fluid. The brain microvessels may thereby play on active role in brain potassium homeostasis and brain extracellular fluid formation.
A dopamine receptor has been characterized which differs in its pharmacology and signalling system from the D1 or D2 receptor and represents both an autoreceptor and a postsynaptic receptor. The D3 receptor is localized to limbic areas of the brain, which are associated with cognitive, emotional and endocrine functions. It seems to mediate some of the effects of antipsychotic drugs and drugs used against Parkinson's disease, that were previously thought to interact only with D2 receptors.
One of the early events in the establishment of regional diversity in brain is the subdivision of the forebrain into the cerebral cortex and underlying basal ganglia. This subdivision is of special interest, owing to the striking difference in cellular patterning in these two regions. Whereas the dorsal aspect of the telencephalon gives rise to the laminar, cortical regions of brain, the basal aspect gives rise to nuclear, subcortical regions. To examine early events in the regionalization of the forebrain, we visualized cell movement within the ventricular zones of the dorsal and basal regions of the E15 murine telencephalon. Over an 8-24-hour observation period, labelled cells moved extensively in the plane of the cortical ventricular zone. Cell dispersion was restricted, however, at the border between the cortical ventricular zone and the lateral ganglionic eminence, the basal telencephalic ventricular zone. We suggest that this restriction of cell movements establishes a regional pattern of neurogenesis in the developing brain.
In mammals, circadian oscillators reside not only in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the brain, which harbors the central pacemaker, but also in most peripheral tissues. Here, we show that the glucocorticoid hormone analog dexamethasone induces circadian gene expression in cultured rat-1 fibroblasts and transiently changes the phase of circadian gene expression in liver, kidney, and heart. However, dexamethasone does not affect cyclic gene expression in neurons of the suprachiasmatic nucleus. This enabled us to establish an apparent phase-shift response curve specifically for peripheral clocks in intact animals. In contrast to the central clock, circadian oscillators in peripheral tissues appear to remain responsive to phase resetting throughout the day.
In an investigation of the mechanism by which brain lesions result in delayed degeneration of neurons remote from the site of injury, neurons within the caudate nucleus of rats were destroyed by local injection of the excitotoxin ibotenic acid. Treatment resulted in the rapid degeneration of the striatonigral pathway including projections containing the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and delayed transneuronal death of neurons in the substantia nigra pars reticulata. The distribution of nigral cell loss corresponded to the loss of GABAergic terminals. Neuronal death was prevented by long-term intraventricular infusion of the GABA agonist muscimol. Delayed transneuronal degeneration may be produced by neuronal disinhibition consequent to loss of inhibitory inputs. Replacement of inhibitory transmitters by suitable drugs may prevent some forms of delayed neuronal death.
Two angiotensin II (Ang II)-specific receptors, AGTR1 and AGTR2, are expressed in the mammalian brain. Ang II actions on blood pressure regulation, water electrolyte balance, and hormone secretion are primarily mediated by AGTR1. The function of AGTR2 remains unclear. Here, we show that expression of the AGTR2 gene was absent in a female patient with mental retardation (MR) who had a balanced X;7 chromosomal translocation. Additionally, 8 of 590 unrelated male patients with MR were found to have sequence changes in the AGTR2 gene, including one frameshift and three missense mutations. These findings indicate a role for AGTR2 in brain development and cognitive function.
Development and maintenance of the mammalian nervous system is dependent upon neurotrophic cytokines. One class of neurotrophic factor acts through receptor complexes involving the low-affinity leukaemia inhibitory factor receptor subunit (LIF-R). Members of this family of cytokines, such as ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF), have profound effects on the survival and maintenance of motor neurons. Recently it was reported that mice lacking LIF-R die shortly after birth unlike mice lacking CNTF or LIF which are viable. Here we describe histopathological analyses of lifr mutants that reveal a loss > 35% of facial motor neurons, 40% of spinal motor neurons and 50% of neurons in the nucleus ambiguus. These findings point to the existence of a ligand for LIF-R that is required for the normal development of motor neurons in both brainstem nuclei and spinal cord.
A degraded image of an object or face, which appears meaningless when seen for the first time, is easily recognizable after viewing an undegraded version of the same image. The neural mechanisms by which this form of rapid perceptual learning facilitates perception are not well understood. Psychological theory suggests the involvement of systems for processing stimulus attributes, spatial attention and feature binding, as well as those involved in visual imagery. Here we investigate where and how this rapid perceptual learning is expressed in the human brain by using functional neuroimaging to measure brain activity during exposure to degraded images before and after exposure to the corresponding undegraded versions. Perceptual learning of faces or objects enhanced the activity of inferior temporal regions known to be involved in face and object recognition respectively. In addition, both face and object learning led to increased activity in medial and lateral parietal regions that have been implicated in attention and visual imagery. We observed a strong coupling between the temporal face area and the medial parietal cortex when, and only when, faces were perceived. This suggests that perceptual learning involves direct interactions between areas involved in face recognition and those involved in spatial attention, feature binding and memory recall.
Radial glia, the neuronal stem cells of the embryonic cerebral cortex, reside deep within the developing brain and extend radial fibres to the pial surface, along which embryonic neurons migrate to reach the cortical plate. Here we show that the gap junction subunits connexin 26 (Cx26) and connexin 43 (Cx43) are expressed at the contact points between radial fibres and migrating neurons, and acute downregulation of Cx26 or Cx43 impairs the migration of neurons to the cortical plate. Unexpectedly, gap junctions do not mediate neuronal migration by acting in the classical manner to provide an aqueous channel for cell-cell communication. Instead, gap junctions provide dynamic adhesive contacts that interact with the internal cytoskeleton to enable leading process stabilization along radial fibres as well as the subsequent translocation of the nucleus. These results indicate that gap junction adhesions are necessary for glial-guided neuronal migration, raising the possibility that the adhesive properties of gap junctions may have an important role in other physiological processes and diseases associated with gap junction function.
Angiotensin II elicits different responses which affect cardiovascular, neuronal and electrolyte transport regulation. To understand the mechanisms responsible for its various actions, the receptor for angiotensin II has long been sought, but numerous attempts to purify the receptor have been unsuccessful owing to its instability and low concentration. We report here the expression cloning of a complementary DNA encoding a bovine angiotensin II receptor to overcome these difficulties. The receptor cDNA encodes a protein of 359 amino-acid residues with a transmembrane topology similar to that of other G protein-coupled receptors. COS-7 cells transfected with the cDNA expressed specific and high-affinity binding sites for angiotensin II, angiotensin II antagonist and a non-peptide specific antagonist for type-1 receptor. Dithiothreitol inhibited ligand binding. The concentration of intracellular Ca2+ and of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate increased in the transfected COS-7 cells in response to angiotensin II or angiotensin III, indicating that this receptor is the type-1 receptor for angiotensin II. Northern blot analysis revealed that the messenger RNA for this receptor is expressed in bovine adrenal medulla, cortex and kidney.
Intraperitoneal injection of physostigmine in rats produced a retrograde amnesia of a trained task of escaping shock. This amnesic effect was a U-shaped function of the length of the interval between initial training and injection. In all cases, retraining Occurred 30 minutes after injection. A substantial effect was produced by physostigmine if its application was made 30 minutes after training; there was no effect if application and tests were made 1, 2, or 3 days after the original training. When the substance was injected and the rats were retrained 5, 7, or 14 days after the original training, a substantial effect again appeared. These results are similar to those reported in experiments in which another anticholinesterase, diisopropyl fluorophosphate, was applied intracerebrally. The data demonstrate a similar pattern of change of the amnesia with time, and they substantiate the view that neither the place of application nor the brain lesions caused the reported amnesia.
Models of cognitive control posit a key modulatory role for the pontine locus coeruleus-norepinephrine (LC-NE) system. In nonhuman primates, phasic LC-NE activity confers adaptive adjustments in cortical gain in task-relevant brain networks, and in performance, on a trial-by-trial basis. This model has remained untested in humans. We used the pharmacological agent modafinil to promote low-tonic/high-phasic LC-NE activity in healthy humans performing a cognitive control task during event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Modafanil administration was associated with decreased task-independent, tonic LC activity, increased task-related LC and prefrontal cortex (PFC) activity, and enhanced LC-PFC functional connectivity. These results confirm in humans the role of the LC-NE system in PFC function and cognitive control and suggest a mechanism for therapeutic action of procognitive noradrenergic agents.
An adult moth sheds its pupal skin only during a specific period of the day. The brain is necessary for the synchronization of this behavior with the environmental photoperiod. This function is fully preserved when all the brain's nervous connections are severed or when a "loose" brain is transplanted into the tip of the abdomen. By appropriate experiments it was possible to show that the entire mechanism is brain-centered. The components include a photoreceptor mechanism, a clock, and a neuroendocrine output. The clock-controlled release of the hormone acts on the central nervous system to trigger a species-specific behavior pattern which culminates in ecdysis.
The left cerebral hemisphere is dominant for language, and many aspects of language use are more impaired by damage to the left than the right hemisphere. The basis for this asymmetry, however, is a matter of debate; the left hemisphere may be specialized for processing linguistic information or for some more general function on which language depends, such as the processing of rapidly changing temporal information or execution of complex motor patterns. To investigate these possibilities, we examined the linguistic abilities of 23 sign-language users with unilateral brain lesions. Despite the fact that sign language relies on visuospatial rather than rapid temporal information, the same left-hemispheric dominance emerged. Correlation analyses of the production of sign language versus non-linguistic hand gestures suggest that these processes are largely independent. Our findings support the view that the left-hemisphere dominance for language is not reducible solely to more general sensory or motor processes.
Microinfusions of rat prolactin into the dorsal midbrain of estrogen-treated, ovariectomized rats increased lordosis behavior. Midbrain microinfusions of antiserum to prolactin into rats displaying maximum lordosis had the opposite effect. The distribution of a prolactin-like substance in the brain was studied immunocytochemically. The results suggest that a hypothalamic neuronal system projecting to the midbrain contains a prolactin-like substance that plays a role in facilitating this behavior and therefore may mediate some of the effects of estrogen on the brain. These data, together with others from studies of the prolactin gene and its regulation, indicate that it may be possible to analyze a sequence of molecular events in the brain that facilitate a behavioral response.
Mesolimbic dopamine-releasing neurons appear to be important in the brain reward system. One behavioural paradigm that supports this hypothesis is intracranial self-stimulation (ICS), during which animals repeatedly press a lever to stimulate their own dopamine-releasing neurons electrically. Here we study dopamine release from dopamine terminals in the nucleus accumbens core and shell in the brain by using rapid-responding voltammetric microsensors during electrical stimulation of dopamine cell bodies in the ventral tegmental area/substantia nigra brain regions. In rats in which stimulating electrode placement failed to elicit dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens, ICS behaviour was not learned. In contrast, ICS was acquired when stimulus trains evoked extracellular dopamine in either the core or the shell of the nucleus accumbens. In animals that could learn ICS, experimenter-delivered stimulation always elicited dopamine release. In contrast, extracellular dopamine was rarely observed during ICS itself. Thus, although activation of mesolimbic dopamine-releasing neurons seems to be a necessary condition for ICS, evoked dopamine release is actually diminished during ICS. Dopamine may therefore be a neural substrate for novelty or reward expectation rather than reward itself.
Neurons in deep laminae of the rabbit cingulate cortex develop discriminative activity at an early stage of behavioral discrimination learning, whereas neurons in the anteroventral nucleus of thalamus and neurons in the superficial cortical laminae develop such activity in a late stage of behavioral learning. It is hypothesized that early-forming discriminative neuronal activity, relayed to anteroventral neurons via the corticothalamic pathway, contributes to the construction of changes underlying the late-forming neuronal discrimination in the anteroventral nucleus. The resultant late discriminative activity in the anteroventral nucleus is then relayed via the thalamocortical pathway back to the superficial cortical laminae, promoting disengagement of cortex from further task-processing.
Medial temporal brain regions such as the hippocampal formation and parahippocampal cortex have been generally implicated in navigation and visual memory. However, the specific function of each of these regions is not yet clear. Here we present evidence that a particular area within human parahippocampal cortex is involved in a critical component of navigation: perceiving the local visual environment. This region, which we name the 'parahippocampal place area' (PPA), responds selectively and automatically in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to passively viewed scenes, but only weakly to single objects and not at all to faces. The critical factor for this activation appears to be the presence in the stimulus of information about the layout of local space. The response in the PPA to scenes with spatial layout but no discrete objects (empty rooms) is as strong as the response to complex meaningful scenes containing multiple objects (the same rooms furnished) and over twice as strong as the response to arrays of multiple objects without three-dimensional spatial context (the furniture from these rooms on a blank background). This response is reduced if the surfaces in the scene are rearranged so that they no longer define a coherent space. We propose that the PPA represents places by encoding the geometry of the local environment.
A physiological role for the dopamine D1 receptor has been difficult to define, particularly because of its complex pre- and postsynaptic localization in brain areas such as the striatum. In the midbrain, however, D1 receptors are selectively localized to the terminals of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-containing afferents. We have studied the actions of these D1 receptors on evoked GABA synaptic potentials recorded intracellularly from dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). We report here that dopamine augmented GABAB inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (i.p.s.ps) in the presence of D2 receptor antagonists. This effect was mimicked by the D1 agonists SKF38393 and SKF82958 and blocked by the D1 antagonists SCH23390 and cis-flupenthixol. No modulation of the GABAA synaptic potential was observed. The postsynaptic actions of the GABAB agonist, baclofen, were unaffected by SKF38393, SCH23390 or cis-flupenthixol, confirming a presynaptic locus of D1 action. Additionally, D1 antagonists reduced the amplitude of the GABAB i.p.s.p. in the absence of D1 agonists. We conclude that dopamine acts tonically at presynaptic D1 receptors on the terminals of afferent GABA neurons to facilitate selectively GABAB-mediated neurotransmission in the midbrain.
Stimulation of a site on the brain's left hemisphere prompts the creepy feeling that somebody is close by. The strange sensation that somebody is nearby when no one is actually present has been described by psychiatric and neurological patients, as well as by healthy subjects, but it is not understood how the illusion is triggered by the brain. Here we describe the repeated induction of this sensation in a patient who was undergoing presurgical evaluation for epilepsy treatment, as a result of focal electrical stimulation of the left temporoparietal junction: the illusory person closely 'shadowed' changes in the patient's body position and posture. These perceptions may have been due to a disturbance in the multisensory processing of body and self at the temporoparietal junction.
The mechanisms underlying experience-dependent plasticity in the brain may depend on the AMPA subclass of glutamate receptors (AMPA-Rs). We examined the trafficking of AMPA-Rs into synapses in the developing rat barrel cortex. In vivo gene delivery was combined with in vitro recordings to show that experience drives recombinant GluR1, an AMPA-R subunit, into synapses formed between layer 4 and layer 2/3 neurons. Moreover, expression of the GluR1 cytoplasmic tail, a construct that inhibits synaptic delivery of endogenous AMPA-Rs during long-term potentiation, blocked experience-driven synaptic potentiation. In general, synaptic incorporation of AMPA-Rs in vivo conforms to rules identified in vitro and contributes to plasticity driven by natural stimuli in the mammalian brain.
The ability of insects to learn and navigate to specific locations in the environment has fascinated naturalists for decades. The impressive navigational abilities of ants, bees, wasps and other insects demonstrate that insects are capable of visual place learning, but little is known about the underlying neural circuits that mediate these behaviours. Drosophila melanogaster (common fruit fly) is a powerful model organism for dissecting the neural circuitry underlying complex behaviours, from sensory perception to learning and memory. Drosophila can identify and remember visual features such as size, colour and contour orientation. However, the extent to which they use vision to recall specific locations remains unclear. Here we describe a visual place learning platform and demonstrate that Drosophila are capable of forming and retaining visual place memories to guide selective navigation. By targeted genetic silencing of small subsets of cells in the Drosophila brain, we show that neurons in the ellipsoid body, but not in the mushroom bodies, are necessary for visual place learning. Together, these studies reveal distinct neuroanatomical substrates for spatial versus non-spatial learning, and establish Drosophila as a powerful model for the study of spatial memories.
There are two types of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in the cerebral cortex. Fast inhibition is mediated by ionotropic gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABA(A)) receptors, and slow inhibition is due to metabotropic GABA(B) receptors. Several neuron classes elicit inhibitory postsynaptic potentials through GABA(A) receptors, but possible distinct sources of slow inhibition remain unknown. We identified a class of GABAergic interneurons, the neurogliaform cells, that, in contrast to other GABA-releasing cells, elicited combined GABA(A) and GABA(B) receptor-mediated responses with single action potentials and that predominantly targeted the dendritic spines of pyramidal neurons. Slow inhibition evoked by a distinct interneuron in spatially restricted postsynaptic compartments could locally and selectively modulate cortical excitability.
Intracisternal injection of ovine corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) into the pylorus-ligated rat or the rat with gastric fistula resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of gastric secretion stimulated with pentagastrin or thyrotropin-releasing hormone. When injected into the lateral hypothalamus--but not when injected into the cerebral cortex--CRF suppressed pentagastrin-stimulated acid secretion. The inhibitory effect of CRF was blocked by vagotomy and adrenalectomy but not by hypophysectomy or naloxone treatment. These results indicate that CRF acts within the brain to inhibit gastric acid secretion through vagal and adrenal mechanisms and not through hypophysiotropic effects.
The relation of cellular activity in the motor cortex to the direction of two-dimensional isometric force was investigated under dynamic conditions in monkeys. A task was designed so that three force variables were dissociated: the force exerted by the subject, the net force, and the change in force. Recordings of neuronal activity in the motor cortex revealed that the activity of single cells was directionally tuned and that this tuning was invariant across different directions of a bias force. Cell activity was not related to the direction of force exerted by the subject, which changed drastically as the bias force changed. In contrast, the direction of net force, the direction of force change, and the visually instructed direction all remained quite invariant and congruent and could be the directional variables, alone or in combination, to which cell activity might relate.
A large portion of the central catecholaminergic nerve terminals of the rat are destroyed by administering 6-hydroxydopamine (6-HDA) via the cerebrospinal fluid. Animals lesioned in this way often appear normal, yet show many subtle behavioural abnormalities. We have been examining one example of this phenomenon, the failure of 6-HDA-lesioned rats to increase food intake when given a systemic injection of 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) (refs 5, 6). This glucose analogue seems to elicit feeding in intact rats due to its inhibition of glycolysis in cerebral chemoreceptor cells. We have proposed that lesioned animals do not eat because of an insufficient central catecholaminergic response to the severe decrease in glucose utilisation induced by 2-DG (ref. 10). If so, then pretreatments which serve to augment this neurochemical response might be expected to reinstate behavioural function. Consistent with this hypothesis, very large increases in telencephalic tyrosine hydroxylase activity in 6-HDA-lesioned animals, which occur following chronic insulin treatment, are associated with the restoration of 2-DG-induced feeding. Many of the physiological effects of catecholamines in the sympathetic nervous system seem to be mediated by an increase in the cyclic AMP concentration of the target cells. Methylxanthenes, such as caffeine and theophylline, inhibit phosphodiesterase, prevent cyclic AMP degradation, and thereby potentiate the catecholamine-stimulated rise in cyclic nucleotide. They also enhance many of the behavioural and physiological effects of catecholamines, presumably by the same mechanism. We therefore sought to determine whether the acute administration of those sympathomimetic agents, in intact and 6-HDA-lesioned rats, also would potentiate 2-DG-induced feeding, a behaviour that seems to be mediated, in part, by central catecholaminergic neurons. We report that caffeine restores the 2-DG-induced feeding response.
Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) was originally isolated through its structural homology to human Cdc2, a key regulator of cell-cycle progression. In tissue samples from adult mice, Cdk5 protein is found at the highest level in brain, at an intermediate level in testis, and at low or undetectable levels in all other tissues, but brain is the only tissue that shows Cdk5 histone H1 kinase activity. No equivalent kinase activity has been found in tissue culture cell lines despite high levels of Cdk5. This raised the possibility that a Cdk5 regulatory subunit was responsible for the activation of Cdk5 in brain. Here we describe the cloning and characterization of a regulatory subunit for Cdk5 known as p35. p35 displays a neuronal cell-specific pattern of expression, it associates physically with Cdk5 in vivo and activates the Cdk5 kinase. p35 differs from the mammalian cyclins and thus represents a new type of regulatory subunit for cyclin-dependent kinase activity.
Altered sensory input can result in the reorganization of somatosensory maps in the cerebral cortex and thalamus, but the extent to which reorganization occurs at lower levels of the somatosensory system is unknown. In cat dorsal column nuclei (DCN), the injection of local anesthetic into the receptive fields of DCN neurons resulted in the emergence of a new receptive field in all 13 neurons studied. New receptive fields emerged rapidly (within minutes), sometimes accompanied by changes in adaptation rates and stimulus selectivity, suggesting that the new fields arose from the unmasking of previously ineffective inputs. Receptive field reorganization was not imposed by descending cortical inputs to the DCN, because comparable results were obtained in 10 additional cells when the somatosensory and motor cortex were removed before recording. These results suggest that mechanisms underlying somatotopic reorganization exist at the earliest stages of somatosensory processing. Such mechanisms may participate in adaptive responses of the nervous system to injury or continuously changing sensory stimulation.
The presence of a novel receptor for the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) on peripheral autonomic nerve terminals and in mammalian brain slices has been described recently. This receptor differs from the classical GABA site as it is unaffected by recognized GABA antagonists such as bicuculline and is not sensitive to the majority of accepted GABA-mimetics such as 3-aminopropanesulphonic acid (3-APS) or isoguvacine. We propose to designate the classical site as the GABA A and the novel site as the GABA B receptor. The beta-p-chlorophenyl derivative of GABA, baclofen, is stereospecifically active at the GABA B site whereas it is devoid of activity at the classical GABA A3 site. We now report that high-affinity saturable binding of 3H-baclofen and 3H-GABA to the GABA B site can be detected in fragments of crude synaptic membranes prepared from rat brain. The results support the concept of a novel GABA receptor within the mammalian brain and show that GABA and baclofen can compete for the same recognition site.
Synaptic transmission from excitatory nerve cells in the mammalian brain is largely mediated by AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid)-type glutamate receptors located at the surface of dendritic spines. The abundance of postsynaptic AMPA receptors correlates with the size of the synapse and the dimensions of the dendritic spine head. Moreover, long-term potentiation is associated with the formation of dendritic spines as well as synaptic delivery of AMPA receptors. The molecular mechanisms that coordinate AMPA receptor delivery and spine morphogenesis are unknown. Here we show that overexpression of the glutamate receptor 2 (GluR2) subunit of AMPA receptors increases spine size and density in hippocampal neurons, and more remarkably, induces spine formation in GABA-releasing interneurons that normally lack spines. The extracellular N-terminal domain (NTD) of GluR2 is responsible for this effect, and heterologous fusion proteins of the NTD of GluR2 inhibit spine morphogenesis. We propose that the NTD of GluR2 functions at the cell surface as part of a receptor-ligand interaction that is important for spine growth and/or stability.
Evoked activity in the mammalian cortex and the resulting behavioral responses exhibit a large variability to repeated presentations of the same stimulus. This study examined whether the variability can be attributed to ongoing activity. Ongoing and evoked spatiotemporal activity patterns in the cat visual cortex were measured with real-time optical imaging; local field potentials and discharges of single neurons were recorded simultaneously, by electrophysiological techniques. The evoked activity appeared deterministic, and the variability resulted from the dynamics of ongoing activity, presumably reflecting the instantaneous state of cortical networks. In spite of the large variability, evoked responses in single trials could be predicted by linear summation of the deterministic response and the preceding ongoing activity. Ongoing activity must play an important role in cortical function and cannot be ignored in exploration of cognitive processes.
The onset of vision occurs when neural circuits in the visual cortex are immature, lacking both the full complement of connections and the response selectivity that defines functional maturity. Direction-selective responses are particularly vulnerable to the effects of early visual deprivation, but it remains unclear how stimulus-driven neural activity guides the emergence of cortical direction selectivity. Here we report observations from a motion training protocol that allowed us to monitor the impact of experience on the development of direction-selective responses in visually naive ferrets. Using intrinsic signal imaging techniques, we found that training with a single axis of motion induced the rapid emergence of direction columns that were confined to cortical regions preferentially activated by the training stimulus. Using two-photon calcium imaging techniques, we found that single neurons in visually naive animals exhibited weak directional biases and lacked the strong local coherence in the spatial organization of direction preference that was evident in mature animals. Training with a moving stimulus, but not with a flashed stimulus, strengthened the direction-selective responses of individual neurons and preferentially reversed the direction biases of neurons that deviated from their neighbours. Both effects contributed to an increase in local coherence. We conclude that early experience with moving visual stimuli drives the rapid emergence of direction-selective responses in the visual cortex.
The response of single units in cuneate and gracile nuclei to cutaneous stimulation can be modified by prior stimulation of the motor cortex of the cat. Both excitation and inhibition of these neurons can be effected via the pyramidal tract.
The cellular phenomena underlying focal epilepsy are currently understood in the context of contemporary concepts of cellular and synaptic function. Interictal discharges appear to be due to a combination of synaptic events and intrinsic currents, the exact proportion of which in any given neuron may vary according to the anatomic and functional substrate involved in the epileptic discharge and the epileptogenic agent used in a given model. The transition to seizure appears to be due to simultaneous increments in excitatory influences and decrements in inhibitory processes--both related to frequency-dependent neuronal events. A variety of specific hypotheses have been proposed to account for the increased excitability that occurs during epileptiform activity. Although each of the proposed mechanisms is likely to contribute significantly to the epileptic process, no single hypothesis provides an exclusive unifying framework within which all kinds of focal epilepsy can be understood. The spread of epileptic activity throughout the brain, the development of primary generalized epilepsy, the existence of "gating" mechanisms in specific anatomic locations, and the extrapolation of hypotheses derived from simple models of focal epilepsy to explain more complex forms of human epilepsy, all are not yet fully understood.
A macromolecular alteration occurs at the posttranscriptional level in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain. Compared with age-matched controls, total cellular RNA and polyadenylated RNA were substantially reduced in the AD cortex with many neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. RNA changes are associated with a significant increase in alkaline ribonuclease activity due to an abnormality in the ribonuclease-inhibitor complex. The decrease in protein synthesis in the AD brain, previously observed in patients severely affected with AD, and in translation systems in vitro with AD cortical messenger RNA, may be partly related to an enzyme-inhibitor alteration that affects RNA levels and activity. Decreased protein synthesis therefore may contribute to the characteristic decline in certain neurotransmitter enzymes and to the loss of neurons in the AD brain.
A glycoprotein purified from chick brain, of relative molecular mass 42,000, increases the rate of appearance of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) on the surface of chick myotubes. RNase protection assays have shown that this AChR-inducing activity (ARIA) increases the amount of mRNA encoding the alpha-subunit of the AChR, with little or no effect on the amounts of gamma- and delta-mRNAs2. Here, we report that the mRNAs encoding the alpha- and gamma-subunits of the receptor detected by in situ hybridization are concentrated around nuclei in cultured myotubes. Consistent with previous results, ARIA selectively increased the amount of alpha-subunit mRNA, but we now find that all nuclei were not activated to the same extent, with a substantial number not responding at all. Assuming that ARIA is released by motor nerve terminals, our results indicate that only a subset of muscle nuclei are capable of contributing to the accumulation of AChRs at developing neuromuscular junctions.
Chemokines are small secreted proteins that stimulate the directional migration of leukocytes and mediate inflammation. During screening of a murine choroid plexus complementary DNA library, we identified a new chemokine, designated neurotactin. Unlike other chemokines, neurotactin has a unique cysteine pattern, Cys-X-X-X-Cys, and is predicted to be a type 1 membrane protein. Full-length recombinant neurotactin is localized on the surface of transfected 293 cells. Recombinant neurotactin containing the chemokine domain is chemotactic for neutrophils both in vitro and in vivo. Neurotactin messenger RNA is predominantly expressed in normal murine brain and its protein expression in activated brain microglia is upregulated in mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, as well as in mice treated with lipopolysaccharide. Distinct from all other chemokine genes, the neurotactin gene is localized to human chromosome 16q. Consequently we propose that neurotactin represents a new delta-chemokine family and that it may play a role in brain inflammation processes.
Olfactory sensory neurons detect a large variety of odor molecules and send information through their axons to the olfactory bulb, the first site for the processing of olfactory information in the brain. The axonal connection is precisely organized so that signals from 1000 different types of odorant receptors are sorted out in 1800 glomeruli in the mouse olfactory bulb. Individual glomerular modules presumably represent a single type of receptor and are thus tuned to specific molecular features of odorants. Local neuronal circuits in the bulb mediate lateral inhibition among glomerular modules to sharpen the tuning specificity of output neurons. They also mediate synchronized oscillatory discharges among specific combinations of output neurons and may contribute to the integration of signals from distinct odorant receptors in the olfactory cortex.
The ageing of the human brain is a cause of cognitive decline in the elderly and the major risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. The time in life when brain ageing begins is undefined. Here we show that transcriptional profiling of the human frontal cortex from individuals ranging from 26 to 106 years of age defines a set of genes with reduced expression after age 40. These genes play central roles in synaptic plasticity, vesicular transport and mitochondrial function. This is followed by induction of stress response, antioxidant and DNA repair genes. DNA damage is markedly increased in the promoters of genes with reduced expression in the aged cortex. Moreover, these gene promoters are selectively damaged by oxidative stress in cultured human neurons, and show reduced base-excision DNA repair. Thus, DNA damage may reduce the expression of selectively vulnerable genes involved in learning, memory and neuronal survival, initiating a programme of brain ageing that starts early in adult life.
The DJ-1 gene encodes a ubiquitous, highly conserved protein. Here, we show that DJ-1 mutations are associated with PARK7, a monogenic form of human parkinsonism. The function of the DJ-1 protein remains unknown, but evidence suggests its involvement in the oxidative stress response. Our findings indicate that loss of DJ-1 function leads to neurodegeneration. Elucidating the physiological role of DJ-1 protein may promote understanding of the mechanisms of brain neuronal maintenance and pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
Brodmann's area 44 delineates part of Broca's area within the inferior frontal gyrus of the human brain and is a critical region for speech production, being larger in the left hemisphere than in the right - an asymmetry that has been correlated with language dominance. Here we show that there is a similar asymmetry in this area, also with left-hemisphere dominance, in three great ape species (Pan troglodytes, Pan paniscus and Gorilla gorilla). Our findings suggest that the neuroanatomical substrates for left-hemisphere dominance in speech production were evident at least five million years ago and are not unique to hominid evolution.
Early neuroscientists scoured the animal kingdom for the ideal preparation with which to study specific problems of interest. Today, non-mammalian nervous systems continue to provide ideal platforms for the study of fundamental problems in neuroscience. Indeed, the peculiarities of body plan and nervous systems that have evolved to carry out precise tasks in unique ecological niches enable investigators not only to pose specific scientific questions, but also to uncover principles that are general to all nervous systems.
Thrombin, the central regulatory enzyme in coagulation, when incubated in nanomolar concentrations with murine neuroblastoma cells produced a rapid and marked increase in tritiated guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic GMP) formation that was blocked by hirudin and competitively antagonized by dansylarginine N-(3-ethyl-1,5-pentanediyl)amide. Diisopropylphosphofluoridate-inactivated thrombin as well as the serine protease trypsin were markedly less potent and less effective than alpha-thrombin in producing this effect. Thrombin-stimulated cyclic GMP formation was inhibited by mepacrine and nordihydroguaiaretic acid but unaffected by indomethacin, suggesting that lipoxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid are involved in the response. These results suggest that a thrombin-like protease in the brain may be involved with the function of neurons or that thrombin interactions with nerve cells, such as those following cerebral hemorrhage or other trauma of the central nervous system, may be important in the subsequent neuropathology.
As the interface between hippocampus and neocortex, the entorhinal cortex is likely to play a pivotal role in memory. To determine how information is represented in this area, we measured spatial modulation of neural activity in layers of medial entorhinal cortex projecting to the hippocampus. Close to the postrhinal-entorhinal border, entorhinal neurons had stable and discrete multipeaked place fields, predicting the rat's location as accurately as place cells in the hippocampus. Precise positional modulation was not observed more ventromedially in the entorhinal cortex or upstream in the postrhinal cortex, suggesting that sensory input is transformed into durable allocentric spatial representations internally in the dorsocaudal medial entorhinal cortex.
In the hippocampus, which is phylogenetically older than the cerebral neocortex, high frequency stimulation of afferent pathways leads to long-term potentiation (LTP) of synaptic transmission. This use-dependent malleability is of considerable interest because it may serve as a substrate for memory processes. However, in the neocortex, whose involvement in learning is undisputed, attempts to demonstrate LTP have remained inconclusive. Here we use intracellular recording techniques to show that LTP can be induced by high frequency stimulation of the optic radiation in slices of the visual cortex of adult rats. We identify as a necessary prerequisite for the induction of LTP the activation of the membrane channel that is associated with the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor. Selective blockade of this receptor system with DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovalerate consistently prevents LTP as in most hippocampal pathways. In most cortical neurons the activation of the NMDA mechanism and hence the induction of LTP in these experiments requires a concomitant reduction of GABAergic inhibition by low doses of the GABAA antagonist bicuculline. This indicates that in the neocortex the activation threshold of the NMDA-mechanism and consequently the susceptibility to LTP, are strongly influenced by inhibitory processes.
Midbrain dopamine neurons are key components of the brain's reward system, which is thought to guide reward-seeking behaviours. Although recent studies have shown how dopamine neurons respond to rewards and sensory stimuli predicting reward, it is unclear which parts of the brain provide dopamine neurons with signals necessary for these actions. Here we show that the primate lateral habenula, part of the structure called the epithalamus, is a major candidate for a source of negative reward-related signals in dopamine neurons. We recorded the activity of habenula neurons and dopamine neurons while rhesus monkeys were performing a visually guided saccade task with positionally biased reward outcomes. Many habenula neurons were excited by a no-reward-predicting target and inhibited by a reward-predicting target. In contrast, dopamine neurons were excited and inhibited by reward-predicting and no-reward-predicting targets, respectively. Each time the rewarded and unrewarded positions were reversed, both habenula and dopamine neurons reversed their responses as the bias in saccade latency reversed. In unrewarded trials, the excitation of habenula neurons started earlier than the inhibition of dopamine neurons. Furthermore, weak electrical stimulation of the lateral habenula elicited strong inhibitions in dopamine neurons. These results suggest that the inhibitory input from the lateral habenula plays an important role in determining the reward-related activity of dopamine neurons.
Over the past 20 years, the technological impediments to fabricating electrodes of micrometer dimensions have been largely overcome. These small electrodes can be readily applied to probe chemical events at the surface of tissues or individual biological cells; they can even be used to monitor concentration changes within intact animals. These measurements can be made on rapid time scales and with minimal perturbation of the system under study. Several recent applications have provided important insights into chemical processes at cells and in tissues. Examples include molecular flux measurements at the surface of single cells and through skin-which can offer insights into oxidative stress, exocytosis, and drug delivery-and real-time brain neurotransmitter monitoring in living rats, which reveals correlations between behavior and molecular events in the brain. Such findings can promote interdisciplinary collaborations and may lead to a broader understanding of the chemical aspects of biology.
Sensory stimuli reach the brain via the thalamocortical projection, a group of axons thought to be among the most powerful in the neocortex. Surprisingly, these axons account for only approximately 15% of synapses onto cortical neurons. The thalamocortical pathway might thus achieve its effectiveness via high-efficacy thalamocortical synapses or via amplification within cortical layer 4. In rat somatosensory cortex, we measured in vivo the excitatory postsynaptic potential evoked by a single synaptic connection and found that thalamocortical synapses have low efficacy. Convergent inputs, however, are both numerous and synchronous, and intracortical amplification is not required. Our results suggest a mechanism of cortical activation by which thalamic input alone can drive cortex.
The discovery of the peptide hormone ghrelin, an endogenous ligand for the growth hormone secretagogue (GHS) receptor, yielded the surprising result that the principal site of ghrelin synthesis is the stomach and not the hypothalamus. Although ghrelin is likely to regulate pituitary growth hormone (GH) secretion along with GH-releasing hormone and somatostatin, GHS receptors have also been identified on hypothalamic neurons and in the brainstem. Apart from potential paracrine effects, ghrelin may thus offer an endocrine link between stomach, hypothalamus and pituitary, suggesting an involvement in regulation of energy balance. Here we show that peripheral daily administration of ghrelin caused weight gain by reducing fat utilization in mice and rats. Intracerebroventricular administration of ghrelin generated a dose-dependent increase in food intake and body weight. Rat serum ghrelin concentrations were increased by fasting and were reduced by re-feeding or oral glucose administration, but not by water ingestion. We propose that ghrelin, in addition to its role in regulating GH secretion, signals the hypothalamus when an increase in metabolic efficiency is necessary.
The blood/brain barrier prevents the passive diffusion of proteins and metabolites from cerebral blood vessels into tissue spaces around neuronal and glial cells. To provide nutrients for these cells, transport mechanisms must exist and indeed have been demonstrated for metabolites. We now show that monoclonal antibodies against rat and human transferrin receptors label blood capillaries in the brain but not in other tissues. In the rat this labelling occurs after injection of antibody into the blood, thus the receptors seem to be accessible at the endothelial surface. It is possible that transferrin receptors are expressed on these cells to allow transport of transferrin (and thus iron) into brain tissues.
The song control nuclei of the zebra finch brain contain more neurones of larger diameter in the male than in the female. This sexual dimorphism is thought to result from differential growth of neurones in the two sexes. Using neurohistological techniques and radioactive tracers, we have studied the development of several forebrain nuclei involved in the control of song and find that the dimorphism arises from neuronal atrophy and death in the female brain as well as from an increase in cell-body size and afferent terminals from other forebrain nuclei in the male. Although the timing of these events varies from nucleus to nucleus, the sequence is essentially similar in all of them except area X. Here we describe the events in one of these nuclei, the robust nucleus of archistriatum (RA), as an example.
Superficial lesions of the superior colliculus produced deficits in form discrimination, while deeper lesions produced, in addition, an inability to track objects. These two syndromes were related to an anatomical subdivision: Superficial lesions resulted in anterograde degeneration in the visual thalamus, whereas lesions confined to the deeper layers produced degeneration in the nonvisual thalamus and in brainstem motor areas.
Sleep is characterized by synchronized events in billions of synaptically coupled neurons in thalamocortical systems. The activation of a series of neuromodulatory transmitter systems during awakening blocks low-frequency oscillations, induces fast rhythms, and allows the brain to recover full responsiveness. Analysis of cortical and thalamic networks at many levels, from molecules to single neurons to large neuronal assemblies, with a variety of techniques, ranging from intracellular recordings in vivo and in vitro to computer simulations, is beginning to yield insights into the mechanisms of the generation, modulation, and function of brain oscillations.
Cocaine addiction is thought to involve persistent neurobiological changes that facilitate relapse to drug use despite efforts to abstain. But the propensity for relapse may be reduced by extinction training--a form of inhibitory learning that progressively reduces cocaine-seeking behaviour in the absence of cocaine reward. Here we show that extinction training during withdrawal from chronic cocaine self-administration induces experience-dependent increases in the GluR1 and GluR2/3 subunits of AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate) glutamate receptors in the nucleus accumbens shell, a brain region that is critically involved in cocaine reward. Increases in the GluR1 subunit are positively associated with the level of extinction achieved during training, suggesting that GluR1 may promote extinction of cocaine seeking. Indeed, viral-mediated overexpression of both GluR1 and GluR2 in nucleus accumbens shell neurons facilitates extinction of cocaine- but not sucrose-seeking responses. A single extinction training session, when conducted during GluR subunit overexpression, attenuates stress-induced relapse to cocaine seeking even after GluR overexpression declines. Our findings indicate that extinction-induced plasticity in AMPA receptors may facilitate control over cocaine seeking by restoring glutamatergic tone in the nucleus accumbens, and may reduce the propensity for relapse under stressful situations in prolonged abstinence.
Clinical studies consistently demonstrate that a single sub-psychomimetic dose of ketamine, an ionotropic glutamatergic NMDAR (N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor) antagonist, produces fast-acting antidepressant responses in patients suffering from major depressive disorder, although the underlying mechanism is unclear. Depressed patients report the alleviation of major depressive disorder symptoms within two hours of a single, low-dose intravenous infusion of ketamine, with effects lasting up to two weeks, unlike traditional antidepressants (serotonin re-uptake inhibitors), which take weeks to reach efficacy. This delay is a major drawback to current therapies for major depressive disorder and faster-acting antidepressants are needed, particularly for suicide-risk patients. The ability of ketamine to produce rapidly acting, long-lasting antidepressant responses in depressed patients provides a unique opportunity to investigate underlying cellular mechanisms. Here we show that ketamine and other NMDAR antagonists produce fast-acting behavioural antidepressant-like effects in mouse models, and that these effects depend on the rapid synthesis of brain-derived neurotrophic factor. We find that the ketamine-mediated blockade of NMDAR at rest deactivates eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2) kinase (also called CaMKIII), resulting in reduced eEF2 phosphorylation and de-suppression of translation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Furthermore, we find that inhibitors of eEF2 kinase induce fast-acting behavioural antidepressant-like effects. Our findings indicate that the regulation of protein synthesis by spontaneous neurotransmission may serve as a viable therapeutic target for the development of fast-acting antidepressants.
Receptor channels activated by glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain, are involved in processes such as long-term potentiation and excitotoxicity. Studies of glutamate receptor channels expressed in cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons reveal that these channels are subject to neuromodulatory regulation through the adenylate cyclase cascade. The whole-cell current response to glutamate and kainate [a non-NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor agonist] was enhanced by forskolin, an activator of adenylate cyclase. Single-channel analysis revealed that an adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-dependent protein kinase (PKA) increases the opening frequency and the mean open time of the non-NMDA-type glutamate receptor channels. Analysis of synaptic events indicated that forskolin, acting through PKA, increased the amplitude and decay time of spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors were administered to rats while the activities of single, serotonin-containing neurons of the midbrain raphe nuclei were being monitored with microelectrodes. All the inhibitors tested (pargyline, tranylcypromine, phenelzine, iproniazid) caused depression of raphe unit firing rate. The ability of monoamine oxidase inhibitors to depress raphe units was impaired by prior treatment with p-chlorophenylalanine, an inhibitor of serotonin synthesis.
The way that we perceive and interact with objects depends on our previous experience with them. For example, a bird expert is more likely to recognize a bird as a sparrow, a sandpiper or a cockatiel than a non-expert. Neurons in the inferior temporal cortex have been shown to be important in the representation of visual objects; however, it is unknown which object features are represented and how these representations are affected by categorization training. Here we show that feature selectivity in the macaque inferior temporal cortex is shaped by categorization of objects on the basis of their visual features. Specifically, we recorded from single neurons while monkeys performed a categorization task with two sets of parametric stimuli. Each stimulus set consisted of four varying features, but only two of the four were important for the categorization task (diagnostic features). We found enhanced neuronal representation of the diagnostic features relative to the non-diagnostic ones. These findings demonstrate that stimulus features important for categorization are instantiated in the activity of single units (neurons) in the primate inferior temporal cortex.
The clinical manifestations of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) often include neuropsychiatric and neurological deficits, including early memory loss and progressive dementia. HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), the aetiological agent of AIDS, is probably carried by infected macrophages in the central nervous system. The virus enters cells by binding its envelope glycoprotein gp120 to the CD4 antigen present on brain and immune cells. From the data reported in this paper, we now suggest that the neuronal deficits associated with HIV may not be entirely a result of infectivity, but that gp120 shed from HIV could directly produce the neuropathology as a result of its interference with endogenous neurotrophic substances. It is known that an analogue of a sequence contained in vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) occurs in all known sequenced gp120 isolates and that VIP is important for neuronal survival in cell culture. Here we show that purified gp120 from two diverse HIV isolates and a recombinant gp120 from a third isolate were all potent in specifically producing significant neuronal cell death in dissociated hippocampal cultures derived from fetal mice, and that this could be reduced by monoclonal antibodies against the murine CD4 antigen and completely antagonized by VIP.
The nucleus accumbens is a key mediator of cocaine reward, but the distinct roles of the two subpopulations of nucleus accumbens projection neurons, those expressing dopamine D1 versus D2 receptors, are poorly understood. We show that deletion of TrkB, the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) receptor, selectively from D1+ or D2+ neurons oppositely affects cocaine reward. Because loss of TrkB in D2+ neurons increases their neuronal excitability, we next used optogenetic tools to control selectively the firing rate of D1+ and D2+ nucleus accumbens neurons and studied consequent effects on cocaine reward. Activation of D2+ neurons, mimicking the loss of TrkB, suppresses cocaine reward, with opposite effects induced by activation of D1+ neurons. These results provide insight into the molecular control of D1+ and D2+ neuronal activity as well as the circuit-level contribution of these cell types to cocaine reward.
Retrograde axonal transport of horseadish peroxidase from areas 17 and 18 of the cat's visual cortex labels, principally, the small (X) and large (Y) cells, respectively, of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Quantitative analysis of the sizes of these morphologically identified neurons after monocular deprivation shows that the arrest of cell growth in the deprived laminae involves mainly Y cells.
A variety of extracellular signals are transduced across the cell membrane by the enzyme phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C-beta (PLC-beta) coupled with guanine-nucleotide-binding G proteins. There are four isoenzymes of PLC-beta, beta1-beta4, but their functions in vivo are not known. Here we investigate the role of PLC-beta1 and PLC-beta4 in the brain by generating null mutations in mice: we found that PLCbeta1-/- mice developed epilepsy and PLCbeta4-/- mice showed ataxia. We determined the molecular basis of these phenotypes and show that PLC-beta1 is involved in signal transduction in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus by coupling predominantly to the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, whereas PLC-beta4 works through the metabotropic glutamate receptor in the cerebellum, illustrating how PLC-beta isoenzymes are used to generate different functions in the brain.
Long-term administration of imipramine caused a decrease in serotonin2 receptor binding in rat brain cerebral cortex, an effect that was abolished by ovariectomy. In contrast, ovariectomy had no effect on imipramine-induced decreases in hippocampal serotonin or in cerebral cortical and hippocampal beta-adrenergic receptor binding. Administration of estradiol or progesterone separately or in combination reestablished the effect of imipramine treatment on cortical serotonin2 receptors. These results suggest that ovarian steroids may play an important, but subtle, role in the neurochemical and perhaps clinical response to this drug.
Sleep is a widespread biological phenomenon, and its scientific study is proceeding at multiple levels at the same time. Marked progress is being made in answering three fundamental questions: what is sleep, what are its mechanisms and what are its functions? The most salient answers to these questions have resulted from applying new techniques from basic and applied neuroscience research. The study of sleep is also shedding light on our understanding of consciousness, which undergoes alteration in parallel with sleep-induced changes in the brain.
Erythropoietin, a kidney cytokine regulating haematopoiesis (the production of blood cells), is also produced in the brain after oxidative or nitrosative stress. The transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) upregulates EPO following hypoxic stimuli. Here we show that preconditioning with EPO protects neurons in models of ischaemic and degenerative damage due to excitotoxins and consequent generation of free radicals, including nitric oxide (NO). Activation of neuronal EPO receptors (EPORs) prevents apoptosis induced by NMDA (N-methyl-d-aspartate) or NO by triggering cross-talk between the signalling pathways of Janus kinase-2 (Jak2) and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB). We show that EPOR-mediated activation of Jak2 leads to phosphorylation of the inhibitor of NF-kappaB (IkappaB), subsequent nuclear translocation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB, and NF-kappaB-dependent transcription of neuroprotective genes. Transfection of cerebrocortical neurons with a dominant interfering form of Jak2 or an IkappaBalpha super-repressor blocks EPO-mediated prevention of neuronal apoptosis. Thus neuronal EPORs activate a neuroprotective pathway that is distinct from previously well characterized Jak and NF-kappaB functions. Moreover, this EPO effect may underlie neuroprotection mediated by hypoxic-ischaemic preconditioning.
Phosphorylation of ion channels has been suggested as one molecular mechanism responsible for learning-produced long-term changes in neuronal excitability. Persistent training-produced changes in two distinct K+ currents (IA (ref. 2), IK-Ca (refs 3,4)) and a voltage-dependent calcium current (ICa; refs 3,4) have previously been shown to occur in type B photoreceptors of Hermissenda, as a result of associative learning. But the identity of the phosphorylation pathway(s) responsible for these changes has not as yet been determined. Injections of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase reduce a K+ current (IK) in B cells which is different from those changed by training, but fails to reduce IA and IK-Ca. Phosphorylase b kinase (an exogenous calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase) reduces IA, but whether IK-Ca and ICa are changed in the manner of associative training is not yet known. Another protein kinase present in high concentrations in both mammalian brain and molluscan nervous systems is protein kinase C, which is both calcium- and phospholipid-sensitive. We now present evidence that activation of protein kinase C by the tumour promoter phorbol ester (PDB) and intracellular injection of the enzyme induce conductance changes similar to those caused by associative training in Hermissenda B cells (that is a reduction of IA and IK-Ca, and enhancement of ICa). These results represent the first direct demonstration that protein kinase C affects membrane K+ ion conductance mechanisms.
Interruption of the ascending noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus in the rat forebrain with 6-hydroxydopamine produced a progressive accumulation, proximal to the lesion, of tritiated dihydroalprenolol binding activity over 2 days. This accumulation could be blocked by interrupting the neurons closer to their cell bodies. Competitive binding studies with the beta 2 agonist Zinterol suggested that the accumulated beta-receptors were primarily of the beta 1 subtype. These results suggest that, in the rat brain, some beta 1-adrenoreceptors are located in presynaptic, noradrenergic locus coeruleus neurons and are transported in their axons.
Many neurotransmitters, hormones and growth factors act at membrane receptors to stimulate the phosphodiesteratic hydrolysis of phosphatidyl-inositol 4,5-bisphosphate generating the comessengers inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P3) and diacylglycerol. Diacylglycerol stimulates protein kinase C3 while Ins(1,4,5)P3 is postulated to activate specific receptors leading to release of intracellular calcium, probably from the endoplasmic reticulum. In recent preliminary reports, Rubin and associates detected 32P-Ins(1,4,5)P3 binding to liver and adrenal microsomes and to permeabilized neutrophils and liver cells. We now report the biochemical and autoradiographic demonstration in brain of high affinity, selective binding sites for 3H- and 32P-labelled Ins(1,4,5)P3 at levels 100-300 times higher than those observed in peripheral tissues. The potencies of various myoinositol analogues at the Ins(1,4,5)P3 binding site correspond to their potencies in releasing calcium from microsomes, supporting the physiological relevance of this receptor. Brain autoradiograms demonstrate discrete, heterogeneous localization of Ins(1,4,5)P3 receptors. In some regions localizations of Ins(1,4,5)P3 receptors resemble those of protein kinase C14, while in others they differ markedly, suggesting a novel mechanism whereby the relative activity of the two limbs of the PI cycle can be differently regulated.
Whether memories can be suppressed has been a controversial issue in psychology and cognitive neuroscience for decades. We found evidence that emotional memories are suppressed via two time-differentiated neural mechanisms: (i) an initial suppression by the right inferior frontal gyrus over regions supporting sensory components of the memory representation (visual cortex, thalamus), followed by (ii) right medial frontal gyrus control over regions supporting multimodal and emotional components of the memory representation (hippocampus, amygdala), both of which are influenced by fronto-polar regions. These results indicate that memory suppression does occur and, at least in nonpsychiatric populations, is under the control of prefrontal regions.
More than 20 peptides have been identified in neurones of the brain, spinal cord and periphery. In several cases a peptide occurs together with a 'classical' transmitter in the same neurone. This raises new questions about the process of neurotransmission and may have important implications for our understanding and treatment of mental disorders.
After activation in mesoderm and neuroectoderm, expression of the Hoxb-1 gene is progressively restricted to rhombomere (r) 4 in the hindbrain. Analysis of the chick and mouse Hoxb-1 genes identified positive and negative regulatory regions that cooperate to mediate segment-restricted expression during rhombomere formation. An enhancer generates expression extending into r3 and r5, and a repressor limits this domain to r4. The repressor contains a conserved retinoic acid response element, point mutations in which allow expression to spread into adjacent rhombomeres. Retinoids and their nuclear receptors may therefore participate in sharpening segment-restricted expression of Hoxb-1 during rhombomere boundary formation.
The steroid hormones corticosterone and testosterone are supplied to the central nervous system by endocrine glands, the adrenals and gonads. In contrast, the 3 beta-hydroxy-delta 5-derivatives of cholesterol, pregnenolone and dehydroepiandrosterone, accumulate in the rat brain through mechanisms independent of peripheral sources. Immunohistochemical studies have been performed with specific antibodies to bovine adrenal cytochrome P-450scc, which is involved in cholesterol side-chain cleavage and pregnenolone formation. The enzyme was localized in the white matter throughout the brain. Scarce clusters of cell bodies were also stained in the entorhinal and cingulate cortex and in the olfactory bulb. These observations strongly support the existence of "neurosteroids," which have been posited on the basis of biochemical, physiological, and behavioral studies.
In the developing brain, transcription factors (TFs) direct the formation of a diverse array of neurons and glia. We identifed 1445 putative TFs in the mouse genome. We used in situ hybridization to map the expression of over 1000 of these TFs and TF-coregulator genes in the brains of developing mice. We found that 349 of these genes showed restricted expression patterns that were adequate to describe the anatomical organization of the brain. We provide a comprehensive inventory of murine TFs and their expression patterns in a searchable brain atlas database.
After injection of tritiated amino acid into the mouse eye, radioactivity appeared in the contralateral visual cortex, indicating that some material had been transferred from optic axons to lateral geniculate neurons. The radioactivity in the cortex was about 2 percent of that arriving in the geniculate, and most of it was contained in material that appeared to be protein.
It is controversial whether the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is involved in the maintenance of items in working memory or in the selection of responses. We used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging to study the performance of a spatial working memory task by humans. We distinguished the maintenance of spatial items from the selection of an item from memory to guide a response. Selection, but not maintenance, was associated with activation of prefrontal area 46 of the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex. In contrast, maintenance was associated with activation of prefrontal area 8 and the intraparietal cortex. The results support a role for the dorsal prefrontal cortex in the selection of representations. This accounts for the fact that this area is activated both when subjects select between items on working memory tasks and when they freely select between movements on tasks of willed action.
The olfactory system translates myriad chemical structures into diverse odour perceptions. To gain insight into how this is accomplished, we prepared mice that coexpressed a transneuronal tracer with only one of about 1,000 different odorant receptors. The tracer travelled from nasal neurons expressing that receptor to the olfactory bulb and then to the olfactory cortex, allowing visualization of cortical neurons that receive input from a particular odorant receptor. These studies revealed a stereotyped sensory map in the olfactory cortex in which signals from a particular receptor are targeted to specific clusters of neurons. Inputs from different receptors overlap spatially and could be combined in single neurons, potentially allowing for an integration of the components of an odorant's combinatorial receptor code. Signals from the same receptor are targeted to multiple olfactory cortical areas, permitting the parallel, and perhaps differential, processing of inputs from a single receptor before delivery to the neocortex and limbic system.
Brain-machine interfaces use neuronal activity recorded from the brain to establish direct communication with external actuators, such as prosthetic arms. It is hoped that brain-machine interfaces can be used to restore the normal sensorimotor functions of the limbs, but so far they have lacked tactile sensation. Here we report the operation of a brain-machine-brain interface (BMBI) that both controls the exploratory reaching movements of an actuator and allows signalling of artificial tactile feedback through intracortical microstimulation (ICMS) of the primary somatosensory cortex. Monkeys performed an active exploration task in which an actuator (a computer cursor or a virtual-reality arm) was moved using a BMBI that derived motor commands from neuronal ensemble activity recorded in the primary motor cortex. ICMS feedback occurred whenever the actuator touched virtual objects. Temporal patterns of ICMS encoded the artificial tactile properties of each object. Neuronal recordings and ICMS epochs were temporally multiplexed to avoid interference. Two monkeys operated this BMBI to search for and distinguish one of three visually identical objects, using the virtual-reality arm to identify the unique artificial texture associated with each. These results suggest that clinical motor neuroprostheses might benefit from the addition of ICMS feedback to generate artificial somatic perceptions associated with mechanical, robotic or even virtual prostheses.
Immunohistofluorescence studies of the rat central nervous system with antibodies to Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-NH2 (molluskan cardioexcitatory peptide) revealed a widespread neuronal system in the brain, spinal cord, and posterior pituitary. Immunoreactive axons and cell bodies were mainly located in cortical, limbic, and hypothalamic areas. Immunostaining of serial sections of the brain and pituitary showed that the Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-NH2 immunoreactive neurons were different from neurons labeled by antibodies to either Met-enkephalin or the putative Met-enkephalin precursor Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met-Arg-Phe, which is structurally related to Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-NH2. Control staining by antiserum absorption and radioimmunoassay indicated that the antibodies that caused the specific immunofluorescence recognized peptides with an amidated Arg-Phe sequence at the carboxyl terminus.
In foetal monkey brain neuronal projections carrying input from the two eyes initially overlap; they segregate during the second half of gestation and become fully separated in subcortical visual centres and partially separated in the cortex three weeks before birth and thus before visual experience.
Retrograde amnesia observed following hippocampal lesions in humans and animals is typically temporally graded, with recent memory being impaired while remote memories remain intact, indicating that the hippocampal formation has a time-limited role in memory storage. However, this claim remains controversial because studies involving hippocampal lesions tell us nothing about the contribution of the hippocampus to memory storage if this region was present at the time of memory retrieval. We therefore used non-invasive functional brain imaging using (14C)2-deoxyglucose uptake to examine how the brain circuitry underlying long-term memory storage is reorganized over time in an intact brain. Regional metabolic activity in the brain was mapped in mice tested at different times for retention of a spatial discrimination task. Here we report that increasing the retention interval from 5 days to 25 days resulted in both decreased hippocampal metabolic activity during retention testing and a loss of correlation between hippocampal metabolic activity and memory performance. Concomitantly, a recruitment of certain cortical areas was observed. These results indicate that there is a time-dependent reorganization of the neuronal circuitry underlying long-term memory storage, in which a transitory interaction between the hippocampal formation and the neocortex would mediate the establishment of long-lived cortical memory representations.
Membrane affinity for the neurotransmitter norepinephrine is rapidly but reversibly decreased in nerve terminals of the cerebral cortex by intense nervous stimulation. This should adaptively facilitate alerting during acute emergency and stress. The Michaelis constant (K(m)) for the high-affinity active uptake of norepinephrine into crude synaptosome-rich homogenates of the cerebral cortices of mice was increased 68 percent after 15 minutes of intense fighting and 110 percent 5 minutes after a single electroconvulsive shock. These changes were no longer evident 18 to 20 hours later.
Transection of a sensory nerve in adults results in profound abnormalities in sensory perception, even if the severed nerve is surgically repaired to facilitate accurate nerve regeneration. In marked contrast, fewer perceptual errors follow nerve transection and surgical repair in children. The basis for this superior recovery in children was unknown. Here we show that there is little or no topographic order in the median nerve to the hand after median nerve section and surgical repair in immature macaque monkeys. Remarkably, however, in the same animals the representation of the reinnervated hand in primary somatosensory cortex area (area 3b) is quite orderly. This indicates that there are mechanisms in the developing brain that can create cortical topography, despite disordered sensory inputs. Presumably the superior recovery of perceptual abilities after peripheral nerve transection in children depends on this restoration of somatotopy in the central sensory maps.
The recent discovery of mammalian bitter, sweet, and umami taste receptors indicates how the different taste qualities are encoded at the periphery. However, taste representations in the brain remain elusive. We used a genetic approach to visualize the neuronal circuitries of bitter and sweet tastes in mice to gain insight into how taste recognition is accomplished in the brain. By selectively expressing a transsynaptic tracer in either bitter- or sweet and/or umami-responsive taste receptor cells, and by comparing the locations of the tracer-labeled neurons in the brain, our data revealed the potential neuronal bases that underlie discrimination of bitter versus sweet.
Ubiquitin-positive, tau- and alpha-synuclein-negative inclusions are hallmarks of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Although the identity of the ubiquitinated protein specific to either disorder was unknown, we showed that TDP-43 is the major disease protein in both disorders. Pathologic TDP-43 was hyper-phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, and cleaved to generate C-terminal fragments and was recovered only from affected central nervous system regions, including hippocampus, neocortex, and spinal cord. TDP-43 represents the common pathologic substrate linking these neurodegenerative disorders.
Conversion of new memories into a lasting form may involve the gradual refinement and linking together of neural representations stored widely throughout neocortex. This consolidation process may require coordinated reactivation of distributed components of memory traces while the cortex is "offline," i.e., not engaged in processing external stimuli. Simultaneous neural ensemble recordings from four sites in the macaque neocortex revealed such coordinated reactivation. In motor, somatosensory, and parietal cortex (but not prefrontal cortex), the behaviorally induced correlation structure and temporal patterning of neural ensembles within and between regions were preserved, confirming a major tenet of the trace-reactivation theory of memory consolidation.
The identification of brain structures and connections involved in memory functions has depended largely on clinico-pathological studies of memory-impaired patients, and more recently on studies of a primate model of human amnesia. But quantitative neurobehavioural data and detailed neuropathological information are rarely available for the same patients. One case has demonstrated that selective bilateral damage to the hippocampus causes a circumscribed memory impairment in the absence of other intellectual deficits. This finding, in conjunction with evidence from humans and monkeys, indicates that the hippocampus together with adjacent and anatomically related structures is essential for the formation of long-term memory, perhaps by virtue of the extensive reciprocal connections between the hippocampal formation and putative memory storage sites in the neocortex. Although cognitive studies of amnesia provide useful information about the functional organization of normal memory, it has not usually been possible to relate memory impairment to anatomy in living patients. We have developed a high-resolution protocol for imaging the human hippocampus with magnetic resonance that permits visualization of the hippocampal formation in substantial cytoarchitectonic detail, revealing abnormalities in patients with severe and selective memory impairment.
As a first step in a program to use genetically altered mice in the study of memory mechanisms, mutant mice were produced that do not express the alpha-calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase II (alpha-CaMKII). The alpha-CaMKII is highly enriched in postsynaptic densities of hippocampus and neocortex and may be involved in the regulation of long-term potentiation (LTP). Such mutant mice exhibited mostly normal behaviors and presented no obvious neuroanatomical defects. Whole cell recordings reveal that postsynaptic mechanisms, including N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor function, are intact. Despite normal postsynaptic mechanisms, these mice are deficient in their ability to produce LTP and are therefore a suitable model for studying the relation between LTP and learning processes.
Individual neural progenitors generate different cell types in a reproducible order in the retina, cerebral cortex and probably in the spinal cord. It is unknown how neural progenitors change over time to generate different cell types. It has been proposed that progenitors undergo progressive restriction or transit through distinct competence states; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. Here we investigate neural progenitor competence and temporal identity using an in vivo genetic system--Drosophila neuroblasts--where the Hunchback transcription factor is necessary and sufficient to specify early-born cell types. We show that neuroblasts gradually lose competence to generate early-born fates in response to Hunchback, similar to progressive restriction models, and that competence to acquire early-born fates is present in mitotic precursors but is lost in post-mitotic neurons. These results match those observed in vertebrate systems, and establish Drosophila neuroblasts as a model system for the molecular genetic analysis of neural progenitor competence and plasticity.
Deafferented somatosensory thalamic neurons showed hyperactivity, followed by greatly reduced activity, after initiation of cortical spreading depression; local cooling of sensorimotor cortex was followed only by the inactive phase. Stimulation of contralateral midbrain reticular formation during the inactive phase failed to induce the typical increase in discharge rate of somatosensory thalamic neurons, but produced desynchronization in unaffected cortex. These results indicate that corticothalamic discharge is necessary for sustaining the ongoing activity of deafferented somatosensory thalamic neurons and for maintaining their responsiveness to stimulation of the reticular formation.
The sequence of glucagon-like peptide-1 (7-36) amide (GLP-1) is completely conserved in all mammalian species studied, implying that it plays a critical physiological role. We have shown that GLP-1 and its specific receptors are present in the hypothalamus. No physiological role for central GLP-1 has been established. We report here that intracerebroventricular (ICV) GLP-1 powerfully inhibits feeding in fasted rats. ICV injection of the specific GLP-1-receptor antagonist, exendin (9-39), blocked the inhibitory effect of GLP-1 on food intake. Exendin (9-39) alone had no influence on fast-induced feeding but more than doubled food intake in satiated rats, and augmented the feeding response to the appetite stimulant, neuropeptide Y. Induction of c-fos is a marker of neuronal activation. Following ICV GLP-1 injection, c-fos appeared exclusively in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and central nucleus of the amygdala, and this was inhibited by prior administration of exendin (9-39). Both of these regions of the brain are of primary importance in the regulation of feeding. These findings suggest that central GLP-1 is a new physiological mediator of satiety.
Neurons process and transmit information in the form of electrical signals. Their electrical excitability is due to the presence of voltage-sensitive ion channels in the neuronal plasma membrane. In recent years, the voltage-sensitive sodium channel of mammalian brain has become the first of these important neuronal components to be studied at the molecular level. This article describes the distribution of sodium channels among the functional compartments of the neuron and reviews work leading to the identification, purification, and characterization of this membrane glycoprotein.
Cortical neurons communicate with various cortical and subcortical targets by way of stereotyped axon projections through the white matter. Slice overlay experiments indicate that the initial growth of cortical axons toward the white matter is regulated by a diffusible chemorepulsive signal localized near the marginal zone. Semaphorin III is a major component of this diffusible signal, and cortical neurons transduce this signal by way of the neuropilin-1 receptor. These observations indicate that semaphorin-neuropilin interactions play a critical role in the initial patterning of projections in the developing cortex.
Target cells are thought to regulate the survival of afferent neurons during development by supplying limiting amounts of neurotrophic factors, but the degree to which afferent neurons remain dependent on target-derived support in the adult is uncertain. In this study, uninjured basal forebrain cholinergic neurons did not die after excitotoxic ablation of their target neurons in young adult rats, indicating that they are either not dependent on neurotrophic factors for survival or can obtain trophic support from other sources after target neurons are lost. This finding suggests that cholinergic cell death in neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease is not due solely to a loss of target neurons or factors provided by them.
Breathing movements in mammals arise from a rhythmic pattern of neural activity, thought to originate in the pre-Botzinger complex in the lower brainstem. The mechanisms generating the neural rhythm in this region are unknown. The central question is whether the rhythm is generated by a network of bursting pacemaker neurons coupled by excitatory synapses that synchronize pacemaker activity. Here we visualized the activity of inspiratory pacemaker neurons at single-cell and population levels with calcium-sensitive dye. We developed methods to label these neurons retrogradely with the dye in neonatal rodent brainstem slices that retain the rhythmically active respiratory network. We simultaneously used infrared structural imaging to allow patch-clamp recording from the identified neurons. After we pharmacologically blocked glutamatergic synaptic transmission, a subpopulation of inspiratory neurons continued to burst rhythmically but asynchronously. The intrinsic bursting frequency of these pacemaker neurons depended on the baseline membrane potential, providing a cellular mechanism for respiratory frequency control. These results provide evidence that the neuronal kernel for rhythm generation consists of a network of synaptically-coupled pacemaker neurons.
AMPA glutamate receptors mediate the majority of rapid excitatory synaptic transmission in the central nervous system and play a role in the synaptic plasticity underlying learning and memory. AMPA receptors are heteromeric complexes of four homologous subunits (GluR1-4) that differentially combine to form a variety of AMPA receptor subtypes. These subunits are thought to have a large extracellular amino-terminal domain, three transmembrane domains and an intracellular carboxy-terminal domain. AMPA receptors are localized at excitatory synapses and are not found on adjacent inhibitory synapses enriched in GABA(A) receptors. The targeting of neurotransmitter receptors, such as AMPA receptors, and ion channels to synapses is essential for efficient transmission. A protein motif called a PDZ domain is important in the targeting of a variety of membrane proteins to cell-cell junctions including synapses. Here we identify a synaptic PDZ domain-containing protein GRIP (glutamate receptor interacting protein) that specifically interacts with the C termini of AMPA receptors. GRIP is a new member of the PDZ domain-containing protein family which has seven PDZ domains and no catalytic domain. GRIP appears to serve as an adapter protein that links AMPA receptors to other proteins and may be critical for the clustering of AMPA receptors at excitatory synapses in the brain.
No one knows what causes depression, although many neuroscientists blame an imbalance of brain chemicals, so-called neurotransmitters, especially those that affect the brain's pleasure responses. Now a few neuroscientists are converging on a radical, but complementary, theory: that depression may be caused by a lack of new cell growth in the brain. The recent discovery that the brain keeps producing neurons into adulthood has given this highly speculative theory at least one leg to stand on.
Two color-separation positive transparencies of a scene, one projected with "red" light and the other with tungsten lamp light, were superimposed on a screen. The light was polarized so that an observer wearing an appropriate viewer could either see both images in each eye or the "red" image in one eye and the "white" image in the other. These two situations gave different results, not the same results, as some previous investigators have claimed. Land's major results cannot be "obtained stereoscopically." We conclude that the process by which color is formed could possibly be a process of the retina or the lateral geniculate body, and does not necessarily have to be a process of the cerebral cortex as implied by the binocular experiments which purported to give the fuller gamut of color.
Neuromodulators such as dopamine have a central role in cognitive disorders. In the past decade, biological findings on dopamine function have been infused with concepts taken from computational theories of reinforcement learning. These more abstract approaches have now been applied to describe the biological algorithms at play in our brains when we form value judgements and make choices. The application of such quantitative models has opened up new fields, ripe for attack by young synthesizers and theoreticians.
Adrenergic and cholinergic stimulation of several interrelated limbic and diencephalic areas causes the animal to eat and drink, respectively. The brain areas involved may be organized in terms of "Papez circuit" and, more generally, " Nauta circuit" neuroanatomy. However, it is proposed that separate synaptic nets, one for the control of hunger and one for the control of thirst, are deployed throughout the brain at all levels, including neocortical.
Vascular casts of the pituitary gland have demonstrated a paucity of veins extending from the adenohypophysis to the systemic circulation and have suggested that some adenohypophyseal venous blood returns to the neurohypophysis. The neurohypophyseal capillary bed may function as a vascular switch and in this article a series of 14 questions are proposed regarding the vascular dynamics of the pituitary. Together these questions raise the larger question, namely, whether pituitary hormones are transported directly to the brain to modify brain function?
In the adult brain, new synapses are formed and pre-existing ones are lost, but the function of this structural plasticity has remained unclear. Learning of new skills is correlated with formation of new synapses. These may directly encode new memories, but they may also have more general roles in memory encoding and retrieval processes. Here we investigated how mossy fibre terminal complexes at the entry of hippocampal and cerebellar circuits rearrange upon learning in mice, and what is the functional role of the rearrangements. We show that one-trial and incremental learning lead to robust, circuit-specific, long-lasting and reversible increases in the numbers of filopodial synapses onto fast-spiking interneurons that trigger feedforward inhibition. The increase in feedforward inhibition connectivity involved a majority of the presynaptic terminals, restricted the numbers of c-Fos-expressing postsynaptic neurons at memory retrieval, and correlated temporally with the quality of the memory. We then show that for contextual fear conditioning and Morris water maze learning, increased feedforward inhibition connectivity by hippocampal mossy fibres has a critical role for the precision of the memory and the learned behaviour. In the absence of mossy fibre long-term potentiation in Rab3a(-/-) mice, c-Fos ensemble reorganization and feedforward inhibition growth were both absent in CA3 upon learning, and the memory was imprecise. By contrast, in the absence of adducin 2 (Add2; also known as b-adducin) c-Fos reorganization was normal, but feedforward inhibition growth was abolished. In parallel, c-Fos ensembles in CA3 were greatly enlarged, and the memory was imprecise. Feedforward inhibition growth and memory precision were both rescued by re-expression of Add2 specifically in hippocampal mossy fibres. These results establish a causal relationship between learning-related increases in the numbers of defined synapses and the precision of learning and memory in the adult. The results further relate plasticity and feedforward inhibition growth at hippocampal mossy fibres to the precision of hippocampus-dependent memories.
How do animals discriminate self-generated from external stimuli during behavior and prevent desensitization of their sensory pathways? A fundamental concept in neuroscience states that neural signals, termed corollary discharges or efference copies, are forwarded from motor to sensory areas. Neurons mediating these signals have proved difficult to identify. We show that a single, multisegmental interneuron is responsible for the pre- and postsynaptic inhibition of auditory neurons in singing crickets (Gryllus bimaculatus). Therefore, this neuron represents a corollary discharge interneuron that provides a neuronal basis for the central control of sensory responses.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus markedly improves the motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease, but causes cognitive side effects such as impulsivity. We showed that DBS selectively interferes with the normal ability to slow down when faced with decision conflict. While on DBS, patients actually sped up their decisions under high-conflict conditions. This form of impulsivity was not affected by dopaminergic medication status. Instead, medication impaired patients' ability to learn from negative decision outcomes. These findings implicate independent mechanisms leading to impulsivity in treated Parkinson's patients and were predicted by a single neurocomputational model of the basal ganglia.
Minced rat brain softened by treatment with trypsin is disrupted by filtration through nylon and steel meshes to produce a suspension of free-floating cells and debris. The cells are separated and purified by centrifugation on discontinuous sucrose gradients. Preparations of neuronal perikarya, retaining stumps of processes, so obtained are 90 percent pure and yield 33.6 x 10(6) cells per brain (3 milligrams, dry weight). The glial cells, apparently intact with extensive branched processess, are about 70 percent pure by weight and are obtained in a yield of 6.6 x 10(6) cells per brain (2 milligrams dry weight). The neurons are smaller and have less lipid than the glial cells.
Complex synaptic configurations which appear to have especial evolutionary and functional significance are shown in the neuropil of the brain of the planarian Dugesia dorotocephala. Some of the endings in these synaptic attachments contain dense core vesicles, suggesting that nonadrenaline or serotonin or both are neurotransmitters at a more primitive phyletic level than reported hitherto. The spatial proximity and connectivity of the synapses suggest modes of action permitting greater functional complexity to the planarian brain than previously supposed. Closely adjacent cellular processes which contain polysomal ribosomes, unusual in the neuropil, suggest synaptic transmission-protein synthesis coupling and a possible role in memory.
Nicotine exerts antinociceptive effects by interacting with one or more of the subtypes of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) that are present throughout the neuronal pathways that respond to pain. To identify the particular subunits involved in this process, we generated mice lacking the alpha4 subunit of the neuronal nAChR by homologous recombination techniques and studied these together with previously generated mutant mice lacking the beta2 nAChR subunit. Here we show that the homozygous alpha4-/- mice no longer express high-affinity [3H]nicotine and [3H]epibatidine binding sites throughout the brain. In addition, both types of mutant mice display a reduced antinociceptive effect of nicotine on the hot-plate test and diminished sensitivity to nicotine in the tail-flick test. Patch-clamp recordings further reveal that raphe magnus and thalamic neurons no longer respond to nicotine. The alpha4 nAChR subunit, possibly associated with the beta2 nAChR subunit, is therefore crucial for nicotine-elicited antinociception.
Impulsive choice is exemplified by choosing a small or poor reward that is available immediately, in preference to a larger but delayed reward. Impulsive choice contributes to drug addiction, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, mania, and personality disorders, but its neuroanatomical basis is unclear. Here, we show that selective lesions of the nucleus accumbens core induce persistent impulsive choice in rats. In contrast, damage to two of its afferents, the anterior cingulate cortex and medial prefrontal cortex, had no effect on this capacity. Thus, dysfunction of the nucleus accumbens core may be a key element in the neuropathology of impulsivity.
The anatomical connections from the whiskers to the rodent somatosensory (barrel) cortex form two parallel (lemniscal and paralemniscal) pathways. It is unclear whether the paralemniscal pathway is directly involved in tactile processing, because paralemniscal neuronal responses show poor spatial resolution, labile latencies and strong dependence on cortical feedback. Here we show that the paralemniscal system can transform temporally encoded vibrissal information into a rate code. We recorded the representations of the frequency of whisker movement along the two pathways in anaesthetized rats. In response to varying stimulus frequencies, the lemniscal neurons exhibited amplitude modulations and constant latencies. In contrast, paralemniscal neurons in both thalamus and cortex coded the input frequency as changes in latency. Because the onset latencies increased and the offset latencies remained constant, the latency increments were translated into a rate code: increasing onset latencies led to lower spike counts. A thalamocortical loop that includes cortical oscillations and thalamic gating can account for these results. Thus, variable latencies and effective cortical feedback in the paralemniscal system can serve the processing of temporal sensory cues, such as those that encode object location during whisking. In contrast, fixed time locking in the lemniscal system is crucial for reliable spatial processing.
In the development of the mammalian telencephalon, the genesis of neurons destined for the various layers of the cerebral cortex is preceded by the generation of a population of cells that comes to reside in the subplate and marginal zones (see ref. 2 for nomenclature). In the cat, these cells are present in large numbers during development, when their location is correlated with the arrival and accumulation of ingrowing axonal systems and with synapses. However, as the brain matures, the cells disappear and the white matter and layer 1 of the adult emerge. Their disappearance occurs in concert with the invasion of the cortical plate by the axonal systems and with the elimination of the synapses from the subplate. Here we report that the subplate cells have properties typical of mature neurons. They have the ultrastructural appearance of neurons and receive synaptic contacts. They also have long projections and are immunoreactive for MAP2 (microtubule associated protein 2). Further, subpopulations are immunoreactive for one of several neuropeptides. These observations suggest that during the fetal and early postnatal development of the mammalian telencephalon the subplate cells function as neurons in synaptic circuitry that disappears by adulthood.
Plasma human growth hormone responses to oral administration of 500 milligrams of L-dopa were analyzed in three groups of subjects: normals, age 20 to 32; normals, age 48 to 68; and unipolar depressed patients, age 45 to 68. While only 7 percent of the young normals had deficient human growth hormone responses to this stimulus, 36 percent of the older normals and 77 percent of the depressed patients failed to have adequate responses, suggesting an effect of age and a further effect of depressive illness. Because the release of human growth hormone appears to be closely related to brain catecholamine metabolism, the deficient responses in the depressed patients may provide further support to the concept of a neurochemical defect in depressive illness.
Many receptors for hormones, neurotransmitters and other signals cause hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2) and effect a rise in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration. The inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P3) liberated during PtdIns(4,5)P2 breakdown seems to serve as a second messenger that activates the release of Ca2+ from a nonmitochondrial intracellular compartment. As expected if it is an important intracellular messenger, Ins(1,4,5)P3 is relatively rapidly degraded, both within stimulated cells and when added to homogenates of blowfly salivary gland or to permeabilized, but not intact, hepatocytes. Here we report that the dephosphorylation reactions responsible for the conversion of Ins(1,4,5)P3 to free inositol in rat liver are catalysed by two or more enzymes, and that these reactions are distributed between the plasma membrane and cytosol. The Ins(1,4,5)P3 5-phosphatase and inositol 1-phosphate (Ins(1)P) phosphatase of liver appear similar to enzymes described previously in erythrocytes and brain.
Thrombolysis has become established as an acute treatment for human stroke. But despite multiple clinical trials, neuroprotective strategies have yet to be proved effective in humans. Here we discuss intrinsic tissue mechanisms of ischaemic brain injury, and present a perspective that broadening of therapeutic targeting beyond excitotoxicity and neuronal calcium overload will be desirable for developing the most effective neuroprotective therapies.
The body responds to stress by activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and release of glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoid production in the adult regulates carbohydrate and amino-acid metabolism, maintains blood pressure, and restrains the inflammatory response. In the fetus, exogenous glucocorticoids accelerate maturation of lung and gastrointestinal enzyme systems and promote hepatic glycogen deposition. Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), a 41-amino-acid neuropeptide produced in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and many regions of the cerebral cortex, has been implicated in both the HPA axis and behavioural responses to stress. To define the importance of CRH in the response of the HPA axis to stress and fetal development, we have constructed a mammalian model of CRH deficiency by targeted mutation in embryonic stem (ES) cells. We report here that corticotropin-releasing hormone-deficient mice reveal a fetal glucocorticoid requirement for lung maturation. Postnatally, despite marked glucocorticoid deficiency, these mice exhibit normal growth, fertility and longevity, suggesting that the major role of glucocorticoid is during fetal rather than postnatal life.
The neural basis of navigation by humans was investigated with functional neuroimaging of brain activity during navigation in a familiar, yet complex virtual reality town. Activation of the right hippocampus was strongly associated with knowing accurately where places were located and navigating accurately between them. Getting to those places quickly was strongly associated with activation of the right caudate nucleus. These two right-side brain structures function in the context of associated activity in right inferior parietal and bilateral medial parietal regions that support egocentric movement through the virtual town, and activity in other left-side regions (hippocampus, frontal cortex) probably involved in nonspatial aspects of navigation. These findings outline a network of brain areas that support navigation in humans and link the functions of these regions to physiological observations in other mammals.
Area 5 in the parietal lobe of the primate brain is thought to be involved in monitoring the posture and movement of the body. In this study, neurons in monkey area 5 were found to encode the position of the monkey's arm while it was covered from view. The same neurons also responded to the position of a visible, realistic false arm. The neurons were not sensitive to the sight of unrealistic substitutes for the arm and were able to distinguish a right from a left arm. These neurons appear to combine visual and somatosensory signals in order to monitor the configuration of the limbs. They could form the basis of the complex body schema that we constantly use to adjust posture and guide movement.
The cortex of the inferior parietal lobule in primates is important for spatial perception and spatially oriented behavior. Recordings of single neurons in this area in behaving monkeys showed that the visual sensitivity of the retinotopic receptive fields changes systematically with the angle of gaze. The activity of many of the neurons can be largely described by the product of a gain factor that is a function of the eye position and the response profile of the visual receptive field. This operation produces an eye position-dependent tuning for locations in head-centered coordinate space.
During mammalian cerebral corticogenesis, progenitor cells become progressively restricted in the types of neurons they can produce. The molecular mechanism that determines earlier versus later born neuron fate is unknown. We demonstrate here that the generation of the earliest born neurons, the Cajal-Retzius cells, is suppressed by the telencephalic transcription factor Foxg1. In Foxg1 null mutants, we observed an excess of Cajal-Retzius neuron production in the cortex. By conditionally inactivating Foxg1 in cortical progenitors that normally produce deep-layer cortical neurons, we demonstrate that Foxg1 is constitutively required to suppress Cajal-Retzius cell fate. Hence, the competence to generate the earliest born neurons during later cortical development is actively suppressed but not lost.
A newly identified class of neurons of the parietal cortex, studied in waking monkeys (Macaca mulatta), is activated by visual stimuli, perhaps via the retino-collicular visual pathway. This afferent input is thought to provide the visual cues activating the visuomotor mechanisms of the parietal lobe for the direction of visual attention.
Repeated stimulation of hippocampal neurons can induce an immediate and prolonged increase in synaptic strength that is called long-term potentiation (LTP)-the primary cellular model of memory in the mammalian brain. An early phase of LTP (lasting less than three hours) can be dissociated from late-phase LTP by using inhibitors of transcription and translation, Because protein synthesis occurs mainly in the cell body, whereas LTP is input-specific, the question arises of how the synapse specificity of late LTP is achieved without elaborate intracellular protein trafficking. We propose that LTP initiates the creation of a short-lasting protein-synthesis-independent 'synaptic tag' at the potentiated synapse which sequesters the relevant protein(s) to establish late LTP. In support of this idea, we now show that weak tetanic stimulation, which ordinarily leads only to early LTP, or repeated tetanization in the presence of protein-synthesis inhibitors, each results in protein-synthesis-dependent late LTP, provided repeated tetanization has already been applied at another input to the same population of neurons. The synaptic tag decays in less than three hours. These findings indicate that the persistence of LTP depends not only on local events during its induction, but also on the prior activity of the neuron.
Tau is one of the diverse group of microtubule-associated proteins that bind to microtubules and may thereby influence their structure and function. It occurs in the mammalian brain, mainly in axons, and is a component of the neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer's disease. Tau was recently sequenced, but there remains a short-age of structural data on the protein. We have now prepared paracrystals of tau suitable for electron microscopy and image processing. They show distinct transverse banding and polarity, indicating that the protein subunits are aligned with the same orientations. In contrast to other paracrystals, those of tau protein can stretch or contract continuously by more than three-fold; the axial repeats range from 22 to 68 nm. After scaling to a common period, the density distributions are closely superimposable. This suggests that tau is an elastic molecule.
Activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of glutamate receptors is implicated in the pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury. Here, the effects of mechanical injury on the voltage-dependent magnesium (Mg2+) block of NMDA currents in cultured rat cortical neurons were examined. Stretch-induced injury was found to reduce the Mg2+ blockade, resulting in significantly larger ionic currents and increases in intracellular free calcium (Ca2+) concentration after NMDA stimulation of injured neurons. The Mg2+ blockade was partially restored by increased extracellular Mg2+ concentration or by pretreatment with the protein kinase C inhibitor calphostin C. These findings could account for the secondary pathological changes associated with traumatic brain injury.
High-level circuits in the brain that control the direction of gaze are intimately linked with the control of visual spatial attention. Immediately before an animal directs its gaze towards a stimulus, both psychophysical sensitivity to that visual stimulus and the responsiveness of high-order neurons in the cerebral cortex that represent the stimulus increase dramatically. Equivalent effects on behavioural sensitivity and neuronal responsiveness to visual stimuli result from focal electrical microstimulation of gaze control centres in monkeys. Whether the gaze control system modulates neuronal responsiveness in sensory modalities other than vision is unknown. Here we show that electrical microstimulation applied to gaze control circuitry in the forebrain of barn owls regulates the gain of midbrain auditory responses in an attention-like manner. When the forebrain circuit was activated, midbrain responses to auditory stimuli at the location encoded by the forebrain site were enhanced and spatial selectivity was sharpened. The same stimulation suppressed responses to auditory stimuli represented at other locations in the midbrain map. Such space-specific, top-down regulation of auditory responses by gaze control circuitry in the barn owl suggests that the central nervous system uses a common strategy for dynamically regulating sensory gain that applies across modalities, brain areas and classes of vertebrate species. This approach provides a path for discovering mechanisms that underlie top-down gain control in the central nervous system.
Associations between proteins present on neurotransmitter-containing vesicles and on the presynaptic membrane are thought to underlie docking and fusion of synaptic vesicles with the plasma membrane, which are obligate steps in regulated neurotransmission. SNAP-25 resides on the plasma membrane and interacts with syntaxin (a plasma membrane t-SNARE) and VAMP (a vesicle v-SNARE) to form a core protein complex thought to be an intermediate in a biochemical pathway that is essential for vesicular transport. We have now characterized a protein, Hrs-2, that interacts with SNAP-25. The binding of Hrs-2 to SNAP-25 is inhibited by calcium in the physiological concentration range that supports synaptic transmission. Furthermore, Hrs-2 binds and hydrolyses nucleoside triphosphates with kinetics that suggest that ATP is the physiological substrate for this enzyme. Hrs-2 is expressed throughout the brain and is present in nerve terminals. Moreover, recombinant Hrs-2 inhibits calcium-triggered 3H-noradrenaline release from permeabilized PC12 cells. Our results suggest a role for Hrs-2 in regulating secretory processes through calcium- and nucleotide-dependent modulation of vesicle-trafficking protein complexes.
During ageing of the human brain, and particularly in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type (AD), many neurones progressively accumulate abnormal cytoplasmic fibres, called paired helical filaments (PHF). Each such fibre consists of a pair of intermediate (10 nm) filaments twisted into a double helix with a periodicity of 160 nm. PHF accumulate in large perikaryal masses, called neurofibrillary tangles, and are also found in degenerating cortical neurites that form neurite plaques. The density of PHF-containing neurites and cell bodies correlates with the degree of dementia and the extent of loss of cholinergic neurotransmitter function in AD. Recently, we demonstrated that PHF from human cerebral cortex are large, rigid polymers with unusual molecular properties, including insolubility in SDS, urea and other denaturing solvents and apparent resistance to protease digestion. These properties have so far prevented complete purification and analysis of the constituents of PHF. Based on their insolubility, we have developed a new method of preparing highly enriched PHF fractions and have raised an antiserum that is highly specific for PHF. We report here that this antiserum specifically labels PHF, free of any associated normal fibrous proteins and, unexpectedly, it reacts with neither neurofilaments nor any other normal cytoskeletal protein in brain sections or on immunoblotted gels. These anti-PHF antibodies have been used for the specific detection of Alzheimer-type PHF and in the search for cross-reacting antigens in various tissues, and are suitable for immunoaffinity purification of PHF. Our results indicate that PHF contain determinants that are not shared with normal neuronal fibrous proteins.
It has often been proposed that the vocal calls of monkeys are precursors of human speech, in part because they provide critical information to other members of the species who rely on them for survival and social interactions. Both behavioural and lesion studies suggest that monkeys, like humans, use the auditory system of the left hemisphere preferentially to process vocalizations. To investigate the pattern of neural activity that might underlie this particular form of functional asymmetry in monkeys, we measured local cerebral metabolic activity while the animals listened passively to species-specific calls compared with a variety of other classes of sound. Within the superior temporal gyrus, significantly greater metabolic activity occurred on the left side than on the right, only in the region of the temporal pole and only in response to monkey calls. This functional asymmetry was absent when these regions were separated by forebrain commissurotomy, suggesting that the perception of vocalizations elicits concurrent interhemispheric interactions that focus the auditory processing within a specialized area of one hemisphere.
Cultures derived from rat cerebral hemispheres were sequentially stained for acetylcholinesterase activity and for either somatostatin-like immunoreactivity or cholecystokinin-like immunoreactivity. Somatostatin-like immunoreactivity was found to coexist with acetylcholinesterase activity in individual neurons of several morphological subtypes, but cholecystokinin-like immunoreactivity and acetycholinesterase activity were never seen in the same neurons. These findings suggest a specific anatomical association, perhaps even an overlap, of the cholinergic and somatostatinergic systems in the mammalian cerebrum, and indicate that the combined deficiencies of somatostatin and cholinergic markers in Alzheimer's dementia and senile dementia of the Alzheimer type may be of pathophysiological importance.
In the vertebrate central nervous system, multipotential cells have been identified in vitro and in vivo. Defined mitogens cause the proliferation of multipotential cells in vitro, the magnitude of which is sufficient to account for the number of cells in the brain. Factors that control the differentiation of fetal stem cells to neurons and glia have been defined in vitro, and multipotential cells with similar signaling logic can be cultured from the adult central nervous system. Transplanting cells to new sites emphasizes that neuroepithelial cells have the potential to integrate into many brain regions. These results focus attention on how information in external stimuli is translated into the number and types of differentiated cells in the brain. The development of therapies for the reconstruction of the diseased or injured brain will be guided by our understanding of the origin and stability of cell type in the central nervous system.
The ability to silence the activity of genetically specified neurons in a temporally precise fashion would provide the opportunity to investigate the causal role of specific cell classes in neural computations, behaviours and pathologies. Here we show that members of the class of light-driven outward proton pumps can mediate powerful, safe, multiple-colour silencing of neural activity. The gene archaerhodopsin-3 (Arch) from Halorubrum sodomense enables near-100% silencing of neurons in the awake brain when virally expressed in the mouse cortex and illuminated with yellow light. Arch mediates currents of several hundred picoamps at low light powers, and supports neural silencing currents approaching 900 pA at light powers easily achievable in vivo. Furthermore, Arch spontaneously recovers from light-dependent inactivation, unlike light-driven chloride pumps that enter long-lasting inactive states in response to light. These properties of Arch are appropriate to mediate the optical silencing of significant brain volumes over behaviourally relevant timescales. Arch function in neurons is well tolerated because pH excursions created by Arch illumination are minimized by self-limiting mechanisms to levels comparable to those mediated by channelrhodopsins or natural spike firing. To highlight how proton pump ecological and genomic diversity may support new innovation, we show that the blue-green light-drivable proton pump from the fungus Leptosphaeria maculans (Mac) can, when expressed in neurons, enable neural silencing by blue light, thus enabling alongside other developed reagents the potential for independent silencing of two neural populations by blue versus red light. Light-driven proton pumps thus represent a high-performance and extremely versatile class of 'optogenetic' voltage and ion modulator, which will broadly enable new neuroscientific, biological, neurological and psychiatric investigations.
The mammalian hippocampus contains the neural circuitry that is crucial for cognitive functions such as learning and memory. The development of such circuitry is dependent on the generation and correct placement of the appropriate number and types of neurons. Mice lacking function of the LIM homeobox gene Lhx5 showed a defect in hippocampus development. Hippocampal neural precursor cells were specified and proliferated, but many of them failed to either exit the cell cycle or to differentiate and migrate properly. Lhx5 is therefore essential for the regulation of precursor cell proliferation and the control of neuronal differentiation and migration during hippocampal development.
Dogs were trained before operation on a go, no-go test with symmetrical reinforcement. Lesions situated on the medial surface of the prefrontal cortex caused slight or no impairment in retention, whereas removal of the lateral prefrontal cortex induced severe and long-lasting impairment. The lateral prefrontal cortex is probably related to selection of the proper instrumental responses to corresponding stimuli.
The effect of electrical stimulation of the midbrain reticular formation upon patterns of discharge of single lateral geniculate neurons was studied. Data were processed by means of a 256-channel scaler analyzer. The rate of spontaneous discharge of geniculate neurons was raised by electrical stimulation of the reticular formation and their ability to respond to intermittent light was enhanced.
Microglia are resident brain cells that sense pathological tissue alterations. They can develop into brain macrophages and perform immunological functions. However, expression of immune proteins by microglia is not synonymous with inflammation, because these molecules can have central nervous system (CNS)-specific roles. Through their involvement in pain mechanisms, microglia also respond to external threats. Experimental studies support the idea that microglia have a role in the maintenance of synaptic integrity. Analogous to electricians, they are capable of removing defunct axon terminals, thereby helping neuronal connections to stay intact. Microglia in healthy CNS tissue do not qualify as macrophages, and their specific functions are beginning to be explored.
Glutamate, the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, activates three different receptors that directly gate ion channels, namely receptors for AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl isoxozole propionic acid), NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate), and kainate, a structural analogue of glutamate. The contribution of AMPA and NMDA receptors to synaptic transmission and plasticity is well established. Recent work on the physiological function of kainate receptors has focused on the hippocampus, where repetitive activation of the mossy-fibre pathway generates a slow, kainate-receptor-mediated excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC). Here we show that high-intensity single-shock stimulation (of duration 200 microseconds) of primary afferent sensory fibres produces a fast, kainate-receptor-mediated EPSC in the superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Activation of low-threshold afferent fibres generates typical AMPA-receptor-mediated EPSCs only, indicating that kainate receptors may be restricted to synapses formed by high-threshold nociceptive (pain-sensing) and thermoreceptive primary afferent fibres. Consistent with this possibility, kainate-receptor-mediated EPSCs are blocked by the analgesic mu-opiate-receptor agonist Damgo and spinal blockade of both kainate and AMPA receptors produces antinociception. Thus, spinal kainate receptors contribute to transmission of somatosensory inputs from the periphery to the brain.
Patients with damage to the striate cortex have a subjectively blind region of the visual field, but may still be able to detect and localize targets within this region. But the relative roles in this 'blindsight' of subcortical neural systems, and of pathways to extra-striate visual areas, have been uncertain. Here we report results on two infants in whom one cerebral hemisphere, including both striate and extra-striate visual cortex, needed surgical removal in their first year. Single conspicuous targets in the half-field contralateral to the lesion could elicit fixations, implying detection and orienting by a subcortical system. In contrast, binocular optokinetic nystagmus (OKN), for which a subcortical pathway has often been thought adequate, showed a marked asymmetry. In normal neonates, fixation shifts and OKN have both been taken to reflect subcortical control; our results are consistent with subcortical control for fixation but not for OKN.
In sensory cortex regions, neurons are tuned to specific stimulus features. For example, in the visual cortex, many neurons fire predominantly in response to moving objects of a preferred orientation. However, the characteristics of the synaptic input that cortical neurons receive to generate their output firing pattern remain unclear. Here we report a novel approach for the visualization and functional mapping of sensory inputs to the dendrites of cortical neurons in vivo. By combining high-speed two-photon imaging with electrophysiological recordings, we identify local subthreshold calcium signals that correspond to orientation-specific synaptic inputs. We find that even inputs that share the same orientation preference are widely distributed throughout the dendritic tree. At the same time, inputs of different orientation preference are interspersed, so that adjacent dendritic segments are tuned to distinct orientations. Thus, orientation-tuned neurons can compute their characteristic firing pattern by integrating spatially distributed synaptic inputs coding for multiple stimulus orientations.
The claustrum is a telencephalic cell group (Fig. 1A, B) possessing widespread reciprocal connections with the neocortex. In this regard, it bears a unique and striking resemblance to the thalamus. We have now examined the anatomical ordering of pathways linking the claustrum with sensory areas of the cat neocortex and, in parallel electrophysiological experiments, have studied the functional organization of claustral sensory zones so identified. Our findings indicate that there are discrete visual and somatosensory subdivisions in the claustrum interconnected with the corresponding primary sensory areas of the neocortex and that the respective zones contain orderly retinotopic and somatotopic maps. A third claustral region receiving fibre projections from the auditory cortex in or near area Ep was found to contain neurones responsive to auditory stimulation. We conclude that loops connecting sensory areas of the neocortex with satellite zones in the claustrum contribute to the early processing of exteroceptive information by the forebrain.
Complex biological systems such as human language and the genetic code are characterized by explicit markers at the beginning and end of functional sequences. We report here that macaque prefrontal cortical neurons exhibit phasic peaks of spike activity that occur at the beginning and endpoint of sequential oculomotor saccade performance and have the properties of dynamic start- and end-state encoders accompanying responses to sequential actions. Sequence bounding may thus reflect a general mechanism for encoding biological information.
Neuronal networks in vivo are characterized by considerable spontaneous activity, which is highly complex and intrinsically generated by a combination of single-cell electrophysiological properties and recurrent circuits. As seen, for example, during waking compared with being asleep or under anesthesia, neuronal responsiveness differs, concomitant with the pattern of spontaneous brain activity. This pattern, which defines the state of the network, has a dramatic influence on how local networks are engaged by inputs and, therefore, on how information is represented. We review here experimental and theoretical evidence of the decisive role played by stochastic network states in sensory responsiveness with emphasis on activated states such as waking. From single cells to networks, experiments and computational models have addressed the relation between neuronal responsiveness and the complex spatiotemporal patterns of network activity. The understanding of the relation between network state dynamics and information representation is a major challenge that will require developing, in conjunction, specific experimental paradigms and theoretical frameworks.
The individual functional properties and spatial arrangement of afferent synaptic inputs on dendrites have a critical role in the processing of information by neurons in the mammalian brain. Although recent work has identified visually-evoked local dendritic calcium signals in the rodent visual cortex, sensory-evoked signalling on the level of dendritic spines, corresponding to individual afferent excitatory synapses, remains unexplored. Here we used a new variant of high-resolution two-photon imaging to detect sensory-evoked calcium transients in single dendritic spines of mouse cortical neurons in vivo. Calcium signals evoked by sound stimulation required the activation of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors. Active spines are widely distributed on basal and apical dendrites and pure-tone stimulation at different frequencies revealed both narrowly and widely tuned spines. Notably, spines tuned for different frequencies were highly interspersed on the same dendrites: even neighbouring spines were mostly tuned to different frequencies. Thus, our results demonstrate that NMDA-receptor-dependent single-spine synaptic inputs to the same dendrite are highly heterogeneous. Furthermore, our study opens the way for in vivo mapping of functionally defined afferent sensory inputs with single-synapse resolution.
Activation of microglia and inflammation-mediated neurotoxicity are suggested to play a decisive role in the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative disorders. Activated microglia release pro-inflammatory factors that may be neurotoxic. Here we show that the orderly activation of caspase-8 and caspase-3/7, known executioners of apoptotic cell death, regulate microglia activation through a protein kinase C (PKC)-d-dependent pathway. We find that stimulation of microglia with various inflammogens activates caspase-8 and caspase-3/7 in microglia without triggering cell death in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown or chemical inhibition of each of these caspases hindered microglia activation and consequently reduced neurotoxicity. We observe that these caspases are activated in microglia in the ventral mesencephalon of Parkinson's disease (PD) and the frontal cortex of individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Taken together, we show that caspase-8 and caspase-3/7 are involved in regulating microglia activation. We conclude that inhibition of these caspases could be neuroprotective by targeting the microglia rather than the neurons themselves.
The role of transcription in the development of electrical properties of neuronal membranes has been largely unexplored. To study the molecular events which result in the expression of these properties it is useful to describe the timing of the underlying RNA synthetic events. For example, the timing of the transcription involved in denervation-induced action potentials in frog slow muscle fibres and brain extract-induced sodium channels in chick muscle cells has been investigated. Previous studies of Xenopus laevis spinal neurones have established that the timing of the development of the neuronal action potential ionic dependence in dissociated cell cultures parallels that seen in vivo. This culture system, therefore, allows the determination of transcription-dependent periods necessary for the development of membrane properties known to have in vivo relevance. In the study described here, actinomycin D was used to examine the timing of the RNA synthetic events necessary for (1) neurite outgrowth and (2) development of the ionic dependence of the action potential. I report that inhibition of transcription at an early stage specifically blocks the appearance of the mature sodium-dependent action potential without affecting either neurite outgrowth or the development of delayed rectification.
Paired helical filaments (PHF), which constitute a distinct type of pathological neuronal fiber, are the principal constituent of neurofibrillary tangles that occur in the brain of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Their insolubility in sodium dodecyl sulfate and urea has prevented the analysis of their subunit composition by gel electrophoresis. A monoclonal antibody (DF2) was isolated that specifically labeled PHF at both the light and electron microscopic levels. It labeled a small polypeptide (5 kilodaltons) that was shown to be ubiquitin in immunoblots of the soluble fraction of brain homogenates. To obtain direct evidence that ubiquitin is a component of PHF, PHF were treated with concentrated formic acid and digested with lysylendopeptidase; ubiquitin-derived peptides were then identified by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography. Two fragments in the PHF digest were identified as derived from ubiquitin by protein sequencing. This procedure should make possible definitive identification of other PHF components.
Asymmetric divisions of radial glia progenitors produce self-renewing radial glia and differentiating cells simultaneously in the ventricular zone (VZ) of the developing neocortex. Whereas differentiating cells leave the VZ to constitute the future neocortex, renewing radial glia progenitors stay in the VZ for subsequent divisions. The differential behaviour of progenitors and their differentiating progeny is essential for neocortical development; however, the mechanisms that ensure these behavioural differences are unclear. Here we show that asymmetric centrosome inheritance regulates the differential behaviour of renewing progenitors and their differentiating progeny in the embryonic mouse neocortex. Centrosome duplication in dividing radial glia progenitors generates a pair of centrosomes with differently aged mother centrioles. During peak phases of neurogenesis, the centrosome retaining the old mother centriole stays in the VZ and is preferentially inherited by radial glia progenitors, whereas the centrosome containing the new mother centriole mostly leaves the VZ and is largely associated with differentiating cells. Removal of ninein, a mature centriole-specific protein, disrupts the asymmetric segregation and inheritance of the centrosome and causes premature depletion of progenitors from the VZ. These results indicate that preferential inheritance of the centrosome with the mature older mother centriole is required for maintaining radial glia progenitors in the developing mammalian neocortex.
Treatment efforts for cocaine addiction are hampered by high relapse rates. To map brain areas underlying relapse, we used electrical brain stimulation and intracranial injection of pharmacological compounds after extinction of cocaine self-administration behavior in rats. Electrical stimulation of the hippocampus containing glutamatergic fibers, but not the medial forebrain bundle containing dopaminergic fibers, elicited cocaine-seeking behavior dependent on glutamate in the ventral tegmental area. This suggests a role for glutamatergic neurotransmission in relapse to cocaine abuse. The medial forebrain bundle electrodes supported intense electrical self-stimulation. These findings suggest a dissociation of neural systems subserving positive reinforcement (self-stimulation) and incentive motivation (relapse).
Despite a rapidly-growing scientific and clinical brain imaging literature based on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) using blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signals, it remains controversial whether BOLD signals in a particular region can be caused by activation of local excitatory neurons. This difficult question is central to the interpretation and utility of BOLD, with major significance for fMRI studies in basic research and clinical applications. Using a novel integrated technology unifying optogenetic control of inputs with high-field fMRI signal readouts, we show here that specific stimulation of local CaMKIIalpha-expressing excitatory neurons, either in the neocortex or thalamus, elicits positive BOLD signals at the stimulus location with classical kinetics. We also show that optogenetic fMRI (of MRI) allows visualization of the causal effects of specific cell types defined not only by genetic identity and cell body location, but also by axonal projection target. Finally, we show that of MRI within the living and intact mammalian brain reveals BOLD signals in downstream targets distant from the stimulus, indicating that this approach can be used to map the global effects of controlling a local cell population. In this respect, unlike both conventional fMRI studies based on correlations and fMRI with electrical stimulation that will also directly drive afferent and nearby axons, this of MRI approach provides causal information about the global circuits recruited by defined local neuronal activity patterns. Together these findings provide an empirical foundation for the widely-used fMRI BOLD signal, and the features of of MRI define a potent tool that may be suitable for functional circuit analysis as well as global phenotyping of dysfunctional circuitry.
Vesicular glutamate transporters (VGLUTs) 1 and 2 show a mutually exclusive distribution in the adult brain that suggests specialization for synapses with different properties of release. Consistent with this distribution, inactivation of the VGLUT1 gene silenced a subset of excitatory neurons in the adult. However, the same cell populations exhibited VGLUT1-independent transmission early in life. Developing hippocampal neurons transiently coexpressed VGLUT2 and VGLUT1 at distinct synaptic sites with different short-term plasticity. The loss of VGLUT1 also reduced the reserve pool of synaptic vesicles. Thus, VGLUT1 plays an unanticipated role in membrane trafficking at the nerve terminal.
Concentrations of norepinephrine in lower brainstem and hypothalamus of genetically hypertensive rats are significantly lower than in control rats. There is a concomitant reduction (50 percent) in aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase but not in tyrosine hydroxylase activity. A possible relation of this central catecholamine deficiency to the hypertension is discussed.
Centre-surround receptive field organization is a ubiquitous property in mammalian visual systems, presumably tailored for extracting image features that are differentially distributed over space. In visual motion, this is evident as antagonistic interactions between centre and surround regions of the receptive fields of many direction-selective neurons in visual cortex. In a series of psychophysical experiments we make the counterintuitive observation that increasing the size of a high-contrast moving pattern renders its direction of motion more difficult to perceive and reduces its effectiveness as an adaptation stimulus. We propose that this is a perceptual correlate of centre-surround antagonism, possibly within a population of neurons in the middle temporal visual area. The spatial antagonism of motion signals observed at high contrast gives way to spatial summation as contrast decreases. Evidently, integration of motion signals over space depends crucially on the visibility of those signals, thereby allowing the visual system to register motion information efficiently and adaptively.
Touching warm and cool bars that are spatially interlaced produces a painful burning sensation resembling that caused by intense, noxious cold. We demonstrated previously that this thermal grill illusion can be explained as an unmasking phenomenon that reveals the central inhibition of pain by thermosensory integration. In order to localize this unmasking in the human brain, we have used positron emission tomography (PET) to compare the cortical activation patterns evoked by the thermal grill and by cool, warm, noxious cold and noxious heat stimuli. The thermal grill illusion produces activation in the anterior cingulate cortex, whereas its component warm and cool stimuli do not. This area is also activated by noxious heat or cold. Thus, increased activity in the anterior cingulate cortex appears to be selectively associated with the perception of thermal pain. Disruption of thermosensory and pain integration may account for the central pain syndrome that can occur after stroke damage.
In rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta), ablation of the premotor and supplementary motor areas and the adjoining rostral half of the precentral gyrus impairs the capacity of the contralateral arm to reach around a transparent obstacle to a visible food reward, and results in a tendency of this arm to reach around a transparent obstacle to a visible food reward, and results in a tendency of this arm to reach straight to where the food is visible. This may reflect a disinhibition of brainstem pathways which steer the arm and hand straight ot a visual target.
Working memory is a key function for human cognition, dependent on adequate dopamine neurotransmission. Here we show that the training of working memory, which improves working memory capacity, is associated with changes in the density of cortical dopamine D1 receptors. Fourteen hours of training over 5 weeks was associated with changes in both prefrontal and parietal D1 binding potential. This plasticity of the dopamine D1 receptor system demonstrates a reciprocal interplay between mental activity and brain biochemistry in vivo.
The neurotrophins nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, neurotrophin-3 and neurotrophin-4/5 promote the survival of subpopulations of vertebrate neurons in vitro, but so far only nerve growth factor has been demonstrated to be essential for normal neuronal development; no neurotrophin has previously been shown to function in normal glial cell development. We found recently that neurotrophin-3 promotes the survival of pure oligodendrocyte precursor cells in vitro, and, although by itself it induces only a small percentage of these cells to synthesize DNA, in combination with platelet-derived growth factor it induces the majority of them to do so. Neither of these factors, however, has been shown to contribute to oligodendrocyte precursor cell proliferation in vivo or to stimulate pure populations of these cells to proliferate (as opposed to synthesize DNA) in vitro. Here we show that neurotrophin-3 and platelet-derived growth factor collaborate to promote clonal expansion of oligodendrocyte precursor cells in vitro and to drive the intrinsic clock that times oligodendrocyte development. We also show that neurotrophin-3 helps stimulate the proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells in vivo and is thus required for normal oligodendrocyte development.
A purified, metabolically active preparation of brain microvessels was isolated from bovine cerebral cortex by using a simple procedure involving mild disruption of the tissue by homogenization and trapping of the vessels on nylon sieves. This preparation permits in vitro metabolic and structural studies of small blood vessels.
Voltage-dependent calcium channels mediate calcium entry into neurons, which is crucial for many processes in the brain including synaptic transmission, dendritic spiking, gene expression and cell death. Many types of calcium channels exist in mammalian brains, but high-affinity blockers are available for only two types, L-type channels (targeted by nimodipine and other dihydropyridine channel blockers) and N-type channels (targeted by omega-conotoxin). In a search for new channel blockers, we have identified a peptide toxin from funnel web spider venom, omega-Aga-IVA, which is a potent inhibitor of both calcium entry into rat brain synaptosomes and of 'P-type' calcium channels in rat Purkinje neurons. omega-Aga-IVA will facilitate characterization of brain calcium channels resistant to existing channel blockers and may assist in the design of neuroprotective drugs.
The rate of aerobic transformation of glucose-U-C(14) into radioactive amino acids by slices of rat-brain cortex is greatly influenced by the K(+)/Ca(++) ratio in the incubating medium. Protoveratrine has effects on the amino acid pattern resembling that due to an increase in the K(+)/Ca(++) ratio. These effects are antagonized by cocaine and may be correlated with the neurophysiological activities of these drugs.
The DJ-1 gene encodes a ubiquitous, highly conserved protein. Here, we show that DJ-1 mutations are associated with PARK7, a monogenic form of human parkinsonism. The function of the DJ-1 protein remains unknown, but evidence suggests its involvement in the oxidative stress response. Our findings indicate that loss of DJ-1 function leads to neurodegeneration. Elucidating the physiological role of DJ-1 protein may promote understanding of the mechanisms of brain neuronal maintenance and pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
Magnetic fields and electrical potentials produced by neuronal activity have different properties that can be used for the identification of electrical sources in the human brain. Fields and potentials occurring 20 to 30 milliseconds after median nerve stimulation in human subjects were compared in order to investigate the sources of evoked potential components that have been attributed by different investigators to the thalamus or thalamocortical afferents, to separate radial sources in somatosensory cortex and motor cortex, or to a tangential source in somatosensory cortex. The magnetic and potential wave forms were highly similar in morphology, and their spatial distributions were centered over sensorimotor cortex, were dipolar in shape, and differed in orientation by approximately 90 degrees; distances between the minimum and maximum of the magnetic distributions were about 60 percent of those of the potential distributions. These results cannot be accounted for by thalamic sources or radial cortical sources alone, but are consistent with a tangential source in somatosensory cortex, with an additional smaller contribution from radial sources.
The motor abnormalities of Parkinson's disease (PD) are caused by alterations in basal ganglia network activity, including disinhibition of the subthalamic nucleus (STN), and excessive activity of the major output nuclei. Using adeno-associated viral vector-mediated somatic cell gene transfer, we expressed glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), the enzyme that catalyzes synthesis of the neurotransmitter GABA, in excitatory glutamatergic neurons of the STN in rats. The transduced neurons, when driven by electrical stimulation, produced mixed inhibitory responses associated with GABA release. This phenotypic shift resulted in strong neuroprotection of nigral dopamine neurons and rescue of the parkinsonian behavioral phenotype. This strategy suggests that there is plasticity between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission in the mammalian brain that could be exploited for therapeutic benefit.
Maturation along the brainstem acoustic pathway, as well as the integrity of these structures, has been shown to be reflected in brainstem evoked potential recordings. Trajectories formed from repeated sequential measurements of several brainstem response variables reveal distinct developmental curves for healthy and high-risk infants. Longitudinal analysis offers a means of determining temporary or permanent maturational effects on the central nervous system in early life.
Clozapine exerts superior clinical efficacy and markedly enhances cortical dopamine output compared with classical antipsychotic drugs. Here the alpha2 adrenoceptor antagonist idazoxan was administered to rats alone or in combination with the D2/3 dopamine receptor antagonist raclopride. Dopamine efflux in the medial prefrontal cortex and conditioned avoidance responding were analyzed. Idazoxan selectively potentiated the cortical output of dopamine and augmented the suppression of conditioned avoidance responding induced by raclopride. These results challenge basic assumptions underlying the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia and provide insight into clozapine's mode of action.
The NAD-dependent deacetylase Sir2 was initially identified as a mediator of replicative lifespan in budding yeast and was subsequently shown to modulate longevity in worms and flies. Its mammalian homologue, SIRT1, seems to have evolved complex systemic roles in cardiac function, DNA repair and genomic stability. Recent studies suggest a functional relevance of SIRT1 in normal brain physiology and neurological disorders. However, it is unknown if SIRT1 has a role in higher-order brain functions. We report that SIRT1 modulates synaptic plasticity and memory formation via a microRNA-mediated mechanism. Activation of SIRT1 enhances, whereas its loss-of-function impairs, synaptic plasticity. Surprisingly, these effects were mediated via post-transcriptional regulation of cAMP response binding protein (CREB) expression by a brain-specific microRNA, miR-134. SIRT1 normally functions to limit expression of miR-134 via a repressor complex containing the transcription factor YY1, and unchecked miR-134 expression following SIRT1 deficiency results in the downregulated expression of CREB and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), thereby impairing synaptic plasticity. These findings demonstrate a new role for SIRT1 in cognition and a previously unknown microRNA-based mechanism by which SIRT1 regulates these processes. Furthermore, these results describe a separate branch of SIRT1 signalling, in which SIRT1 has a direct role in regulating normal brain function in a manner that is disparate from its cell survival functions, demonstrating its value as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of central nervous system disorders.
Rhythmic activity in the neocortex varies with different behavioral and pathological states and in some cases may encode sensory information. However, the neural mechanisms of these oscillations are largely unknown. Many pyramidal neurons in layer 5 of the neocortex showed prolonged, 5- to 12-hertz rhythmic firing patterns at threshold. Rhythmic firing was due to intrinsic membrane properties, sodium conductances were essential for rhythmicity, and calcium-dependent conductances strongly modified rhythmicity. Isolated slices of neocortex generated epochs of 4- to 10-hertz synchronized activity when N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated channels were facilitated. Layer 5 was both necessary and sufficient to produce these synchronized oscillations. Thus, synaptic networks of intrinsically rhythmic neurons in layer 5 may generate or promote certain synchronized oscillations of the neocortex.
At many glutamatergic synapses in the brain, calcium-permeable alpha - amino - 3 - hydro - 5 - methyl - 4 - isoxazolepropionate receptor (AMPAR) channels mediate fast excitatory transmission. These channels are blocked by endogenous intracellular polyamines, which are found in virtually every type of cell. In excised patches, use-dependent relief of polyamine block enhances glutamate-evoked currents through recombinant and native calcium-permeable, polyamine-sensitive AMPAR channels. The contribution of polyamine unblock to synaptic currents during high-frequency stimulation may be to facilitate currents and maintain current amplitudes in the face of a slow recovery from desensitization or presynaptic depression. Here we show, on pairs and triples of synaptically connected neurons in slices, that this mechanism contributes to short-term plasticity in local circuits formed by presynaptic pyramidal neurons and postsynaptic multipolar interneurons in layer 2/3 of rat neocortex. Activity-dependent relief from polyamine block of postsynaptic calcium-permeable AMPARs in the interneurons either reduces the rate of paired-pulse depression in a frequency-dependent manner or, at a given stimulation frequency, induces facilitation of a synaptic response that would otherwise depress. This mechanism for the enhancement of synaptic gain appears to be entirely postsynaptic.
People adapt with remarkable flexibility to reversal of the visual field caused by prism spectacles. With sufficient time, this adaptation restores visually guided behaviour and perceptual harmony between the visible and tactile worlds. Although it has been suggested that seeing one's own body is crucial for adaptation, the underlying mechanisms are unclear. Here we show that a new representation of visuomotor mapping with respect to the hands emerges in a month during adaptation to reversed vision. The subjects become bi-perceptual, or able to use both new and old representations. In a visual task designed to assess the new hand representation, subjects identified visually presented hands as left or right by matching the picture to the representation of their own hands. Functional magnetic resonance imaging showed brain activity in the left posterior frontal cortex (Broca's area) that was unique to the new hand representations of both hands, together with activation in the intraparietal sulcus and prefrontal cortex. The emergence of the new hand representation coincided with the adaptation of perceived location of visible objects in space. These results suggest that the hand representation operates as a visuomotor transformation device that provides an arm-centred frame of reference for space perception.
A subset of neurons in the brain, known as 'glucose-excited' neurons, depolarize and increase their firing rate in response to increases in extracellular glucose. Similar to insulin secretion by pancreatic beta-cells, glucose excitation of neurons is driven by ATP-mediated closure of ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channels. Although beta-cell-like glucose sensing in neurons is well established, its physiological relevance and contribution to disease states such as type 2 diabetes remain unknown. To address these issues, we disrupted glucose sensing in glucose-excited pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons via transgenic expression of a mutant Kir6.2 subunit (encoded by the Kcnj11 gene) that prevents ATP-mediated closure of K(ATP) channels. Here we show that this genetic manipulation impaired the whole-body response to a systemic glucose load, demonstrating a role for glucose sensing by POMC neurons in the overall physiological control of blood glucose. We also found that glucose sensing by POMC neurons became defective in obese mice on a high-fat diet, suggesting that loss of glucose sensing by neurons has a role in the development of type 2 diabetes. The mechanism for obesity-induced loss of glucose sensing in POMC neurons involves uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2), a mitochondrial protein that impairs glucose-stimulated ATP production. UCP2 negatively regulates glucose sensing in POMC neurons. We found that genetic deletion of Ucp2 prevents obesity-induced loss of glucose sensing, and that acute pharmacological inhibition of UCP2 reverses loss of glucose sensing. We conclude that obesity-induced, UCP2-mediated loss of glucose sensing in glucose-excited neurons might have a pathogenic role in the development of type 2 diabetes.
The frequency of action potentials of about one-third of the neurons sampled in the striate cortex of awake rabbits was clearly modified by mild stimulation of the reticular core of the brain stem. Reticular stimulation often brought about enhancement of firing in units activated by light, while it usually had the contrary effect upon light-inhibited units.
The neural underpinnings of sleep involve interactions between sleep-promoting areas such as the anterior hypothalamus, and arousal systems located in the posterior hypothalamus, the basal forebrain and the brainstem. Hypocretin (Hcrt, also known as orexin)-producing neurons in the lateral hypothalamus are important for arousal stability, and loss of Hcrt function has been linked to narcolepsy. However, it is unknown whether electrical activity arising from Hcrt neurons is sufficient to drive awakening from sleep states or is simply correlated with it. Here we directly probed the impact of Hcrt neuron activity on sleep state transitions with in vivo neural photostimulation, genetically targeting channelrhodopsin-2 to Hcrt cells and using an optical fibre to deliver light deep in the brain, directly into the lateral hypothalamus, of freely moving mice. We found that direct, selective, optogenetic photostimulation of Hcrt neurons increased the probability of transition to wakefulness from either slow wave sleep or rapid eye movement sleep. Notably, photostimulation using 5-30 Hz light pulse trains reduced latency to wakefulness, whereas 1 Hz trains did not. This study establishes a causal relationship between frequency-dependent activity of a genetically defined neural cell type and a specific mammalian behaviour central to clinical conditions and neurobehavioural physiology.
A flash of light evokes neural activity in the brain with a delay of 30-100 milliseconds, much of which is due to the slow process of visual transduction in photoreceptors. A moving object can cover a considerable distance in this time, and should therefore be seen noticeably behind its actual location. As this conflicts with everyday experience, it has been suggested that the visual cortex uses the delayed visual data from the eye to extrapolate the trajectory of a moving object, so that it is perceived at its actual location. Here we report that such anticipation of moving stimuli begins in the retina. A moving bar elicits a moving wave of spiking activity in the population of retinal ganglion cells. Rather than lagging behind the visual image, the population activity travels near the leading edge of the moving bar. This response is observed over a wide range of speeds and apparently compensates for the visual response latency. We show how this anticipation follows from known mechanisms of retinal processing.
New neurons are continuously integrated into existing neural circuits in adult dentate gyrus of the mammalian brain. Accumulating evidence indicates that these new neurons are involved in learning and memory. A substantial fraction of newly born neurons die before they mature and the survival of new neurons is regulated in an experience-dependent manner, raising the possibility that the selective survival or death of new neurons has a direct role in a process of learning and memory--such as information storage--through the information-specific construction of new circuits. However, a critical assumption of this hypothesis is that the survival or death decision of new neurons is information-specific. Because neurons receive their information primarily through their input synaptic activity, we investigated whether the survival of new neurons is regulated by input activity in a cell-specific manner. Here we developed a retrovirus-mediated, single-cell gene knockout technique in mice and showed that the survival of new neurons is competitively regulated by their own NMDA-type glutamate receptor during a short, critical period soon after neuronal birth. This finding indicates that the survival of new neurons and the resulting formation of new circuits are regulated in an input-dependent, cell-specific manner. Therefore, the circuits formed by new neurons may represent information associated with input activity within a short time window in the critical period. This information-specific addition of new circuits through selective survival or death of new neurons may be a unique attribute of new neurons that enables them to play a critical role in learning and memory.
The effects of neurotrophins on several forms of neuronal degeneration in murine cortical cell cultures were examined. Consistent with other studies, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, neurotrophin-3, and neurotrophin-4/5 all attenuated the apoptotic death induced by serum deprivation or exposure to the calcium channel antagonist nimodipine. Unexpectedly, however, 24-hour pretreatment with these same neurotrophins markedly potentiated the necrotic death induced by exposure to oxygen-glucose deprivation or N-methyl-D-aspartate. Thus, certain neurotrophins may have opposing effects on different types of death in the same neurons.
The presence of polyunsaturated and saturated fatty acids in leukocytic membranes prompted study of their possible role in the induction of brain edema. Polyunsaturated fatty acids including sodium arachidonate, sodium linoleate, sodium linolenate, and docasahexaenoic acids induced edma in slices of rat brain cortex. This cellular edema was specific, since neither saturated fatty acids nor a fatty acid containing a single double bond had such effect.
Motor cortex output is capable of considerable reorganization, which involves modulation of excitability within the cortex. Does such reorganization also involve changes beyond the cortex, at the level of throughput from single motor cortex neurons to muscle activity? We examined such throughput during a paradigm that provided incentive for enhancing functional connectivity from motor cortex neurons to muscles. Short-latency throughput from a recorded neuron to muscle activity not present during some behavioral epochs often appeared during others. Such changes in throughput could not always be attributed to a higher neuron firing rate, to more ongoing muscle activity, or to neuronal synchronization, indicating that reorganization of motor cortex output may involve rapid changes in functional connectivity from single motor cortex neurons to alpha-motoneuron pools.
Neural stem cells in various regions of the vertebrate brain continuously generate neurons throughout life. In the mammalian hippocampus, a region important for spatial and episodic memory, thousands of new granule cells are produced per day, with the exact number depending on environmental conditions and physical exercise. The survival of these neurons is improved by learning and conversely learning may be promoted by neurogenesis. Although it has been suggested that newly generated neurons may have specific properties to facilitate learning, the cellular and synaptic mechanisms of plasticity in these neurons are largely unknown. Here we show that young granule cells in the adult hippocampus differ substantially from mature granule cells in both active and passive membrane properties. In young neurons, T-type Ca2+ channels can generate isolated Ca2+ spikes and boost fast Na+ action potentials, contributing to the induction of synaptic plasticity. Associative long-term potentiation can be induced more easily in young neurons than in mature neurons under identical conditions. Thus, newly generated neurons express unique mechanisms to facilitate synaptic plasticity, which may be important for the formation of new memories.
Memory encoding occurs rapidly, but the consolidation of memory in the neocortex has long been held to be a more gradual process. We now report, however, that systems consolidation can occur extremely quickly if an associative "schema" into which new information is incorporated has previously been created. In experiments using a hippocampal-dependent paired-associate task for rats, the memory of flavor-place associations became persistent over time as a putative neocortical schema gradually developed. New traces, trained for only one trial, then became assimilated and rapidly hippocampal-independent. Schemas also played a causal role in the creation of lasting associative memory representations during one-trial learning. The concept of neocortical schemas may unite psychological accounts of knowledge structures with neurobiological theories of systems memory consolidation.
Auditory signals are transmitted from the inner ear through the brainstem to the higher auditory regions of the brain. Neurons throughout the auditory system are tuned to stimulus frequency, and in many auditory regions are arranged in topographical maps with respect to their preferred frequency. These properties are assumed to arise from the interactions of convergent and divergent projections ascending from lower to higher auditory areas; such a view, however, ignores the possible role of descending projections from cortical to subcortical regions. In the bat auditory system, such corticofugal connections modulate neuronal activity to improve the processing of echo-delay information, a specialized feature. Here we show that corticofugal projections are also involved in the most common type of auditory processing, frequency tuning. When cortical neurons tuned to a specific frequency are inactivated, the auditory responses of subcortical neurons tuned to the same frequency are reduced. Moreover, the responses of other subcortical neurons tuned to different frequencies are increased, and their preferred frequencies are shifted towards that of the inactivated cortical neurons. Thus the corticofugal system mediates a positive feedback which, in combination with widespread lateral inhibition, sharpens and adjusts the tuning of neurons at earlier stages in the auditory processing pathway.
Humans and monkeys have similar abilities to discriminate the difference in frequency between two mechanical vibrations applied sequentially to the fingertips. A key component of this sensory task is that the second stimulus is compared with the trace left by the first (base) stimulus, which must involve working memory. Where and how is this trace held in the brain? This question was investigated by recording from single neurons in the prefrontal cortex of monkeys while they performed the somatosensory discrimination task. Here we describe neurons in the inferior convexity of the prefrontal cortex whose discharge rates varied, during the delay period between the two stimuli, as a monotonic function of the base stimulus frequency. We describe this as 'monotonic stimulus encoding', and we suggest that the result may generalize: monotonic stimulus encoding may be the basic representation of one-dimensional sensory stimulus quantities in working memory. Thus we predict that other behavioural tasks that require ordinal comparisons between scalar analogue stimuli would give rise to monotonic responses similar to those reported here.
Sympathetic axons, normally innervating the extracerebral vasculature, sprout into denervated regions of the hippocampal formation after lesions of the medial septal nucleus or fimbria in adult female rats. Similar lesions in adult males also elicit the sympathetic ingrowth; however, the number of anomalous axons is greatly reduced and their distribution is altered. In adult males the sympathetic axons do not send out collaterals within the stratum oriens of region CA3 or the molecular layer or deep hilar regions of the area dentata, as they do in adult females. Lesions in juveniles of both sexes result in more vigorous sprouting than in their adult counterparts. In the young males the anomalous axons are distributed more extensively into the dentate molecular layer; in the young females the axons merely send out more collaterals within the same regions as in the adults. This sexually dimorphic response to central nervous system damage suggests either that the sprouting is affected by the hormonal environment of the mature hippocampal system or that this brain region, like the hypothalamus, may express permanent morphological or physiological differences as a result of exposure to sex steroids during development.
Cats were subjected to complete lower brainstem transection, and were then tested for learning ability according to a classical conditioning paradigm. An auditory stimulus was systematically paired with a brief shock to the eyelid. Within a few weeks after the operation, the decerebrate cats could learn the conditioned response with a tone frequency discrimination and then a discrimination reversal. Our results support the notion that the brainstem reticular formation can support a conditioned response which isbehaviorally similar to that obtained in the intact animal.
Neuroleukin (NLK) is a protein of relative molecular mass (Mr) 56,000 (56K) secreted by denervated rat muscle and found in large amounts in muscle, brain, heart and kidneys. The protein is a neurotrophic factor for spinal and sensory neurons and a lymphokine product of lectin-stimulated T-cells. It also induces immunoglobulin secretion by human mononuclear cells. Molecular clones of NLK have been expressed in monkey COS cells and the product was shown to have the same biological and biochemical properties as the extracted protein. NLK is abundant in muscle, brain and kidney, but is active at concentrations of 10(-9) to 10(-11) M, similar to those for other polypeptide factors. We have cloned the gene for pig muscle phosphohexose isomerase (PHI) (EC 5.3.1.9) which catalyses the conversion of glucose-6-phosphate to fructose-6-phosphate, an obligatory step in glycolysis, and determined its amino-acid sequence. Surprisingly, it is 90% homologous to the sequence of mouse neuroleukin.
A long-standing conjecture in neuroscience is that aspects of cognition depend on the brain's ability to self-generate sequential neuronal activity. We found that reliably and continually changing cell assemblies in the rat hippocampus appeared not only during spatial navigation but also in the absence of changing environmental or body-derived inputs. During the delay period of a memory task, each moment in time was characterized by the activity of a particular assembly of neurons. Identical initial conditions triggered a similar assembly sequence, whereas different conditions gave rise to different sequences, thereby predicting behavioral choices, including errors. Such sequences were not formed in control (nonmemory) tasks. We hypothesize that neuronal representations, evolved for encoding distance in spatial navigation, also support episodic recall and the planning of action sequences.
Studies aimed at characterizing the operation of cognitive functions in normal individuals have examined data from patients with focal cerebral insult. These studies assume that brain damage impairs functions of the cognitive processes along lines that honour the 'normal' pre-morbid organization of the cognitive system. For example, detailed study of individual brain-damaged patients has revealed apparently selective disruption of cognitive functions such as auditory/verbal working memory, phonological processing ability, grapheme-to-phoneme translation procedures and semantic processing. Warrington et al. have studied patients with even more fine-grained selective disturbances of the semantic system. The most selective deficits have been reported for four patients who were significantly better at identifying inanimate objects than they were at identifying living things and foods. These patterns of selective deficit after localized brain damage provide important information about the normal organization of the lexicon, and ultimately about how components of the lexical system are related to particular neural substrates. Here, we report a case study of a patient demonstrating a very selective disturbance of the ability to name items from two related semantic categories. Despite normal performance on a large battery of lexical/semantic tasks, the patient shows a consistent and striking disability in naming members of the semantic categories of 'fruits' and 'vegetables'. The selectivity of this deficit supports a category-specific organization of the mental lexicon, and suggests independence of the processing routes involving naming and name recognition.
Monoclonal antibodies specific for monoamine oxidase (MAO) A and MAO B, respectively, were used to localize these enzymes in primate brain. The reagents recognized different populations of neurons: those that recognized MAO A were located in cell groups containing catecholamines, including the substantia nigra, nucleus locus coeruleus, nucleus subcoeruleus, and the periventricular region of the hypothalamus, whereas those that recognized MAO B were observed in serotonin regions, including the nucleus raphe dorsalis and nucleus centralis superior. These data illustrate the physiological independence of MAO A and B and show that neurons may be specialized for their degradative as well as their synthetic functions.
It is generally accepted that morphine exerts its analgesic effect by binding to specific opiate receptors in the brain and spinal cord. Since Hughes et al. isolated and identified two endogenous pentapeptides, Met- and Leu-enkephalin, from the brain and found that they acted as agonists at opiate receptors, alpha-, beta- and gamma-endorphins, larger peptides than enkephalins and having morphine-like activity, have been identified in either the brain or pituitary of various species. Several studies have demonstrated that enkephalins possess analgesic properties and that they are distributed in the pain-mediated pathways in the central nervous system. These findings suggest that enkephalins are important neurotransmitters or neuromodulators regulating pain transmission. We now report the isolation of a novel substance which has a Met-enkephalin releasing action. Our findings suggest the possibility of a regulating mechanism for the release of endogenous opioid peptides, especially Met-enkephalin.
In adult rats, cortical neurones that send axons through the pyramidal tract are confined to layer V, over the rostral two-thirds of the cerebral hemisphere. However, during the first postnatal week, many neurones in layer V in the occipital cortex (including the visual cortex) also extend axon collaterals through the pyramidal tract and into the spinal cord. These occipital corticospinal collaterals are completely eliminated over the subsequent 2 weeks, although their cells of origin do not die. We now report that when portions of the occipital cortex from fetal rats are transplanted to more rostral cortical regions of newborn rats, some of the transplanted neurones not only extend axons through the pyramidal tract, but also maintain these axons beyond the stage at which they are normally eliminated. These results suggest that normally-eliminated cortical axons can be 'rescued' and, in the case of pyramidal tract neurones, the position of the neurones within the tangential plane of the cortex is a critical factor in determining which neurones retain and which lose their pyramidal tract collaterals.
Huntingtin is a 350-kilodalton protein of unknown function that is mutated in Huntington's disease (HD), a neurodegenerative disorder. The mutant protein is presumed to acquire a toxic gain of function that is detrimental to striatal neurons in the brain. However, loss of a beneficial activity of wild-type huntingtin may also cause the death of striatal neurons. Here we demonstrate that wild-type huntingtin up-regulates transcription of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a pro-survival factor produced by cortical neurons that is necessary for survival of striatal neurons in the brain. We show that this beneficial activity of huntingtin is lost when the protein becomes mutated, resulting in decreased production of cortical BDNF. This leads to insufficient neurotrophic support for striatal neurons, which then die. Restoring wild-type huntingtin activity and increasing BDNF production may be therapeutic approaches for treating HD.
Early detection of neurodegenerative disorders would provide clues to the underlying pathobiology of these diseases and would enable more effective diagnosis and treatment of patients. Recent advances in molecular neuroscience have begun to provide the tools to detect diseases like Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and others early in their course and potentially even before the development of clinical manifestations of disease. These genetic, imaging, clinical, and biochemical tools are being validated in a number of studies. Early detection of these slowly progressive diseases offers the promise of presymptomatic diagnosis and, ultimately, of disease-modifying medications for use early in disease and during the presymptomatic period.
Metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) regulate transmitter release at mammalian central synapses. However, because of the difficulty of recording from mammalian presynaptic terminals, the mechanism underlying mGluR-mediated presynaptic inhibition is not known. Here, simultaneous recordings from a giant presynaptic terminal, the calyx of Held, and its postsynaptic target in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body were obtained in rat brainstem slices. Agonists of mGluRs suppressed a high voltage-activated P/Q-type calcium conductance in the presynaptic terminal, thereby inhibiting transmitter release at this glutamatergic synapse. Because several forms of presynaptic modulation and plasticity are mediated by mGluRs, this identification of a target ion channel is a first step toward elucidation of their molecular mechanism.
Potassium channels comprise a diverse class of ion channels important for neuronal excitability and plasticity. The recent cloning of the Shaker locus from Drosophila melanogaster has provided a starting point for molecular studies of potassium channels. Predicted Shaker proteins appear to be integral membrane proteins and have a sequence similar to the sequence of the S4 segment of the vertebrate sodium channel, where the S4 segment has been proposed to be the voltage sensor. Expression studies in frog oocytes confirm that Shaker encodes a component of a potassium channel (the A channel) that conducts a fast transient potassium current. Here we report the isolation of complementary DNA clones from the mouse brain, the nucleotide sequences of which predict a protein remarkably similar to the Shaker protein. The strong conservation of the predicted protein sequence in flies and mammals suggests that these mouse clones encode a potassium channel component and that the conserved amino acids may be essential to some aspect of potassium channel function.
Earlier work has suggested that aspartate, glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) act as transmitters in the cerebral cortex. There is reasonable evidence for the identity of the cell population responsible for GABA release but until now there has been little evidence concerning the sources for release of aspartate and glutamate. Here we have used two approaches to identify possible neurotransmitters used by cells in the visual cortex: measurement of the efflux of endogenous compounds in conditions of synaptic release and localization of these compounds to particular cell classes using neurotransmitter-specific histochemical techniques. Our results suggest that the acidic amino acids aspartate and glutamate may be cortical neurotransmitters, as shown by calcium-dependent release from endogenous stores and by uptake specific to pyramidal cells in layer 6 of the cortex. These substances may therefore have a role in the function of layer 6 cells, which are responsible for the recurrent projection from the cortex to the lateral geniculate nucleus and for the projection within the cortex from layer 6 to layer 4.
The auditory system of the horseshoe bat is finely tuned to the bat's individual vocalization frequency. To compensate for flight-induced Doppler shifts in the echo frequency, the horseshoe bat adjusts the frequency of its echo-location call to maintain the echo frequency within the narrow range to which its auditory system is best tuned. In this report I describe neurons in the midbrain tegmentum of the horseshoe bat, with properties that strongly indicate their involvement in this Doppler-shift compensation. The activity of these neurons was influenced by both sound emission and auditory stimuli. Neuronal discharges in response to vocalization, however, differed from those in response to purely auditory stimuli that mimicked the bat call. When an auditory stimulus was temporally locked to a preceding vocalization, the response was dependent on the time delay between the two. This delay-sensitivity completely disappeared when vocalizations were simulated acoustically. Only those vocalization and 'echo' parameters were encoded that occur in Doppler-shift compensation. In conclusion, I suggest a model for the regulation of the vocalization frequency through auditory feedback.
Oscillatory firing patterns are an intrinsic property of some neurons and have an important function in information processing. In some cells, low voltage-activated calcium channels have been proposed to underlie a depolarizing potential that regulates bursting. The sequence of a rat brain calcium channel alpha 1 subunit (rbE-II) was deduced. Although it is structurally related to high voltage-activated calcium channels, the rbE-II channel transiently activated at negative membrane potentials, required a strong hyperpolarization to deinactivate, and was highly sensitive to block by nickel. In situ hybridization showed that rbE-II messenger RNA is expressed in regions throughout the central nervous system. The electrophysiological properties of the rbE-II current are consistent with a type of low voltage-activated calcium channel that requires membrane hyperpolarization for maximal activity, which suggests that rbE-II may be involved in the modulation of firing patterns.
The cholinergic agonist carbachol was conjugated to latex microspheres that were fluorescently labeled with rhodamine and used as neuroanatomical probes that show little diffusion from their injection site and retrogradely label neurons projecting to the injection site. Microinjection of this pharmacologically active probe into the gigantocellular field of the cat pontine brain stem caused the awake cats to fall into rapid movement (REM) sleep indistinguishable from that produced by free carbachol. Three-dimensional computer reconstruction of the retrogradely labeled neurons revealed a widely distributed neuronal network in the pontine tegmentum. These pharmacologically active microspheres permit a new precision in the characterization and mapping of neurons associated with the control of behavioral state and of other cholinergic networks.
Neurofibrillary degeneration is an important pathological finding in senile and presenile dementia of the Alzheimer type. Experimentally, aluminum induces neurofibrillary degeneration in neurons of higher mammals. Aluminum concentrations approaching those used experimentally have been found in some regions of the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease.
A unilateral microinjection of adrenocorticotropin 1-24 in the rat brainstem in the region of the locus ceruleus resulted in postural asymmetry and movement disorder that resembled human dystonia, the severity and duration (2 to 3 days) being dose-dependent. These results show for the first time that neuropeptides in the brainstem may modulate posture and movement, and they suggest that some forms of movement disorder such as dystonia may be due to a disordered regulation of postural and locomotor mechanisms by adrenocorticotropin 1-24.
Cerebral deposition of the beta-amyloid peptide (A beta) is an invariant feature of Alzheimer's disease. Since the original isolation and characterization of A beta (ref. 1) and the subsequent cloning of its precursor protein, no direct evidence for the actual production of discrete A beta has been reported. Here we investigate whether A beta is present in human biological fluids using antibodies specific for an epitope within A beta that spans the site of normal constitutive cleavage. These antibodies were used to construct a sandwich-type enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay that detects A beta in cerebrospinal fluid, plasma and conditioned medium of human mixed-brain cells grown in vitro (see also ref. 14). By affinity chromatography, we have purified and sequenced A beta and a novel A beta fragment from human cerebrospinal fluid and conditioned medium of human mixed-brain cell cultures. These findings demonstrate that A beta is produced and released both in vivo and in vitro. These observations offer new opportunities for developing diagnostic tests for Alzheimer's disease and therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing the cerebral deposition of A beta.
Humans expect positive events in the future even when there is no evidence to support such expectations. For example, people expect to live longer and be healthier than average, they underestimate their likelihood of getting a divorce, and overestimate their prospects for success on the job market. We examined how the brain generates this pervasive optimism bias. Here we report that this tendency was related specifically to enhanced activation in the amygdala and in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex when imagining positive future events relative to negative ones, suggesting a key role for areas involved in monitoring emotional salience in mediating the optimism bias. These are the same regions that show irregularities in depression, which has been related to pessimism. Across individuals, activity in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex was correlated with trait optimism. The current study highlights how the brain may generate the tendency to engage in the projection of positive future events, suggesting that the effective integration and regulation of emotional and autobiographical information supports the projection of positive future events in healthy individuals, and is related to optimism.
As first clearly demonstrated by the experiments of Wiesel and Hubel, the developing visual cortex is exquisitely sensitive to sensory deprivation. Temporary closure of one eye of a kitten during a critical period that extends from 3 weeks to 3 months of age results in a dramatic cortical reorganization such that most neurones, originally binocularly driven, are dominated exclusively by the open eye. Recently, attention has been directed to chemical factors which may influence the degree of plasticity during the critical period. The work of Kasamatsu and pettigrew suggests that cortical catecholamines, especially noradrenaline (NA), are essential for the normal plastic response to visual deprivation. In an effort to clarify the role of NA in visual cortical plasticity, we have monocularly deprived kittens whose cortex had been depleted of catecholamines by the neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA). We used two strategies to deplete cortical NA: the first, pioneered by Kasamatsu el al., utilized osmotic minipumps to deliver 6-OHDA to visual cortex; the second involved systemic neonatal injections of 6-OHDA, a technique which has proved effective in rodents. We found, using high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), that both techniques produced a substantial reduction in the level of cortical NA. However, single unit recording in area 17 revealed that the plastic response to monocular deprivation (MD) was only diminished in the kittens depleted by minipump.
The mammalian thalamus is the gateway to the cortex for most sensory modalities. Nearly all thalamic nuclei also receive massive feedback projections from the cortical region to which they project. In this study, the spatiotemporal properties of synchronized thalamic spindle oscillations (7 to 14 hertz) were investigated in barbiturate-anesthetized cats, before and after removal of the cortex. After complete ipsilateral decortication, the long-range synchronization of thalamic spindles in the intact cortex hemisphere changed into disorganized patterns with low spatiotemporal coherence. Local thalamic synchrony was still present, as demonstrated by dual intracellular recordings from nearby neurons. In the cortex, synchrony was insensitive to the disruption of horizontal intracortical connections. These results indicate that the global coherence of thalamic oscillations is determined by corticothalamic projections.
Researchers haven't known exactly where in the brain all the signals that allow an animal to keep track of its limbs are located, but now a team may have located some of the neurons that first make these multisensory connections. On page 1782, researchers report evidence that a small region of the parietal cortex of the monkey brain known as area 5 may enable the monkey to integrate many sources of information about its body and thereby update its mental model of what the body is doing. The researchers based this conclusion on their finding that some area 5 neurons fire at their fastest rates when the visual feedback from a monkey's arm matches the sensory feedback, an indication that the neurons are sensitive to both streams of information.
Nerve growth factor and other neurotrophins signal to neurons through the Trk family of receptor tyrosine kinases. TrkB is relatively promiscuous in vitro, acting as a receptor for brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin-4 (NT4) and, to a lesser extent, NT3 (refs 3-5). Mice lacking TrkB show a more severe phenotype than mice lacking BDNF, suggesting that TrkB may act as a receptor for additional ligands in vivo. To explore this possibility, we generated mice lacking NT4 or BDNF as well as mice lacking both neurotrophins. Unlike mice lacking other Trks or neurotrophins, NT4-deficient mice are long-lived and show no obvious neurological defects. Analysis of mutant phenotypes revealed distinct neuronal populations with different neurotrophin requirements. Thus vestibular and trigeminal sensory neurons require BDNF but not NT4, whereas nodose-petrosal sensory neurons require both BDNF and NT4. Motor neurons, whose numbers are drastically reduced in mice lacking TrkB, are not affected even in mice lacking both BDNF and NT4. These results suggest that another ligand, perhaps NT3, does indeed act on TrkB in vivo.
On page 1426 of the report "Association of parvoviruses with rheumatoid arthritis of humans" by R. W. Simpson et al. (30 Mar., p. 1425), a portion of the text beginning on line 18 of the first full paragraph in column 3 was incorrectly printed. It should have read, "We were unable to detect 24-nm particles in brains of normal mice from our colony or mice intracerebrally inoculated with extracts of synovial cells from patients with noninflammatory degenerative joint disease (DJD). More conclusive evidence for the identity of RA-1 as a parvovirus comes from our recent success in demonstrating that CsCl gradient fractions containing the infectious 24-nm particles can be extracted for a single-stranded DNA which is approximately 4.5 kilobases in size."
Cyclic-nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels in outer segments of vertebrate photoreceptors generate electrical signals in response to changes in cyclic GMP concentration during phototransduction. CNG channels also allow the influx of Ca2+, which is essential for photoreceptor adaptation. In cone photoreceptors, cGMP triggers an increase in membrane capacitance indicative of exocytosis, suggesting that CNG channels are also involved in synaptic function. Here we examine whether CNG channels reside in cone terminals and whether they regulate neurotransmitter release, specifically in response to nitric oxide (NO), a retrograde transmitter that increases cGMP synthesis and potentiates synaptic transmission in the brain. Using intact retina, we show that endogenous NO modulates synapses between cones and horizontal cells. In experiments on isolated cones, we show directly that CNG channels occur in clusters and are indirectly activated by S-nitrosocysteine (SNC), an NO donor. Furthermore, both SNC and pCPT-cGMP, a membrane-permeant analogue of cGMP, trigger the release of transmitter from the cone terminals. The NO-induced transmitter release is suppressed by guanylate cyclase inhibitors and prevented by direct activation of CNG channels, indicating that their activation is required for NO to elicit release. These results expand our view of CNG channel function to include the regulation of synaptic transmission and mediation of the presynaptic effects of NO.
Brain research on mental illnesses has made substantial advances in recent years, supported by conceptual and technological developments in cognitive neuroscience. Brain-based cognitive models of illnesses such as schizophrenia and depression have been tested with a variety of techniques, including the lesion method, tract tracing, neuroimaging, animal modeling, single-cell recording, electrophysiology, neuropsychology, and experimental cognitive psychology. A relatively sophisticated picture is emerging that conceptualizes mental illnesses as disorders of mind arising in the brain. Convergent data using multiple neuroscience techniques indicate that the neural mechanisms of mental illnesses can be understood as dysfunctions in specific neural circuits and that their functions and dysfunctions can be influenced or altered by a variety of cognitive and pharmacological factors.
Psychophysiological measurements have indicated that the right cerebral hemisphere processes noises and other nonverbal data and that the left cerebral hemisphere processes verbal material. Direct physiological measurements, as expressed in summated auditory evoked cortical responses, unequivocally demonstrate that click noises show a greater amplitude of initial output over the right brain, and that verbal stimuli produce either equal or higher amplitudes of output over the left cerebral hemisphere.
The neurotransmitter dopamine acts through various receptor subtypes that are largely associated with enhancement or inhibition of adenylyl cyclases. These dopamine-sensitive adenylyl cyclases are highly concentrated in the corpus stratum and associated limbic structures of the brain, where their levels exceed by orders of magnitude those in other areas of the brain. Here we use in situ hybridization to show that messenger RNA for three of these adenylyl cyclases is not found in the corpus striatum. We have isolated and expressed a complementary DNA encoding new adenylyl cyclase whose selective concentration in the corpus striatum indicates that it may be responsible for the synaptic actions of dopamine.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has its onset in middle age and is a progressive disorder characterized by degeneration of motor neurons of the primary motor cortex, brainstem and spinal cord. Most cases of ALS are sporadic, but about 10% are familial. Genes known to cause classic familial ALS (FALS) are superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), ANG encoding angiogenin, TARDP encoding transactive response (TAR) DNA-binding protein TDP-43 (ref. 4) and fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma (FUS, also known as TLS). However, these genetic defects occur in only about 20-30% of cases of FALS, and most genes causing FALS are unknown. Here we show that there are mutations in the gene encoding optineurin (OPTN), earlier reported to be a causative gene of primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), in patients with ALS. We found three types of mutation of OPTN: a homozygous deletion of exon 5, a homozygous Q398X nonsense mutation and a heterozygous E478G missense mutation within its ubiquitin-binding domain. Analysis of cell transfection showed that the nonsense and missense mutations of OPTN abolished the inhibition of activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB), and the E478G mutation revealed a cytoplasmic distribution different from that of the wild type or a POAG mutation. A case with the E478G mutation showed OPTN-immunoreactive cytoplasmic inclusions. Furthermore, TDP-43- or SOD1-positive inclusions of sporadic and SOD1 cases of ALS were also noticeably immunolabelled by anti-OPTN antibodies. Our findings strongly suggest that OPTN is involved in the pathogenesis of ALS. They also indicate that NF-kappaB inhibitors could be used to treat ALS and that transgenic mice bearing various mutations of OPTN will be relevant in developing new drugs for this disorder.
Command neurons that cause rhythmic feeding behavior in the marine mollusc Pleurobranchaea californica have been identified in the cerebropleural ganglion (brain). Intracellular stimulation of single command neurons in isolated nervous systems, semi-intact prepartions, and restrained whole animals causes the same rhythmic motor output pattern as occurs during feeding. During this motor output pattern, action potentials recorded intracellularly from the command neurons occur in cyclic bursts that are phase-locked with the feeding rhythm. This modulation results from repetitive, alternating bursts of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials, which are caused at least in part by synaptic feedback to the command neurons from identified classes of neurons in the feeding network. Central feedback to command neurons from the motor network they excite provides a possible general physiological mechanism for the sustained oscillation of neural networks controlling cyclic behavior.
The tetrapeptide Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-NH2 (FMRFamide) and peptides structurally related to it, have been isolated from molluscan ganglia. They have widespread actions on both invertebrate and vertebrate tissues and there is increasing evidence that they are an important group of invertebrate peptide neurotransmitters. It is of interest that the primary amino acid sequence of FMRFamide forms the C-terminal tetrapeptide of an enkephalin-like heptapeptide (Met-enkephalin-ArgPhe) isolated from bovine adrenal medulla and striatum. Antisera to FMRFamide have been shown to react in radioimmunoassay and immunohistochemistry with material in the central nervous system of various vertebrate species, but the identity of this material, and in particular its relationship to the opioid heptapeptide, remains uncertain. We have used antibodies specific for the C-terminus of FMRFamide in radioimmunoassays to monitor purification of the material in chicken brain. We describe here the sequence of one of the peptides obtained. It is a biologically active peptide which does not seem to be related to other known vertebrate neuropeptides.
In mammals, each odorant is detected by a combination of different odorant receptors. Signals from different types of receptors are segregated in the nose and the olfactory bulb, but appear to be combined in individual neurons in the olfactory cortex. Here, we report that binary odorant mixes stimulate cortical neurons that are not stimulated by their individual component odorants. We propose that cortical neurons require combinations of receptor inputs for activation and that merging the receptor codes of two odorants provides novel combinations of receptor inputs that stimulate neurons beyond those activated by the single odorants. These findings may explain why odorant mixtures can elicit novel odor percepts in humans.
When placed in a tank of water, aged rats (24 to 27 months old) showed marked impairments in swimming. Compared with young adult rats (3 to 4 months old), the older animals moved their limbs less vigorously and were less successful in keeping their heads above water. The young, but not old, rats maintained a position nearly horizontal to the water surface and planed across it. These movement dysfunctions of aged rats resemble those seen in young adult animals that have sustained injury to brain dopamine-containing neurons. The swimming impairments of the aged rats were reversed by the dopamine receptor stimulant apomorphine and by the biosynthetic precursor of dopamine, L-dopa. Thus, age-related alterations in brain dopaminergic systems may be responsible for some of the movement disturbances associated with senescence.
Extracellular action potentials were recorded from 80 neurons in the sensorimotor cortex of the cat as brain temperature was varied by 4 degrees to 8 degrees C. The discharge rate of 37 percent of the neurons studied increased with increasing brain temperature. The discharge rate varied inversely with temperature in 11 percent of the neurons.
The content of tetrahydrobiopterin in rat brain was doubled by peripherally administered tetrahydrobiopterin, with the natural 1 diastereoisomer more effective than the unnatural d configuration. The model pteridine, 6-methyltetrahydropterin was ten times more efficient than tetrahydrobiopterin in crossing the blood-brain barrier, and striatal concentrations of 6-methyltetrahydropterin remained elevated for 2 hours, declining with a half-life of 3 hours. While no evidence for a specific uptake mechanism for concentrating 6-methyltetrahydropterin in cells containing tetrahydrobiopterin was detected, the pterin was found in ts presumed site of action, the nerve terminal. Replacement therapy with reduced pterins may therefore be effective in the treatment of the neurological disorders associated with the variant forms of hyperphenylalaninemia that result from defects in the biosynthesis or metabolism of tetrahydrobiopterin within the central nervous system.
The molecular basis for breast cancer metastasis to the brain is largely unknown. Brain relapse typically occurs years after the removal of a breast tumour, suggesting that disseminated cancer cells must acquire specialized functions to take over this organ. Here we show that breast cancer metastasis to the brain involves mediators of extravasation through non-fenestrated capillaries, complemented by specific enhancers of blood-brain barrier crossing and brain colonization. We isolated cells that preferentially infiltrate the brain from patients with advanced disease. Gene expression analysis of these cells and of clinical samples, coupled with functional analysis, identified the cyclooxygenase COX2 (also known as PTGS2), the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) ligand HBEGF, and the alpha2,6-sialyltransferase ST6GALNAC5 as mediators of cancer cell passage through the blood-brain barrier. EGFR ligands and COX2 were previously linked to breast cancer infiltration of the lungs, but not the bones or liver, suggesting a sharing of these mediators in cerebral and pulmonary metastases. In contrast, ST6GALNAC5 specifically mediates brain metastasis. Normally restricted to the brain, the expression of ST6GALNAC5 in breast cancer cells enhances their adhesion to brain endothelial cells and their passage through the blood-brain barrier. This co-option of a brain sialyltransferase highlights the role of cell-surface glycosylation in organ-specific metastatic interactions.
Inferior temporal (IT) cortex is critical for visual memory, but it is not known how IT neurons retain memories while new information is streaming into the visual system. Single neurons were therefore recorded from IT cortex of two rhesus monkeys performing tasks that required them to hold items in memory while concurrently viewing other items. The neuronal response to an incoming visual stimulus was attenuated if it matched a stimulus actively held in working memory, even when several other stimuli intervened. The neuronal response to novel stimuli declined as the stimuli became familiar to the animal. IT neurons appear to function as adaptive mnemonic "filters" that preferentially pass information about new, unexpected, or not recently seen stimuli.
The distribution of opiate receptors in the cerebral cortex of the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) was determined by autoradiographic visualization of [3H]naloxone binding to tissue sections. Naloxone was bound in relatively large amounts to the cortical laminae containing the cell bodies of output neurons, to a varying set of additional laminae in different cortical fields, to fields closer to more primitive types of cortex, and to polysensory cortical fields. From these laminar and areal variations in distribution, it appears that opiate receptors play a role in specific aspects of cortical function.
Optical methods were used to locate the cell bodies of directionally selective ganglion cells in isolated rabbit retinas. These neurons detect the direction in which images move across the retinal surface and transmit that information to the brain. The receptive field of each identified cell was determined, after which the cell was injected with Lucifer yellow. An image of the receptive field border was then projected onto the fluorescent image of the dendrites, allowing precise comparison between them. The size of the receptive field matched closely the size of the dendritic arbor of that cell. This result restricts the types of convergence that can be postulated in modeling the mechanism of retinal directional selectivity.
The use of retrograde axonal transport of various substances (for example, enzymes, lectins, synthetic fluorescent compounds) has yielded much information on the organization of neuronal pathways. Each type of retrograde tracer has its own set of attributes which define the scope of problems it can address. We describe here a new class of retrograde tracer, rhodamine-labelled fluorescent latex microspheres (0.02-0.2 micron diameter), which have distinct advantages over other available tracers for in vivo and in vitro applications. When injected into brain tissue, these microspheres show little diffusion and consequently produce small, sharply defined injection sites. Once transported back to neuronal somata, the label persists for at least 10 weeks in vivo and 1 yr after fixation. Microspheres have no obvious cytotoxicity or phototoxicity as assessed by intracellular recording and staining of retrogradely labelled cells in a cortical brain slice preparation. This approach was further used to visualize and compare, in cat visual cortex slices, neurones with different projection patterns, and revealed significant differences in patterns of intrinsic axons and dendrites. These properties of microspheres open new avenues for anatomical and physiological studies of identified projection neurones in slices as well as in dissociated cell cultures.
There is an increasing amount of experimental evidence that oxidative stress is a causal, or at least an ancillary, factor in the neuropathology of several adult neurodegenerative disorders, as well as in stroke, trauma, and seizures. At the same time, excessive or persistent activation of glutamate-gated ion channels may cause neuronal degeneration in these same conditions. Glutamate and related acidic amino acids are thought to be the major excitatory neurotransmitters in brain and may be utilized by 40 percent of the synapses. Thus, two broad mechanisms--oxidative stress and excessive activation of glutamate receptors--are converging and represent sequential as well as interacting processes that provide a final common pathway for cell vulnerability in the brain. The broad distribution in brain of the processes regulating oxidative stress and mediating glutamatergic neurotransmission may explain the wide range of disorders in which both have been implicated. Yet differential expression of components of the processes in particular neuronal systems may account for selective neurodegeneration in certain disorders.
Intrastriatal injections of excitotoxic amino acids and their analogues (for example kainate and ibotenate) elicit a pattern of neuronal degeneration that is similar in many respects to that observed in Huntington's disease. In this disease there is a progressive degeneration of most types of intrinsic neuron but somatostatin and neuropeptide Y levels are increased 3-5-fold. This may be attributed to the selective preservation of a sub-class of striatal aspiny neurons, in which these two peptides are co-localized together with the enzyme NADPH-diaphorase. Beal et al. reported recently that following intrastriatal injections of quinolinic acid in rats, medium-sized aspiny neurons were selectively preserved and they suggested that quinolinic acid which is found in human brain might cause the neuronal degeneration seen in Huntington's disease. We have used immunocytochemical and enzyme histochemical techniques to examine this selective toxicity but find no evidence to support this finding. We conclude that there are substantial differences between the immunocytochemical changes detected in postmortem Huntington's disease brain and those following quinolinic-acid-induced degeneration.
Every organ depends on blood vessels for oxygen and nutrients, but the vasculature associated with individual organs can be structurally and molecularly diverse. The central nervous system (CNS) vasculature consists of a tightly sealed endothelium that forms the blood-brain barrier, whereas blood vessels of other organs are more porous. Wnt7a and Wnt7b encode two Wnt ligands produced by the neuroepithelium of the developing CNS coincident with vascular invasion. Using genetic mouse models, we found that these ligands directly target the vascular endothelium and that the CNS uses the canonical Wnt signaling pathway to promote formation and CNS-specific differentiation of the organ's vasculature.
Modern functional brain mapping relies on interactions of neuronal electrical activity with the cortical microcirculation. The existence of a highly localized, stimulus-evoked initial deoxygenation has remained a controversy. Here, the activity-dependent oxygen tension changes in the microcirculation were measured directly, using oxygen-dependent phosphorescence quenching of an exogenous indicator. The first event after sensory stimulation was an increase in oxygen consumption, followed by an increase in blood flow. Because oxygen consumption and neuronal activity are colocalized but the delayed blood flow is not, functional magnetic resonance imaging focused on this initial phase will yield much higher spatial resolution, ultimately enabling the noninvasive visualization of fundamental processing modules in the human brain.
Central nervous system myelin is a specialized structure produced by oligodendrocytes that ensheaths axons, allowing rapid and efficient saltatory conduction of action potentials. Many disorders promote damage to and eventual loss of the myelin sheath, which often results in significant neurological morbidity. However, little is known about the fundamental mechanisms that initiate myelin damage, with the assumption being that its fate follows that of the parent oligodendrocyte. Here we show that NMDA (N-methyl-d-aspartate) glutamate receptors mediate Ca2+ accumulation in central myelin in response to chemical ischaemia in vitro. Using two-photon microscopy, we imaged fluorescence of the Ca2+ indicator X-rhod-1 loaded into oligodendrocytes and the cytoplasmic compartment of the myelin sheath in adult rat optic nerves. The AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid)/kainate receptor antagonist NBQX completely blocked the ischaemic Ca2+ increase in oligodendroglial cell bodies, but only modestly reduced the Ca2+ increase in myelin. In contrast, the Ca2+ increase in myelin was abolished by broad-spectrum NMDA receptor antagonists (MK-801, 7-chlorokynurenic acid, d-AP5), but not by more selective blockers of NR2A and NR2B subunit-containing receptors (NVP-AAM077 and ifenprodil). In vitro ischaemia causes ultrastructural damage to both axon cylinders and myelin. NMDA receptor antagonism greatly reduced the damage to myelin. NR1, NR2 and NR3 subunits were detected in myelin by immunohistochemistry and immunoprecipitation, indicating that all necessary subunits are present for the formation of functional NMDA receptors. Our data show that the mature myelin sheath can respond independently to injurious stimuli. Given that axons are known to release glutamate, our finding that the Ca2+ increase was mediated in large part by activation of myelinic NMDA receptors suggests a new mechanism of axo-myelinic signalling. Such a mechanism may represent a potentially important therapeutic target in disorders in which demyelination is a prominent feature, such as multiple sclerosis, neurotrauma, infections (for example, HIV encephalomyelopathy) and aspects of ischaemic brain injury.
The combined use of two anterograde axonal transport methods reveals that in the prefrontal association cortex of macaque monkeys, associational projections from the parietal lobe of one hemisphere interdigitate with callosal projections from the opposite frontal lobe, forming adjacent columns 300 to 750 micrometers wide. The finding of separate and alternating ipsilateral and contralateral inputs in the frontal association cortex opens up new possibilities for the functional analysis of this large but unexplored area of the primate brain.
Dopaminergic neuronal pathways arise from mesencephalic nuclei and project axons to the striatum, cortex, limbic system and hypothalamus. Through these pathways dopamine affects many physiological functions, such as the control of coordinated movement and hormone secretion. Here we have studied the physiological involvement of the dopamine D2 receptors in dopaminergic transmission, using homologous recombination to generate D2-receptor-deficient mice. Absence of D2 receptors leads to animals that are akinetic and bradykinetic in behavioural tests, and which show significantly reduced spontaneous movements. This phenotype presents analogies with symptoms characteristic of Parkinson's disease. Our study shows that D2 receptors have a key role in the dopaminergic control of nervous function. These mice have therapeutic potential as a model for investigating and correcting dysfunctions of the dopaminergic system.
Much physiological and pharmacological evidence has accumulated to suggest that the autonomic nervous system has an important role in the peripheral modulation of gastric secretion, although the neurochemical mediators in the brain which initiate or modulate autonomic input are poorly understood. Recently, the demonstration that some oligopeptides present in mammalian brain act in the central nervous system (CNS) to influence profoundly glucoregulation, thermoregulation, blood pressure, sympathetic outflow, muscular activity of gut and stress-induced gastric haemorrhagic lesions have led us to examine a possible role for some of these endogenous brain oligopeptides as chemical messengers involved in the CNS modulation of gastric secretion. We report here that thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) acts within the CNS to elicit a vagus-dependent stimulation of gastric acid secretion.
Recognition sites for the uptake of norepinephrine on adrenergic neurons in the brain and periphery were labeled with [3H]desipramine. The number of these uptake sites varied with the concentration of transmitter; depletion of norepinephrine with reserpine reduced the number of uptake sites, whereas increasing the concentration of norepinephrine induced by treatment with monoamine oxidase inhibitors raised the number of binding sites. These dynamic alterations in norepinephrine uptake recognition sites may regulate synaptic function homeostatically, providing less inactivation of reuptake when the synaptic concentration of the transmitter is low and increased inactivation when it is high.
Large Amounts of cholecystokinin-octapeptide (CCK) are present in the rat caudatoputamen. The peptide occurs in axons and nerve endings but not in perikarya. The origin of CCK in the caudatoputamen was investigated with the use of immunocytochemistry and a radioimmunoassay specific for CCK. Although a small amount of CCK (approximately 30 percent) originates in the amygdaloid complex, the bulk of the peptide (approximately 70 percent) occurs in processes of neurons located ventral to the caudatoputamen, that is, the claustrum or the piriform cortex. The claustrum and piriform cortex receive inputs from various cortical areas and the olfactory system, respectively, and may process information and relay it to the caudatoputamen. Thus CCK may by the transmitter in the final common pathway linking various cortical areas and the olfactory system to the caudatoputamen.
Bird fanciers have known for centuries that songbirds learn their songs. This learning has striking parallels to speech acquisition: like humans, birds must hear the sounds of adults during a sensitive period, and must hear their own voice while learning to vocalize. With the discovery and investigation of discrete brain structures required for singing, songbirds are now providing insights into neural mechanisms of learning. Aided by a wealth of behavioural observations and species diversity, studies in songbirds are addressing such basic issues in neuroscience as perceptual and sensorimotor learning, developmental regulation of plasticity, and the control and function of adult neurogenesis.
Subcutaneous or intravenous injections daily of purified bovine pituitary growth hormone into pregnant rats from the 7th till the 20th day of pregnancy (total dose 36 mg) resulted in offspring with unchanged body weight but with significant increases in brain weight, brain DNA content, cortical cell density, and ratio of neurons to glia.
Adult neurogenesis, the birth and integration of new neurons from adult neural stem cells, is a striking form of structural plasticity and highlights the regenerative capacity of the adult mammalian brain. Accumulating evidence suggests that neuronal activity regulates adult neurogenesis and that new neurons contribute to specific brain functions. The mechanism that regulates the integration of newly generated neurons into the pre-existing functional circuitry in the adult brain is unknown. Here we show that newborn granule cells in the dentate gyrus of the adult hippocampus are tonically activated by ambient GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) before being sequentially innervated by GABA- and glutamate-mediated synaptic inputs. GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the adult brain, initially exerts an excitatory action on newborn neurons owing to their high cytoplasmic chloride ion content. Conversion of GABA-induced depolarization (excitation) into hyperpolarization (inhibition) in newborn neurons leads to marked defects in their synapse formation and dendritic development in vivo. Our study identifies an essential role for GABA in the synaptic integration of newly generated neurons in the adult brain, and suggests an unexpected mechanism for activity-dependent regulation of adult neurogenesis, in which newborn neurons may sense neuronal network activity through tonic and phasic GABA activation.
Neuronal systems involved in the initiation of cocaine reinforcement were investigated by identifying brain sites where direct application of the drug was reinforcing. This was accomplished by allowing rats to self-administer picomolar concentrations of cocaine into discrete brain regions. The medial prefrontal cortex supported self-administration, while the nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area did not. Self-administration could be attenuated by including equimolar concentrations of the dopaminergic D2-receptor antagonist sulpiride in the microinjection system. These results imply that cocaine reinforcement is mediated in part through a direct action on mesocortical dopaminergic receptors.
Human cerebral cortical function degrades during old age. Much of this change may result from a degradation of intracortical inhibition during senescence. We used multibarreled microelectrodes to study the effects of electrophoretic application of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the GABA type a (GABAa) receptor agonist muscimol, and the GABAa receptor antagonist bicuculline, respectively, on the properties of individual V1 cells in old monkeys. Bicuculline exerted a much weaker effect on neuronal responses in old than in young animals, confirming a degradation of GABA-mediated inhibition. On the other hand, the administration of GABA and muscimol resulted in improved visual function. Many treated cells in area V1 of old animals displayed responses typical of young cells. The present results have important implications for the treatment of the sensory, motor, and cognitive declines that accompany old age.
Typically developing human infants preferentially attend to biological motion within the first days of life. This ability is highly conserved across species and is believed to be critical for filial attachment and for detection of predators. The neural underpinnings of biological motion perception are overlapping with brain regions involved in perception of basic social signals such as facial expression and gaze direction, and preferential attention to biological motion is seen as a precursor to the capacity for attributing intentions to others. However, in a serendipitous observation, we recently found that an infant with autism failed to recognize point-light displays of biological motion, but was instead highly sensitive to the presence of a non-social, physical contingency that occurred within the stimuli by chance. This observation raised the possibility that perception of biological motion may be altered in children with autism from a very early age, with cascading consequences for both social development and the lifelong impairments in social interaction that are a hallmark of autism spectrum disorders. Here we show that two-year-olds with autism fail to orient towards point-light displays of biological motion, and their viewing behaviour when watching these point-light displays can be explained instead as a response to non-social, physical contingencies--physical contingencies that are disregarded by control children. This observation has far-reaching implications for understanding the altered neurodevelopmental trajectory of brain specialization in autism.
Perhaps the most widely recognized but least understood electrophysiological activity of the cerebral cortex is its characteristic electrical oscillations. Recently, there have been efforts to understand the mechanisms underlying high-frequency gamma oscillations(approximately 40 Hz) because they may coordinate sensory processing between populations of cortical cells. High-resolution cortical recordings show the gamma oscillations are constrained to sensory cortex, that they occur independently in auditory and somatosensory cortex, and that they are phase-locked between primary and secondary sensory cortex. As yet, the mechanism of their neurogenesis is unknown. Whereas cortical neurons can produce gamma oscillations without subcortical input, they may also be modulated by the thalamus and basal forebrain. Here we report that the neural generator of gamma oscillations in auditory cortex seems to be intracortical, serving to synchronize interactions between the primary and secondary areas. The acoustic thalamus directly modulates these oscillations, which are inhibited by stimulation of the dorsal and ventral divisions of the medial geniculate nucleus (MGd and MGv) and evoked by stimulation of the adjacent posterior intralaminar nucleus (PIL).
Medulloblastoma encompasses a collection of clinically and molecularly diverse tumour subtypes that together comprise the most common malignant childhood brain tumour. These tumours are thought to arise within the cerebellum, with approximately 25% originating from granule neuron precursor cells (GNPCs) after aberrant activation of the Sonic Hedgehog pathway (hereafter, SHH subtype). The pathological processes that drive heterogeneity among the other medulloblastoma subtypes are not known, hindering the development of much needed new therapies. Here we provide evidence that a discrete subtype of medulloblastoma that contains activating mutations in the WNT pathway effector CTNNB1 (hereafter, WNT subtype) arises outside the cerebellum from cells of the dorsal brainstem. We found that genes marking human WNT-subtype medulloblastomas are more frequently expressed in the lower rhombic lip (LRL) and embryonic dorsal brainstem than in the upper rhombic lip (URL) and developing cerebellum. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and intra-operative reports showed that human WNT-subtype tumours infiltrate the dorsal brainstem, whereas SHH-subtype tumours are located within the cerebellar hemispheres. Activating mutations in Ctnnb1 had little impact on progenitor cell populations in the cerebellum, but caused the abnormal accumulation of cells on the embryonic dorsal brainstem which included aberrantly proliferating Zic1(+) precursor cells. These lesions persisted in all mutant adult mice; moreover, in 15% of cases in which Tp53 was concurrently deleted, they progressed to form medulloblastomas that recapitulated the anatomy and gene expression profiles of human WNT-subtype medulloblastoma. We provide the first evidence, to our knowledge, that subtypes of medulloblastoma have distinct cellular origins. Our data provide an explanation for the marked molecular and clinical differences between SHH- and WNT-subtype medulloblastomas and have profound implications for future research and treatment of this important childhood cancer.
Thyroid hormone is important in the regulation of synthesis and secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the anterior pituitary, but its role in the control of hypothalamic thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is controversial. To determine whether thyroid hormone regulates the function of TRH in the hypothalamic tuberoinfundibular system, a study was made of the effect of hypothyroidism on thyrotropin-releasing hormone messenger RNA (proTRH mRNA) and TRH prohormone in the rat paraventricular nucleus. Extracts of rat hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus were examined by quantitative Northern blot analysis, and coronal sections of rat brain were examined by in situ hybridization histochemistry and immunocytochemistry. A nearly twofold increase in proTRH mRNA was observed in hypothyroid animals; this increase could be obliterated by levothyroxine treatment, suggesting an inverse relation between circulating thyroid hormone and proTRH mRNA. In situ hybridization showed that this response occurred exclusively in medial parvocellular neurons of the paraventricular nucleus. A simultaneous increase in proTRH mRNA and immunoreactive TRH prohormone in this region suggests that hypothyroidism induces both transcription and translation of the TRH prohormone in the paraventricular nucleus.
Retinal ganglion cells are the projection neurons that link the retina to the brain. Peptide immunoreactive cells in the ganglion cell layer (GCL) of the mammalian retina have been noted but their identity has not been determined. We now report that, in the rabbit, 25-35% of all retinal ganglion cells contain substance P-like (SP) immunoreactivity. They were identified by either retrograde transport of fluorescent tracers injected into the superior colliculus, or by retrograde degeneration after optic nerve section. SP immunoreactive cells are present in all parts of the retina and have medium to large cell bodies with dendrites that ramify extensively in the proximal inner plexiform layer. Their axons terminate in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus, superior colliculus and accessory optic nuclei, and these terminals disappear completely after contralateral optic nerve section and/or eye enucleation. In the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus large, beaded, immunoreactive axons and varicosities make up a narrow plexus just below the optic tract, where they define a new geniculate lamina. The varicosities make multiple synaptic contacts with dendrites of dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus projection neurons and presumptive interneurons in complex glomerular neuropil. This is direct evidence that some mammalian retinal ganglion cells contain substance P-like peptides and strongly suggests that, in the rabbit, substance P (or related tachykinins) may be a transmitter or modulator in a specific population or populations of retinal ganglion cells.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of the glutamate receptor is essential for neuronal differentiation and establishment or elimination of synapses in a developing brain. The activity of the NMDA receptor has now been shown to also regulate the migration of granule cells in slice preparations of the developing mouse cerebellum. First, blockade of NMDA receptors by specific antagonists resulted in the curtailment of cell migration. Second, enhancement of NMDA receptor activity by the removal of magnesium or by the application of glycine increased the rate of cell movement. Third, increase of endogenous extracellular glutamate by inhibition of its uptake accelerated the rate of cell migration. These results suggest that NMDA receptors may play an early role in the regulation of calcium-dependent cell migration before neurons reach their targets and form synaptic contacts.
Protein aggregation is an established pathogenic mechanism in Alzheimer's disease, but little is known about the initiation of this process in vivo. Intracerebral injection of dilute, amyloid-beta (Abeta)-containing brain extracts from humans with Alzheimer's disease or beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) transgenic mice induced cerebral beta-amyloidosis and associated pathology in APP transgenic mice in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. The seeding activity of brain extracts was reduced or abolished by Abeta immunodepletion, protein denaturation, or by Abeta immunization of the host. The phenotype of the exogenously induced amyloidosis depended on both the host and the source of the agent, suggesting the existence of polymorphic Abeta strains with varying biological activities reminiscent of prion strains.
Functional serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) receptors have been divided into three subtypes: 5-HT1-like, 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 (ref. 1). Brain binding sites have been identified for both the 5-HT1 and 5-HT2 subtypes. Receptors of the 5-HT3 type have been characterized on isolated peripheral tissue models such as the rat vagus nerve, guinea-pig ileum and isolated rabbit heart. Using these models, selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonists such as MDL 72222 (ref. 5), ICS 205-930 (ref. 6), GR38032F (ref. 7) and BRL 43694 (ref. 8) have been developed. Recently, GR38032F, MDL 72222 and ICS 205-930 have been shown to have behavioural effects in rodents and primates that undoubtedly reflect an action in the central nervous system (refs 9-11 and unpublished observations), suggesting the existence of 5-HT3 receptors in the brain. Here we report direct evidence for the existence of 5-HT3 receptors in rat brain tissue and their distribution, based on high affinity binding of the potent 5-HT3 receptor antagonist 3H-GR65630 to homogenates of rat entorhinal cortex. Selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonists and agonists inhibited binding of 3H-GR65630 with high affinities which correlated well with their actions on the rat isolated vagus nerve. Binding was differentially distributed throughout the brain with high concentrations in cortical and limbic areas.
The cerebral cortex develops through the coordinated generation of dozens of neuronal subtypes, but the mechanisms involved remain unclear. Here we show that mouse embryonic stem cells, cultured without any morphogen but in the presence of a sonic hedgehog inhibitor, recapitulate in vitro the major milestones of cortical development, leading to the sequential generation of a diverse repertoire of neurons that display most salient features of genuine cortical pyramidal neurons. When grafted into the cerebral cortex, these neurons develop patterns of axonal projections corresponding to a wide range of cortical layers, but also to highly specific cortical areas, in particular visual and limbic areas, thereby demonstrating that the identity of a cortical area can be specified without any influence from the brain. The discovery of intrinsic corticogenesis sheds new light on the mechanisms of neuronal specification, and opens new avenues for the modelling and treatment of brain diseases.
Monogamous social organization is characterized by selective affiliation with a partner, high levels of paternal behaviour and, in many species, intense aggression towards strangers for defence of territory, nest and mate. Although much has been written about the evolutionary causes of monogamy, little is known about the proximate mechanisms for pair bonding in monogamous mammals. The prairie vole, Microtus ochrogaster, is a monogamous, biparental rodent which exhibits long-term pair bonds characterized by selective affiliation (partner preference) and aggression. Here we describe the rapid development of both selective aggression and partner preferences following mating in the male of this species. We hypothesized that either arginine-vasopressin (AVP) or oxytocin (OT), two nine-amino-acid neuropeptides with diverse forebrain projections, could mediate the development of selective aggression and affiliation. This hypothesis was based on the following observations: (1) monogamous and polygamous voles differ specifically in the distribution of forebrain AVP and OT receptors; (2) AVP innervation in the prairie vole brain is sexually dimorphic and important for paternal behaviour; (3) central AVP pathways have been previously implicated in territorial displays and social memory; and (4) central OT pathways have been previously implicated in affiliative behaviours. We now demonstrate that central AVP is both necessary and sufficient for selective aggression and partner preference formation, two critical features of pair bonding in the monogamous prairie vole.
Ionic channels, the integral membrane proteins responsible for the brain's electrical activity, have long been studied with standard electrophysiological and biochemical methods. Recently, however, newly developed electrical and molecular biological methods have been brought to bear on long-standing questions in neurobiology. Goals of current channel research include elucidating the primary amino acid sequence and three-dimensional structure of channel species; the mechanisms of synthesis, sorting, membrane insertion, and degradation; and aspects of function such as gating, ion permeation and selectivity, and regulation. The latest research combines the new biochemical and electrophysiological techniques to reveal relations between molecular structure and function.
Development of the nervous system depends on the correct pathfinding and target recognition by the growing tip of an axon, the growth cone. Diffusible or substrate-bound molecules present in the environment may serve as either attractants or repellents to influence the direction of growth-cone extension. Here we report that differences in cyclic-AMP-dependent activity in a neuron may result in opposite turning of the growth cone in response to the same guidance cue. A gradient of brain-derived neurotrophic factor normally triggers an attractive turning response of the growth cone of Xenopus spinal neurons in culture, but the same gradient induces repulsive turning of these growth cones in the presence of a competitive analogue of cAMP or of a specific inhibitor of protein kinase A. This cAMP-dependent switch of the turning response was also found for turning induced by acetylcholine, but not for the turning induced by neurotrophin-3 (NT-3). Thus, in the presence of other factors that modulate neuronal cAMP-dependent activity, the same guidance cue may trigger opposite turning behaviours of the growth cone during its pathfinding in the nervous system.
The ability to "mentalize," that is to understand and manipulate other people's behavior in terms of their mental states, is a major ingredient in successful social interactions. A rudimentary form of this ability may be seen in great apes, but in humans it is developed to a high level. Specific impairments of mentalizing in both developmental and acquired disorders suggest that this ability depends on a dedicated and circumscribed brain system. Functional imaging studies implicate medial prefrontal cortex and posterior superior temporal sulcus (STS) as components of this system. Clues to the specific function of these components in mentalizing come from single cell recording studies: STS is concerned with representing the actions of others through the detection of biological motion; medial prefrontal regions are concerned with explicit representation of states of the self. These observations suggest that the ability to mentalize has evolved from a system for representing actions.
Homoiotherms, for example mammals, regulate their body temperature with physiological responses such as a change of metabolic rate and sweating. In contrast, the body temperature of poikilotherms, for example Drosophila, is the result of heat exchange with the surrounding environment as a result of the large ratio of surface area to volume of their bodies. Accordingly, these animals must instinctively move to places with an environmental temperature as close as possible to their genetically determined desired temperature. The temperature that Drosophila instinctively prefers has a function equivalent to the 'set point' temperature in mammals. Although various temperature-gated TRP channels have been discovered, molecular and cellular components in Drosophila brain responsible for determining the desired temperature remain unknown. We identified these components by performing a large-scale genetic screen of temperature preference behaviour (TPB) in Drosophila. In parallel, we mapped areas of the Drosophila brain controlling TPB by targeted inactivation of neurons with tetanus toxin and a potassium channel (Kir2.1) driven with various brain-specific GAL4s. Here we show that mushroom bodies (MBs) and the cyclic AMP-cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (cAMP-PKA) pathway are essential for controlling TPB. Furthermore, targeted expression of cAMP-PKA pathway components in only the MB was sufficient to rescue abnormal TPB of the corresponding mutants. Preferred temperatures were affected by the level of cAMP and PKA activity in the MBs in various PKA pathway mutants.
In Drosophila melanogaster, ageing is slowed when insulin-like signalling is reduced: life expectancy is extended by more than 50% when the insulin-like receptor (InR) or its receptor substrate (chico) are mutated, or when insulin-producing cells are ablated. But we have yet to resolve when insulin affects ageing, or whether insulin signals regulate ageing directly or indirectly through secondary hormones. Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan is also extended when insulin signalling is inhibited in certain tissues, or when repressed in adult worms, and this requires the forkhead transcription factor (FOXO) encoded by daf-16 (ref. 6). The D. melanogaster insulin-like receptor mediates phosphorylation of dFOXO, the equivalent of nematode daf-16 and mammalian FOXO3a. We demonstrate here that dFOXO regulates D. melanogaster ageing when activated in the adult pericerebral fat body. We further show that this limited activation of dFOXO reduces expression of the Drosophila insulin-like peptide dilp-2 synthesized in neurons, and represses endogenous insulin-dependent signalling in peripheral fat body. These findings suggest that autonomous and non-autonomous roles of insulin signalling combine to control ageing.
Asymmetric cell division generates daughter cells with different developmental fates from progenitor cells that contain localized determinants. During this division, the asymmetric localization of cell-fate determinants and the orientation of the mitotic spindle must be precisely coordinated. In Drosophila neuroblasts, inscuteable controls both spindle orientation and the asymmetric localization of the cell-fate determinants Prospero and Numb. Inscuteable itself is localized in an apical cortical crescent and thus reflects the intrinsic asymmetry of the neuroblast. Here we show that localization of Inscuteable depends on Bazooka, a protein containing three PDZ domains with overall sequence similarity to Par-3 of Caenorhabditis elegans. Bazooka and Inscuteable form a complex that also contains Staufen, a protein responsible for the asymmetric localization of prospero messenger RNA. We propose that, after delamination of the neuroblast from the neuroepithelium, Bazooka provides an asymmetric cue in the apical cytocortex that is required to anchor Inscuteable. As Bazooka is also responsible for the maintenance of apical-basal polarity in epithelial tissues, it may be the missing link between epithelial polarity and neuroblast polarity.
Human tissues have carbon-isotope ratios (13C/12C) that reflect dietary ratios. This observation has been used to determine the extent of metabolic turnover of DNA in cells of the adult human cerebellum (90 percent of which are neuronal). If adult human neuronal DNA were metabolically stable, its 13C/12C would reflect that in the maternal diet during fetal development as nearly all neurons are formed during maturation of the fetal brain and do not undergo cell division thereafter. The 13C/12C ratios in the food chains and body tissues of Europeans differ from corresponding American ratios by about 50 parts per million on the average. Therefore, turnover was studied by comparing 13C/12C ratios in cerebellar DNA of American-born Americans, European-born Americans, and European-born Europeans. The 13C/12C ratios in cerebellar DNA from European-born Americans were closer to 13C/12C ratios in cerebellar DNA from European-born Europeans than from American-born Americans, indicating that there was little or no turnover of neuronal DNA.
It is not known whether the variability of neural activity in the cerebral cortex carries information or reflects noisy underlying mechanisms. In an examination of the reliability of spike generation using recordings from neurons in rat neocortical slices, the precision of spike timing was found to depend on stimulus transients. Constant stimuli led to imprecise spike trains, whereas stimuli with fluctuations resembling synaptic activity produced spike trains with timing reproducible to less than 1 millisecond. These data suggest a low intrinsic noise level in spike generation, which could allow cortical neurons to accurately transform synaptic input into spike sequences, supporting a possible role for spike timing in the processing of cortical information by the neocortex.
The primate somatosensory cortex, which processes tactile stimuli, contains a topographic representation of the signals it receives, but the way in which such maps are maintained is poorly understood. Previous studies of cortical plasticity indicated that changes in cortical representation during learning arise largely as a result of hebbian synaptic change mechanisms. Here we show, using owl monkeys trained to respond to specific stimulus sequence events, that serial application of stimuli to the fingers results in changes to the neuronal response specificity and maps of the hand surfaces in the true primary somatosensory cortical field (S1 area 3b). In this representational remodelling stimuli applied asychronously to the fingers resulted in these fingers being integrated in their representation, whereas fingers to which stimuli were applied asynchronously were segregated in their representation. Ventroposterior thalamus response maps derived in these monkeys were not equivalently reorganized. This representational plasticity appears to be cortical in origin.
The rate of release of gamma-aminobutyric acid from the perforated pial surface of the cerebral cortex in the cat showed systematic variations with the state of activation or "arousal" of the electrocorticogram. In animals subjected to midbrain coagulation and showing constant spindle patterns characteristic of sleep, the rate of release was three times greater (about 2 micrograms per hour per square centimeter) than in animals showing a largely "aroused" electrocorticogram, which had sections of the upper cervical cord or were neuraxially intact but had been given local anesthesia. The rate of release of glutamic acid was lower in the "sleeping" animals than in "aroused" animals, while no such differences were found for glutamine and aspartic acid. Such studies may lead to a better understanding of chemical mechanisms involved in the control of states of consciousness by the brain stem.
During perceptual decisions, the activity of sensory neurons correlates with a subject's percept, even when the physical stimulus is identical. The origin of this correlation is unknown. Current theory proposes a causal effect of noise in sensory neurons on perceptual decisions, but the correlation could result from different brain states associated with the perceptual choice (a top-down explanation). These two schemes have very different implications for the role of sensory neurons in forming decisions. Here we use white-noise analysis to measure tuning functions of V2 neurons associated with choice and simultaneously measure how the variation in the stimulus affects the subjects' (two macaques) perceptual decisions. In causal models, stronger effects of the stimulus upon decisions, mediated by sensory neurons, are associated with stronger choice-related activity. However, we find that over the time course of the trial these measures change in different directions-at odds with causal models. An analysis of the effect of reward size also supports this conclusion. Finally, we find that choice is associated with changes in neuronal gain that are incompatible with causal models. All three results are readily explained if choice is associated with changes in neuronal gain caused by top-down phenomena that closely resemble attention. We conclude that top-down processes contribute to choice-related activity. Thus, even forming simple sensory decisions involves complex interactions between cognitive processes and sensory neurons.
Humans and other animals must often make decisions on the basis of imperfect evidence. Statisticians use measures such as P values to assign degrees of confidence to propositions, but little is known about how the brain computes confidence estimates about decisions. We explored this issue using behavioural analysis and neural recordings in rats in combination with computational modelling. Subjects were trained to perform an odour categorization task that allowed decision confidence to be manipulated by varying the distance of the test stimulus to the category boundary. To understand how confidence could be computed along with the choice itself, using standard models of decision-making, we defined a simple measure that quantified the quality of the evidence contributing to a particular decision. Here we show that the firing rates of many single neurons in the orbitofrontal cortex match closely to the predictions of confidence models and cannot be readily explained by alternative mechanisms, such as learning stimulus-outcome associations. Moreover, when tested using a delayed reward version of the task, we found that rats' willingness to wait for rewards increased with confidence, as predicted by the theoretical model. These results indicate that confidence estimates, previously suggested to require 'metacognition' and conscious awareness are available even in the rodent brain, can be computed with relatively simple operations, and can drive adaptive behaviour. We suggest that confidence estimation may be a fundamental and ubiquitous component of decision-making.
Dopamine and apomorphine produced concentration-dependent inhibition of adrenergic neurotransmission in the isolated, perfused, rabbit ear artery. The inhibitory action of both dopamine and apomorphine was competitively antagonized by haloperidol and several other antipsychotic drugs. The calculated affinities of these drugs for the dopaminergic receptor correlate closely with both the pharmacological potencies of these drugs in vivo and their reported potencies as inhibitors of [3H]haloperidol binding to "dopamine receptors" in brain homogenates.
Brain sections from patients who had died with senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type (SDAT), Huntington's disease (HD), or no neurologic disease were studied by autoradiography to measure sodium-independent L-[3H]glutamate binding. In brain sections from SDAT patients, glutamate binding was normal in the caudate, putamen, and claustrum but was lower than normal in the cortex. The decreased cortical binding represented a reduction in numbers of binding sites, not a change in binding affinity, and appeared to be the result of a specific decrease in numbers of the low-affinity quisqualate binding site. No significant changes in cortical binding of other ligands were observed. In brains from Huntington's disease patients, glutamate binding was lower in the caudate and putamen than in the same regions of brains from control and SDAT patients but was normal in the cortex. It is possible that development of positron-emitting probes for glutamate receptors may permit diagnosis of SDAT in vivo by means of positron emission tomographic scanning.
Phosphorylation of membrane components is thought to be an important process in membrane function. Phosphorylated proteins and a special class of phospholipids, the (poly)phosphoinositides (poly PI), are implicated in the regulation of membrane permeability and synaptic transmission in neurones. For many years, protein phosphorylation and poly PI metabolism have been studied in parallel without knowledge of their possible interaction. We report here that the ACTH-sensitive protein kinase/B-50 protein complex which we recently isolated in soluble form from rat brain synaptosomal plasma membranes has lipid phosphorylating activity. Exogenously added phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (DPI) is phosphorylated to phosphatidylinositol 4,5-diphosphate (TPI), and this DPI-kinase activity is dependent on the state of phosphorylation of the protein kinase/B-50 protein complex. The results imply that phosphorylation of protein may affect the metabolism of (poly) PI in brain cell membranes.
The perception of sound is based on signal processing by a bank of frequency-selective auditory filters, the so-called critical bands. Here we investigate how the internal frequency organization of the main auditory midbrain station, the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus (ICC), might contribute to the generation of the critical-band behaviour of its neurons. We find a unique spatial arrangement of the frequency distribution in the ICC that correlates with psychophysical critical-band characteristics. Systematic frequency discontinuities along the main tonotopic axis, in combination with a smooth frequency gradient orthogonal to the main tonotopic organization of cat ICC, reflect a layering of the frequency organization paralleling its anatomical laminae. This layered frequency organization is characterized by constant frequency ratios of corresponding locations on neighbouring laminae and may provide a spatial framework for the generation of critical bands and for signal processing within and across frequency bands for the analysis of sound.
Long-term potentiation (LTP) is a persistent increase in synaptic strength implicated in certain forms of learning and memory. In the CA1 region of the hippocampus, LTP is thought to involve the release of one or more retrograde messengers from the postsynaptic cell that act on the presynaptic terminal to enhance transmitter release. One candidate retrograde messenger is the membrane-permeant gas nitric oxide (NO), which in the brain is released after activation of the neuronal-specific NO synthase isoform (nNOS). To assess the importance of NO in hippocampal synaptic plasticity, LTP was examined in mice where the gene encoding nNOS was disrupted by gene targeting. In nNOS- mice, LTP induced by weak intensity tetanic stimulation was normal except for a slight reduction in comparison to that in wild-type mice and was blocked by NOS inhibitors, just as it was in wild-type mice. Immunocytochemical studies indicate that in the nNOS- mice as in wild-type mice, the endothelial form of NOS (eNOS) is expressed in CA1 neurons. These findings suggest that eNOS, rather than nNOS, generates NO within the postsynaptic cell during LTP.
Malignant gliomas are the most common malignant brain tumors and are almost always fatal. A thymidine kinase-negative mutant of herpes simplex virus-1 (dlsptk) that is attenuated for neurovirulence was tested as a possible treatment for gliomas. In cell culture, dlsptk killed two long-term human glioma lines and three short-term human glioma cell populations. In nude mice with implanted subcutaneous and subrenal U87 human gliomas, intraneoplastic inoculation of dlsptk caused growth inhibition. In nude mice with intracranial U87 gliomas, intraneoplastic inoculation of dlsptk prolonged survival. Genetically engineered viruses such as dlsptk merit further evaluation as novel antineoplastic agents.
A new type of agonist-binding subunit of rat neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) was identified. Rat genomic DNA and complementary DNA encoding this subunit (alpha 2) were cloned and analyzed. Complementary DNA expression studies in Xenopus oocytes revealed that the injection of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) for alpha 2 and beta 2 (a neuronal nAChR subunit) led to the generation of a functional nAChR. In contrast to the other known neuronal nAChRs, the receptor produced by the injection of alpha 2 and beta 2 mRNAs was resistant to the alpha-neurotoxin Bgt3.1. In situ hybridization histochemistry showed that alpha 2 mRNA was expressed in a small number of regions, in contrast to the wide distribution of the other known agonist-binding subunits (alpha 3 and alpha 4) mRNAs. These results demonstrate that the alpha 2 subunit differs from other known agonist-binding alpha-subunits of nAChRs in its distribution in the brain and in its pharmacology.
Our perception of the environment relies on the capacity of neural networks to adapt rapidly to changes in incoming stimuli. It is increasingly being realized that the neural code is adaptive, that is, sensory neurons change their responses and selectivity in a dynamic manner to match the changes in input stimuli. Understanding how rapid exposure, or adaptation, to a stimulus of fixed structure changes information processing by cortical networks is essential for understanding the relationship between sensory coding and behaviour. Physiological investigations of adaptation have contributed greatly to our understanding of how individual sensory neurons change their responses to influence stimulus coding, yet whether and how adaptation affects information coding in neural populations is unknown. Here we examine how brief adaptation (on the timescale of visual fixation) influences the structure of interneuronal correlations and the accuracy of population coding in the macaque (Macaca mulatta) primary visual cortex (V1). We find that brief adaptation to a stimulus of fixed structure reorganizes the distribution of correlations across the entire network by selectively reducing their mean and variability. The post-adaptation changes in neuronal correlations are associated with specific, stimulus-dependent changes in the efficiency of the population code, and are consistent with changes in perceptual performance after adaptation. Our results have implications beyond the predictions of current theories of sensory coding, suggesting that brief adaptation improves the accuracy of population coding to optimize neuronal performance during natural viewing.
Sortilin (approximately 95 kDa) is a member of the recently discovered family of Vps10p-domain receptors, and is expressed in a variety of tissues, notably brain, spinal cord and muscle. It acts as a receptor for neurotensin, but predominates in regions of the nervous system that neither synthesize nor respond to this neuropeptide, suggesting that sortilin has additional roles. Sortilin is expressed during embryogenesis in areas where nerve growth factor (NGF) and its precursor, proNGF, have well-characterized effects. These neurotrophins can be released by neuronal tissues, and they regulate neuronal development through cell survival and cell death signalling. NGF regulates cell survival and cell death via binding to two different receptors, TrkA and p75NTR (ref. 10). In contrast, proNGF selectively induces apoptosis through p75NTR but not TrkA. However, not all p75NTR-expressing cells respond to proNGF, suggesting that additional membrane proteins are required for the induction of cell death. Here we report that proNGF creates a signalling complex by simultaneously binding to p75NTR and sortilin. Thus sortilin acts as a co-receptor and molecular switch governing the p75NTR-mediated pro-apoptotic signal induced by proNGF.
Neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease are neurofibrillary tangles composed of tau and neuritic plaques comprising amyloid-beta peptides (Abeta) derived from amyloid precursor protein (APP), but their exact relationship remains elusive. Phosphorylation of tau and APP on certain serine or threonine residues preceding proline affects tangle formation and Abeta production in vitro. Phosphorylated Ser/Thr-Pro motifs in peptides can exist in cis or trans conformations, the conversion of which is catalysed by the Pin1 prolyl isomerase. Pin1 has been proposed to regulate protein function by accelerating conformational changes, but such activity has never been visualized and the biological and pathological significance of Pin1 substrate conformations is unknown. Notably, Pin1 is downregulated and/or inhibited by oxidation in Alzheimer's disease neurons, Pin1 knockout causes tauopathy and neurodegeneration, and Pin1 promoter polymorphisms appear to associate with reduced Pin1 levels and increased risk for late-onset Alzheimer's disease. However, the role of Pin1 in APP processing and Abeta production is unknown. Here we show that Pin1 has profound effects on APP processing and Abeta production. We find that Pin1 binds to the phosphorylated Thr 668-Pro motif in APP and accelerates its isomerization by over 1,000-fold, regulating the APP intracellular domain between two conformations, as visualized by NMR. Whereas Pin1 overexpression reduces Abeta secretion from cell cultures, knockout of Pin1 increases its secretion. Pin1 knockout alone or in combination with overexpression of mutant APP in mice increases amyloidogenic APP processing and selectively elevates insoluble Abeta42 (a major toxic species) in brains in an age-dependent manner, with Abeta42 being prominently localized to multivesicular bodies of neurons, as shown in Alzheimer's disease before plaque pathology. Thus, Pin1-catalysed prolyl isomerization is a novel mechanism to regulate APP processing and Abeta production, and its deregulation may link both tangle and plaque pathologies. These findings provide new insight into the pathogenesis and treatment of Alzheimer's disease.
The structural dynamics of synapses probably has a crucial role in the development and plasticity of the nervous system. In the mammalian brain, the vast majority of excitatory axo-dendritic synapses occur on dendritic specializations called 'spines'. However, little is known about their long-term changes in the intact developing or adult animal. To address this question we developed a transcranial two-photon imaging technique to follow identified spines of layer-5 pyramidal neurons in the primary visual cortex of living transgenic mice expressing yellow fluorescent protein. Here we show that filopodia-like dendritic protrusions, extending and retracting over hours, are abundant in young animals but virtually absent from the adult. In young mice, within the 'critical period' for visual cortex development, approximately 73% of spines remain stable over a one-month interval; most changes are associated with spine elimination. In contrast, in adult mice, the overwhelming majority of spines (approximately 96%) remain stable over the same interval with a half-life greater than 13 months. These results indicate that spines, initially plastic during development, become remarkably stable in the adult, providing a potential structural basis for long-term information storage.
Monocular deprivation (MD) has much more rapid and severe effects on the ocular dominance of neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1) than does binocular deprivation. This finding underlies the widely held hypothesis that the developmental plasticity of ocular dominance reflects competitive interactions for synaptic space between inputs from the two eyes. According to this view, the relative levels of evoked activity in afferents representing the two eyes determine functional changes in response to altered visual experience. However, if the deprived eye of a monocularly deprived kitten is simply reopened, there is substantial physiological and behavioural recovery, leading to the suggestion that absolute activity levels, or some other non-competitive mechanisms, determine the degree of recovery from MD. Here we provide evidence that correlated binocular input is essential for such recovery. Recovery is far less complete if the two eyes are misaligned after a period of MD. This is a powerful demonstration of the importance of cooperative, associative mechanisms in the developing visual cortex.
Areas and pathways subserving object and spatial vision are segregated in the visual system. Experiments show that the primate prefrontal cortex is similarly segregated into object and spatial domains. Neurons that code information related to stimulus identity are dissociable, both by function and region, from those that code information related to stimulus location. These findings indicate that the prefrontal cortex contains separate processing mechanisms for remembering "what" and "where" an object is.
The amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) is a principal component of the cerebral plaques found in the brains of patients with Alzeheimer's disease (AD). This insoluble 40- to 42-amino acid peptide is formed by the cleavage of the Abeta precursor protein (APP). The three proteases that cleave APP, alpha-, beta-, and gamma-secretases, have been implicated in the etiology of AD. beta-Secretase is a membrane-anchored protein with clear homology to soluble aspartyl proteases, and alpha-secretase displays characteristics of certain membrane-tethered metalloproteases. gamma-Secretase is apparently an oligomeric complex that includes the presenilins, which may be the catalytic component of this protease. Identification of the alpha-, beta-, and gamma-secretases provides potential targets for designing new drugs to treat AD.
Theoretical analyses of the electrical behaviour of the highly branched processes of nerve cells has focused attention on the possibility that single cells perform complex logical operations rather than simply summing their synaptic inputs. In particular, it has been suggested that the orientation and direction selectivity of cells in the visual cortex results from the action of a nonlinear 'shunting' inhibition that emulates an AND-NOT logical operation. The characteristic biophysical feature of this proposed inhibitory mechanism is that it evokes a large and relatively sustained increase in the conductance of the neuronal membrane while leaving the membrane potential unaffected. This shunting mechanism contrasts with linear 'summative' inhibition in which conductance changes are less prominent, and inhibition is achieved by hyperpolarization of the membrane potential. In a direct experimental test of the hypothesis that the selectivity of visual cortical neurons depends on shunting inhibition we found no evidence for the large conductance changes predicted by the theory.
Sensory responsiveness of single neurons in posterior association cortex of kittens that were 7 to 50 days old was investigated. The percentage of trimodal cells (that is, cells that respond to visual, auditory, and somesthetic stimulation) increased gradually until day 50, when percentages of trimodally responsive cells approached the adult level. In the youngest kittens, cells were predominantly responsive to only visual stimulation. With maturation, responsiveness to auditory and then to somesthetic stimulation was observed in increasing percentages of cells.
The impressive capabilities of the mammalian brain--ranging from perception, pattern recognition and memory formation to decision making and motor activity control--have inspired their re-creation in a wide range of artificial intelligence systems for applications such as face recognition, anomaly detection, medical diagnosis and robotic vehicle control. Yet before neuron-based brains evolved, complex biomolecular circuits provided individual cells with the 'intelligent' behaviour required for survival. However, the study of how molecules can 'think' has not produced an equal variety of computational models and applications of artificial chemical systems. Although biomolecular systems have been hypothesized to carry out neural-network-like computations in vivo and the synthesis of artificial chemical analogues has been proposed theoretically, experimental work has so far fallen short of fully implementing even a single neuron. Here, building on the richness of DNA computing and strand displacement circuitry, we show how molecular systems can exhibit autonomous brain-like behaviours. Using a simple DNA gate architecture that allows experimental scale-up of multilayer digital circuits, we systematically transform arbitrary linear threshold circuits (an artificial neural network model) into DNA strand displacement cascades that function as small neural networks. Our approach even allows us to implement a Hopfield associative memory with four fully connected artificial neurons that, after training in silico, remembers four single-stranded DNA patterns and recalls the most similar one when presented with an incomplete pattern. Our results suggest that DNA strand displacement cascades could be used to endow autonomous chemical systems with the capability of recognizing patterns of molecular events, making decisions and responding to the environment.
Long-term potentiation (LTP) is a model for learning and memory processes. Tetanic stimulation of the sensory cortex produces LTP in motor cortical neurons, whereas tetanization of the ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus, which also projects to the motor cortex, does not. However, after simultaneous high-frequency stimulation of both the sensory cortex and the ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus, LTP of thalamic input to motor cortical neurons is induced. This associative LTP occurs only in neurons in the superficial layers of the motor cortex that receive monosynaptic input from both the sensory cortex and the ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus. Associative LTP in the motor cortex may constitute a basis for the retention of motor skills.
Previous investigations have combined transcriptional and genetic analyses in human cell lines, but few have applied these techniques to human neural tissue. To gain a global molecular perspective on the role of the human genome in cortical development, function and ageing, we explore the temporal dynamics and genetic control of transcription in human prefrontal cortex in an extensive series of post-mortem brains from fetal development through ageing. We discover a wave of gene expression changes occurring during fetal development which are reversed in early postnatal life. One half-century later in life, this pattern of reversals is mirrored in ageing and in neurodegeneration. Although we identify thousands of robust associations of individual genetic polymorphisms with gene expression, we also demonstrate that there is no association between the total extent of genetic differences between subjects and the global similarity of their transcriptional profiles. Hence, the human genome produces a consistent molecular architecture in the prefrontal cortex, despite millions of genetic differences across individuals and races. To enable further discovery, this entire data set is freely available (from Gene Expression Omnibus: accession GSE30272; and dbGaP: accession phs000417.v1.p1) and can also be interrogated via a biologist-friendly stand-alone application (http://www.libd.org/braincloud).
The release of cerebral acetylcholine from terminals in the cerebral cortex has been shown to be regulated by 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) but it is not known which subtype of the 5-HT receptor is involved. 5-HT receptor agonists increase acetylcholine levels in vivo, indicating a reduced turnover, and reduce release of acetylcholine from striatal slices in vitro. Depleting 5-HT by inhibiting synthesis or by destroying the neurons containing 5-HT potentiates acetylcholine release, and increases acetylcholine turnover in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Selective antagonists for the 5-HT3 receptor subtypes which seem to have effects on mood and activity may exert their effect through the regulation of acetylcholine release in the cortex and limbic system. Radioligand binding studies show a high density of 5-HT3 receptors in the cholinergic-rich entorhinal cortex and we provide evidence that a reduction in cortical cholinergic function can be effected in vitro by 5-HT3 receptors.
Positron emission tomography (PET) is an analytical imaging technique that provides a way of making in vivo measurements of the anatomical distribution and rates of specific biochemical reactions. This ability of PET to measure and image dynamic biochemistry builds a bridge between the basic and clinical neurosciences founded on the commonality of the types of measurements made. Clinical findings with PET in humans are suggesting hypotheses that can be tested rigorously in the basic science laboratory.
Computational studies suggest that acquisition of a motor skill involves learning an internal model of the dynamics of the task, which enables the brain to predict and compensate for mechanical behavior. During the hours that follow completion of practice, representation of the internal model gradually changes, becoming less fragile with respect to behavioral interference. Here, functional imaging of the brain demonstrates that within 6 hours after completion of practice, while performance remains unchanged, the brain engages new regions to perform the task; there is a shift from prefrontal regions of the cortex to the premotor, posterior parietal, and cerebellar cortex structures. This shift is specific to recall of an established motor skill and suggests that with the passage of time, there is a change in the neural representation of the internal model and that this change may underlie its increased functional stability.
Despite reports of improved auditory discrimination capabilities in blind humans and visually deprived animals, there is no general agreement as to the nature or pervasiveness of such compensatory sensory enhancements. Neuroimaging studies have pointed out differences in cerebral organization between blind and sighted humans, but the relationship between these altered cortical activation patterns and auditory sensory acuity remains unclear. Here we compare behavioural and electrophysiological indices of spatial tuning within central and peripheral auditory space in congenitally blind and normally sighted but blindfolded adults to test the hypothesis (raised by earlier studies of the effects of auditory deprivation on visual processing) that the effects of visual deprivation might be more pronounced for processing peripheral sounds. We find that blind participants displayed localization abilities that were superior to those of sighted controls, but only when attending to sounds in peripheral auditory space. Electrophysiological recordings obtained at the same time revealed sharper tuning of early spatial attention mechanisms in the blind subjects. Differences in the scalp distribution of brain electrical activity between the two groups suggest a compensatory reorganization of brain areas in the blind that may contribute to the improved spatial resolution for peripheral sound sources.
Review During the past 10 years (the "decade of the brain"), some of the genetic causes of many of the primary neurodegenerative diseases, which include Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, prion disease, and many ataxic syndromes, have been found. These breakthroughs mean that for many of these diseases we now know the initiating trigger as well as the final outcome. These diseases have many pathological mechanisms in common, and there may be relatively few pathways to neuronal death seen in these disorders. Thus, treatment strategies developed for a particular disease may be found to have efficacy in more than one disorder.
The dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (LGNd) receives afferents from the brainstem which regulate its capacity to transmit visual information from the retina to the striate cortex. One such pathway consists of noradrenaline (NA)-containing fibres originating in the locus coeruleus (LC). These provide a dense, uniform, noradrenergic innervation of the LGNd. Electrical stimulation in the LC region has been reported to enhance the responsiveness of LGNd neurones to afferent excitation. Although this effect was abolished when brain NA stores were pharmacologically depleted, it was not established as a direct action of NA on LGNd neurones because of the widespread distribution of LC fibres to many parts of the brain and the long latency of the response. Recently, we observed that NA, applied locally by microiontophoresis with low ejection currents, produced a delayed increase in the firing rate of most spontaneously active LGNd neurones, an effect selectively blocked by alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists. We show here that microiontophoretic NA can mimic the ability of LC stimulation to enhance the synaptic excitation of LGNd neurones. As neither NA nor LC stimulation activated LGNd neurones in the absence of synaptic or glutamate-induced excitation, both appear to act through a neuromodulatory mechanism. The postsynaptic alpha-adrenoceptor antagonist WB-4101 blocks the facilitation produced by locally applied NA and by coeruleo-geniculate pathway stimulation, providing evidence for pharmacological identity of the two effects.
Each of our movements activates our own sensory receptors, and therefore keeping track of self-movement is a necessary part of analysing sensory input. One way in which the brain keeps track of self-movement is by monitoring an internal copy, or corollary discharge, of motor commands. This concept could explain why we perceive a stable visual world despite our frequent quick, or saccadic, eye movements: corollary discharge about each saccade would permit the visual system to ignore saccade-induced visual changes. The critical missing link has been the connection between corollary discharge and visual processing. Here we show that such a link is formed by a corollary discharge from the thalamus that targets the frontal cortex. In the thalamus, neurons in the mediodorsal nucleus relay a corollary discharge of saccades from the midbrain superior colliculus to the cortical frontal eye field. In the frontal eye field, neurons use corollary discharge to shift their visual receptive fields spatially before saccades. We tested the hypothesis that these two components-a pathway for corollary discharge and neurons with shifting receptive fields-form a circuit in which the corollary discharge drives the shift. First we showed that the known spatial and temporal properties of the corollary discharge predict the dynamic changes in spatial visual processing of cortical neurons when saccades are made. Then we moved from this correlation to causation by isolating single cortical neurons and showing that their spatial visual processing is impaired when corollary discharge from the thalamus is interrupted. Thus the visual processing of frontal neurons is spatiotemporally matched with, and functionally dependent on, corollary discharge input from the thalamus. These experiments establish the first link between corollary discharge and visual processing, delineate a brain circuit that is well suited for mediating visual stability, and provide a framework for studying corollary discharge in other sensory systems.
Brain changes in response to nerve damage or cochlear trauma can generate pathological neural activity that is believed to be responsible for many types of chronic pain and tinnitus. Several studies have reported that the severity of chronic pain and tinnitus is correlated with the degree of map reorganization in somatosensory and auditory cortex, respectively. Direct electrical or transcranial magnetic stimulation of sensory cortex can temporarily disrupt these phantom sensations. However, there is as yet no direct evidence for a causal role of plasticity in the generation of pain or tinnitus. Here we report evidence that reversing the brain changes responsible can eliminate the perceptual impairment in an animal model of noise-induced tinnitus. Exposure to intense noise degrades the frequency tuning of auditory cortex neurons and increases cortical synchronization. Repeatedly pairing tones with brief pulses of vagus nerve stimulation completely eliminated the physiological and behavioural correlates of tinnitus in noise-exposed rats. These improvements persisted for weeks after the end of therapy. This method for restoring neural activity to normal may be applicable to a variety of neurological disorders.
Although individual neurons in the arm area of the primate motor cortex are only broadly tuned to a particular direction in three-dimensional space, the animal can very precisely control the movement of its arm. The direction of movement was found to be uniquely predicted by the action of a population of motor cortical neurons. When individual cells were represented as vectors that make weighted contributions along the axis of their preferred direction (according to changes in their activity during the movement under consideration) the resulting vector sum of all cell vectors (population vector) was in a direction congruent with the direction of movement. This population vector can be monitored during various tasks, and similar measures in other neuronal populations could be of heuristic value where there is a neural representation of variables with vectorial attributes.
The primate retina contains three classes of cones, the L, M and S cones, which respond preferentially to long-, middle- and short-wavelength visible light, respectively. Colour appearance results from neural processing of these cone signals within the retina and the brain. Perceptual experiments have identified three types of neural pathways that represent colour: a red-green pathway that signals differences between L- and M-cone responses; a blue-yellow pathway that signals differences between S-cone responses and a sum of L- and M-cone responses; and a luminance pathway that signals a sum of L- and M-cone responses. It might be expected that there are neurons in the primary visual cortex with response properties that resemble these three perceptual pathways, but attempts to find them have led to inconsistent results. We have therefore used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine responses in the human brain to a large number of colours. In visual cortical areas V1 and V2, the strongest response is to red-green stimuli, and much of this activity is from neurons receiving opposing inputs from L and M cones. A strong response is also seen with blue-yellow stimuli, and this response declines rapidly as the temporal frequency of the stimulus is increased. These responses resemble psychophysical measurements, suggesting that colour signals relevant for perception are encoded in a large population of neurons in areas V1 and V2.
Chromatin modifications, especially histone-tail acetylation, have been implicated in memory formation. Increased histone-tail acetylation induced by inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACis) facilitates learning and memory in wild-type mice as well as in mouse models of neurodegeneration. Harnessing the therapeutic potential of HDACis requires knowledge of the specific HDAC family member(s) linked to cognitive enhancement. Here we show that neuron-specific overexpression of HDAC2, but not that of HDAC1, decreased dendritic spine density, synapse number, synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Conversely, Hdac2 deficiency resulted in increased synapse number and memory facilitation, similar to chronic treatment with HDACis in mice. Notably, reduced synapse number and learning impairment of HDAC2-overexpressing mice were ameliorated by chronic treatment with HDACis. Correspondingly, treatment with HDACis failed to further facilitate memory formation in Hdac2-deficient mice. Furthermore, analysis of promoter occupancy revealed an association of HDAC2 with the promoters of genes implicated in synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Taken together, our results suggest that HDAC2 functions in modulating synaptic plasticity and long-lasting changes of neural circuits, which in turn negatively regulates learning and memory. These observations encourage the development and testing of HDAC2-selective inhibitors for human diseases associated with memory impairment.
Cerebral auditory areas were delineated in the awake, passively listening, rhesus monkey by comparing the rates of glucose utilization in an intact hemisphere and in an acoustically isolated contralateral hemisphere of the same animal. The auditory system defined in this way occupied large portions of cerebral tissue, an extent probably second only to that of the visual system. Cortically, the activated areas included the entire superior temporal gyrus and large portions of the parietal, prefrontal, and limbic lobes. Several auditory areas overlapped with previously identified visual areas, suggesting that the auditory system, like the visual system, contains separate pathways for processing stimulus quality, location, and motion.
Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive involuntary movements and dementia. The symptoms of the disease, although devastating in severity, do not usually appear until the third to fourth decade of life. The gene defect is highly penetrant, and results in the loss of neurones in the basal ganglia, globus pallidus, and more diffusely in the cortex. A DNA marker, G8 (or D4S10), is tightly linked to Huntington's disease and this gene has been localized to chromosome 4 (ref. 3). The discovery of this linkage marker raises the possibility of developing a presymptomatic test for the disorder, and of eventually isolating the disease gene based on its map position. We have now regionally localized the DNA marker G8 to the terminal band of the short arm of the chromosome, a region representing approximately 0.5% of the total human genome. The assignment was made by examining DNA from patients with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, a birth defect resulting from partial heterozygous deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4.
Structural maturation of fiber tracts in the human brain, including an increase in the diameter and myelination of axons, may play a role in cognitive development during childhood and adolescence. A computational analysis of structural magnetic resonance images obtained in 111 children and adolescents revealed age-related increases in white matter density in fiber tracts constituting putative corticospinal and frontotemporal pathways. The maturation of the corticospinal tract was bilateral, whereas that of the frontotemporal pathway was found predominantly in the left (speech-dominant) hemisphere. These findings provide evidence for a gradual maturation, during late childhood and adolescence, of fiber pathways presumably supporting motor and speech functions.
Measurements of cerebral blood flow in man revealed that complex voluntary movements are associated with a blood flow increase in the supplementary motor area of the brain. This increase is additional to and similar in magnitude to the Rolandic sensorimotor area activation that occurs during all kinds of movement. When subjects counted silently there was no activation of any focal cortical area in the brain; when they counted aloud there was a marked increase in activity in the supplementary motor area. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the supplementary motor area plays a major role in the initiation and control of at least some kinds of voluntary movement in man and is, therefore, a motor center of a higher order than the primary Rolandic areas.
Neurodegeneration can be triggered by genetic or environmental factors. Although the precise cause is often unknown, many neurodegenerative diseases share common features such as protein aggregation and age dependence. Recent studies in Drosophila have uncovered protective effects of NAD synthase nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMNAT) against activity-induced neurodegeneration and injury-induced axonal degeneration. Here we show that NMNAT overexpression can also protect against spinocerebellar ataxia 1 (SCA1)-induced neurodegeneration, suggesting a general neuroprotective function of NMNAT. It protects against neurodegeneration partly through a proteasome-mediated pathway in a manner similar to heat-shock protein 70 (Hsp70). NMNAT displays chaperone function both in biochemical assays and cultured cells, and it shares significant structural similarity with known chaperones. Furthermore, it is upregulated in the brain upon overexpression of poly-glutamine expanded protein and recruited with the chaperone Hsp70 into protein aggregates. Our results implicate NMNAT as a stress-response protein that acts as a chaperone for neuronal maintenance and protection. Our studies provide an entry point for understanding how normal neurons maintain activity, and offer clues for the common mechanisms underlying different neurodegenerative conditions.
Competition between neurons is necessary for refining neural circuits during development and may be important for selecting the neurons that participate in encoding memories in the adult brain. To examine neuronal competition during memory formation, we conducted experiments with mice in which we manipulated the function of CREB (adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response element-binding protein) in subsets of neurons. Changes in CREB function influenced the probability that individual lateral amygdala neurons were recruited into a fear memory trace. Our results suggest a competitive model underlying memory formation, in which eligible neurons are selected to participate in amemorytrace as a function of their relative CREB activity at the time of learning.
The brain's sensitivity to unexpected outcomes plays a fundamental role in an organism's ability to adapt and learn new behaviors. Emerging research suggests that midbrain dopaminergic neurons encode these unexpected outcomes. We used microelectrode recordings during deep brain stimulation surgery to study neuronal activity in the human substantia nigra (SN) while patients with Parkinson's disease engaged in a probabilistic learning task motivated by virtual financial rewards. Based on a model of the participants' expected reward, we divided trial outcomes into expected and unexpected gains and losses. SN neurons exhibited significantly higher firing rates after unexpected gains than unexpected losses. No such differences were observed after expected gains and losses. This result provides critical support for the hypothesized role of the SN in human reinforcement learning.
The corpora pedunculata, or mushroom bodies (MBs), in the brain of Drosophila melanogaster adults consist of approximately 2500 parallel Kenyon cell fibers derived from four MB neuroblasts. Hydroxyurea fed to newly hatched larvae selectively deletes these cells, resulting in complete, precise MB albation. Adult flies developing without MBs behave normally in most respects, but are unable to perform in a classical conditioning paradigm that tests associative learning of odor cues and electric shock. This deficit cannot be attributed to reductions in olfactory sensitivity, shock reactivity, or locomotor behavior. The results demonstrate that MBs mediate associative odor learning in flies.
To plan a serial order behavior, we hold serial sensory information in our minds and convert it to a movement program. We trained monkeys to memorize a sequence of positional cues and to reproduce it by making saccades in either the original or reverse order. The order was determined in the middle of a trial on the basis of an instruction stimulus. Triggered by the instruction stimulus, single neurons in the dorsal premotor cortex became transiently active only when the order needed to be determined. These transient neurons, together with nearby sustained neurons that hold information on cue or movement sequences, appear to mediate the generation of a motor program from the maintained information.
Brain function emerges from the morphologies, spatial organization and patterns of connectivity established between diverse sets of neurons. Historically, the notion that neuronal structure predicts function stemmed from classic histological staining and neuronal tracing methods. Recent advances in molecular genetics and imaging technologies have begun to reveal previously unattainable details about patterns of functional circuit connectivity and the subcellular organization of synapses in the living brain. This sophisticated molecular and genetic 'toolbox', coupled with new methods in optical and electron microscopy, provides an expanding array of techniques for probing neural anatomy and function.
The recognition of dyslexia as a neurodevelopmental disorder has been hampered by the belief that it is not a specific diagnostic entity because it has variable and culture-specific manifestations. In line with this belief, we found that Italian dyslexics, using a shallow orthography which facilitates reading, performed better on reading tasks than did English and French dyslexics. However, all dyslexics were equally impaired relative to their controls on reading and phonological tasks. Positron emission tomography scans during explicit and implicit reading showed the same reduced activity in a region of the left hemisphere in dyslexics from all three countries, with the maximum peak in the middle temporal gyrus and additional peaks in the inferior and superior temporal gyri and middle occipital gyrus. We conclude that there is a universal neurocognitive basis for dyslexia and that differences in reading performance among dyslexics of different countries are due to different orthographies.
The adult mammalian central nervous system (CNS) contains a population of neural stem cells (NSCs) with properties said to include the generation of non-neural progeny. However, the precise identity, location and potential of the NSC in situ remain unclear. We purified NSCs from the adult mouse brain by flow cytometry, and directly examined the cells' properties. Here we show that one type of NSC, which expresses the protein nestin but only low levels of PNA-binding and HSA proteins, is found in both ependymal and subventricular zones and accounts for about 63% of the total NSC activity. Furthermore, the selective depletion of the population of this stem cell in querkopf mutant mice (which are deficient in production of olfactory neurons) suggests that it acts as a major functional stem cell in vivo. Most freshly isolated NSCs, when co-cultured with a muscle cell line, rapidly differentiated in vitro into myocytes that contain myosin heavy chain (MyHC). This demonstrates that a predominant, functional type of stem cell exists in the periventricular region of the adult brain with the intrinsic ability to generate neural and non-neural cells.
There is increasing evidence that L-glutamate is a major excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. Immunocytochemical studies indicate that glutamate within nerve terminals may be concentrated in vesicles and glutamate-accumulating vesicles have recently been isolated. Exocytotic release of glutamate from synaptosomes (isolated nerve terminals) has not been convincingly demonstrated, however, and remains highly controversial. In order to study the kinetics of release of endogenous L-glutamate from guinea pig cerebral cortical synaptosomes we have devised a continuous enzymatic assay. This has enabled us to identify a pool, equivalent to 15-20% of the total synaptosomal glutamate, which is capable of rapid Ca2+-dependent exocytotic release.
Split-brain monkeys (with forebrain divided) were trained to perform two contradictory visual tasks simultaneously, one task being presented to each eye. Usually one cerebral hemisphere dominated, but in some cases the two halves of the brain learned simultaneously. Contradictory color discriminations showed interference or transfer of learning until mid-brain commissures were also sectioned. The more extensive surgery failed to prevent transfer of simple brightness discriminations.
The immature cerebral cortex self-organizes into local neuronal clusters long before it is activated by patterned sensory inputs. In the cortical anlage of newborn mammals, neurons coassemble through electrical or chemical synapses either spontaneously or by activation of transmitter-gated receptors. The neuronal network and the cellular mechanisms underlying this cortical self-organization process during early development are not completely understood. Here we show in an intact in vitro preparation of the immature mouse cerebral cortex that neurons are functionally coupled in local clusters by means of propagating network oscillations in the beta frequency range. In the newborn mouse, this activity requires an intact subplate and is strongly synchronized within a cortical column by gap junctions. With the developmental disappearance of the subplate at the end of the first postnatal week, activation of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors in the immature cortical network is essential to generate this columnar activity pattern. Our findings show that during a brief developmental period the cortical network switches from a subplate-driven, gap-junction-coupled syncytium to a synaptic network acting through NMDA receptors to generate synchronized oscillatory activity, which may function as an early functional template for the development of the cortical columnar architecture.
Human lesion data indicate that an intact left hippocampal formation is necessary for auditory-verbal memory. By contrast, functional neuroimaging has highlighted the role of the left prefrontal cortex but has generally failed to reveal the predicted left hippocampal activation. Here we describe an experiment involving learning category-exemplar word pairs (such as 'dog...boxer') in which we manipulate the novelty of either individual elements or the entire category-exemplar pairing. We demonstrate both left medial temporal (including hippocampal) and left prefrontal activation and show that these activations are dissociable with respect to encoding demands. Left prefrontal activation is maximal with a change in category-exemplar pairings, whereas medial temporal activation is sensitive to the overall degree of novelty. Thus, left prefrontal cortex is sensitive to processes required to establish meaningful connections between a category and its exemplar, a process maximized when a previously formed connection is changed. Conversely, the left medial temporal activation reflects processes that register the overall novelty of the presented material. Our results provide striking evidence of functionally dissociable roles for the prefrontal cortex and hippocampal formation during learning of auditory-verbal material.
The specificity of the neurotoxic agent, kainic acid, for destroying cell bodies while sparing terminals and fibers of passage was examined by infusing this agent into the axons of the dorsal noradrenergic bundle and measuring the degree of depletion of noradrenaline concentrations and the reduction in noradrenaline uptake in cortex and hippocampus. Extensive neuronal loss and gliosis were observed around the injection site. In addition, a significant and consistent 25 percent depletion of hippocampal-cortical noradrenaline was also obtained. The results suggest that although kainic acid has its greatest destructive action on neuronal perikarya, a significant amount of damage to axons of passage may also occur.
Systematic analysis of autoradiograms prepared from postpubertal rhesus monkeys given single and multiple injections of tritium-labeled thymidine and killed 3 days to 6 years later displayed a slow turnover of glial cells but failed to reveal any radiolabeled neurons. Therefore, unlike neurons of some nonprimate species, all neurons of the rhesus monkey brain are generated during prenatal and early postnatal life. A stable population of neurons in primates, including humans, may be important for the continuity of learning and memory over a lifetime.
The neuroelectric activity of the human brain that accompanies linguistic processing can be studied through recordings of event-related potentials (e.r.p. components) from the scalp. The e.r.ps triggered by verbal stimuli have been related to several different aspects of language processing. For example, the N400 component, peaking around 400 ms post-stimulus, appears to be a sensitive indicator of the semantic relationship between a word and the context in which it occurs. Words that complete sentences in a nonsensical fashion elicit much larger N400 waves than do semantically appropriate words or non-semantic irregularities in a text. In the present study, e.r.ps were recorded in response to words that completed meaningful sentences. The amplitude of the N400 component of the e.r.p. was found to be an inverse function of the subject's expectancy for the terminal word as measured by its 'Cloze probability'. In addition, unexpected words that were semantically related to highly expected words elicited lower N400 amplitudes. These findings suggest N400 may reflect processes of semantic priming or activation.
Neurons in the developing rodent cortex are generated from radial glial cells that function as neural stem cells. These epithelial cells line the cerebral ventricles and generate intermediate progenitor cells that migrate into the subventricular zone (SVZ) and proliferate to increase neuronal number. The developing human SVZ has a massively expanded outer region (OSVZ) thought to contribute to cortical size and complexity. However, OSVZ progenitor cell types and their contribution to neurogenesis are not well understood. Here we show that large numbers of radial glia-like cells and intermediate progenitor cells populate the human OSVZ. We find that OSVZ radial glia-like cells have a long basal process but, surprisingly, are non-epithelial as they lack contact with the ventricular surface. Using real-time imaging and clonal analysis, we demonstrate that these cells can undergo proliferative divisions and self-renewing asymmetric divisions to generate neuronal progenitor cells that can proliferate further. We also show that inhibition of Notch signalling in OSVZ progenitor cells induces their neuronal differentiation. The establishment of non-ventricular radial glia-like cells may have been a critical evolutionary advance underlying increased cortical size and complexity in the human brain.
Visual scenes are composed of many elements and although we can appreciate a scene as a whole, we can only move our eyes to one element of the scene at a time. As visual scenes become more complex, the number of potential targets in the scene increases, and the uncertainty that any particular one will be selected for an eye movement also increases. How motor systems accommodate this target uncertainty remains unknown. The activities of neurons in both the cerebral cortex and superior colliculus are modulated by this selection process. We reasoned that activity associated with target uncertainty should be evident in the saccadic motor system at the final stages of neural processing, in the superior colliculus. By systematically changing the number of stimuli from which a selection must be made and recording from superior colliculus neurons, we found that as the target uncertainty increased, the neural activity preceding target selection decreased. These results indicate that neurons within the final common pathway for movement generation are active well in advance of the selection of a particular movement. This early activity varies with the probability that a particular movement will be selected.
Neurogenesis in the mammalian central nervous system is believed to end in the period just after birth; in the mouse striatum no new neurons are produced after the first few days after birth. In this study, cells isolated from the striatum of the adult mouse brain were induced to proliferate in vitro by epidermal growth factor. The proliferating cells initially expressed nestin, an intermediate filament found in neuroepithelial stem cells, and subsequently developed the morphology and antigenic properties of neurons and astrocytes. Newly generated cells with neuronal morphology were immunoreactive for gamma-aminobutyric acid and substance P, two neurotransmitters of the adult striatum in vivo. Thus, cells of the adult mouse striatum have the capacity to divide and differentiate into neurons and astrocytes.
When two small doses of ethanol were administered to pregnant mice during the gastrulation stage of embryogenesis, the embryos developed craniofacial malformations closely resembling those seen in the human fetal alcohol syndrome. Striking histological changes appeared in the developing brain (neuroectoderm) within 24 hours of exposure. Decreased development of the neural plate and its derivatives apparently accounts for the craniofacial malformations. The critical exposure period is equivalent to the third week in human pregnancy.
Embryonic spinal motor neurons are thought to depend for survival on unidentified factors secreted both by their peripheral targets and by cells within the central nervous system. The neurotrophins are a family of polypeptides required for survival of discrete central and peripheral neuronal populations in vivo and in vitro. In spite of their ability to reduce motor neuron death in vivo, the known neurotrophins have been thought to be without direct effect on motor neurons. Here we show that picomolar concentrations of three of them, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, neurotrophin-3 and neurotrophin-5, can prevent the death of cultured embryonic rat spinal motor neurons. Furthermore, messenger RNA coding for neurotrophins is present at appropriate stages in spinal cord and limb bud, and mRNA for their receptors is found in motor neurons. These neurotrophins may therefore be physiological motor neuron growth factors.
By repeating words 'in our head', verbal material (such as telephone numbers) can be kept in working memory almost indefinitely. This 'articulatory loop' includes a subvocal rehearsal system and a phonological store. Little is known about neural correlates of this model of verbal short-term memory. We therefore measured regional cerebral blood flow, an index of neuronal activity, in volunteers performing a task engaging both components of the articulatory loop (short-term memory for letters) and a task which engages only the subvocal rehearsal system (rhyming judgement for letters). Stimuli were presented visually and the subjects did not speak. We report here that comparisons of distribution of cerebral blood flow in these conditions localized the phonological store to the left supramarginal gyrus whereas the subvocal rehearsal system was associated with Broca's area. This is, to our knowledge, the first demonstration of the normal anatomy of the components of the 'articulatory loop'.
In a variety of neurological syndromes, patients may show tacit awareness of stimuli that cannot be consciously recollected or identified. Such dissociations are the defining characteristic of 'blindsight'; comparable phenomena are seen in some patients with amnesia and some with prosopagnosia, a profound impairment of familiar face recognition. We report here an analogous dissociation between overt and covert perception in a case of visuo-spatial neglect. The patient, P.S., had sustained right cerebral damage and failed overtly to process information in the hemispace contralateral to lesion. In common with most patients who manifest left-sided neglect, P.S. has a left homonymous hemianopia. Nonetheless, her neglect persists despite free movement of the head and eyes and is thus not a direct consequence of sensory loss in the left visual field. P.S. was presented simultaneously with two line drawings of a house, in one of which the left side was on fire. She judged that the drawings were identical; yet when asked to select which house she would prefer to live in, she reliably chose the house that was not burning.
Extracellular action potentials were recorded from units in the preoptic area of the brain of the Australian blue-tongued skink (Tiliqua scincoides) during periods of local heating and cooling of the brain (20 degrees to 36 degrees C) with water-perfused thermodes. In this temperature range most spontaneously firing neurons were temperature-insensitive, but eight showed sensitivity to the thermal stimulus. Five warm neurons increased their activity when the brain temperature was raised, and three cold neurons showed increased activity with fall in temperature.
Theoretical models have long pointed to the dentate gyrus as a possible source of neuronal pattern separation. In agreement with predictions from these models, we show that minimal changes in the shape of the environment in which rats are exploring can substantially alter correlated activity patterns among place-modulated granule cells in the dentate gyrus. When the environments are made more different, new cell populations are recruited in CA3 but not in the dentate gyrus. These results imply a dual mechanism for pattern separation in which signals from the entorhinal cortex can be decorrelated both by changes in coincidence patterns in the dentate gyrus and by recruitment of nonoverlapping cell assemblies in CA3.
The capacity for binding dimethyl d-tubocurarine-C(14) was studied in isolated nerve-ending membranes from cerebral cortex and myelin. After treatment of the membrane with organic solvents most of the radioactivity was recovered in the extract. Preliminary evidence indicates that dimethyl d-tubocurarine-C(14) is not bound to lipids or glycolipids. While the proteolipids of myelin have a low binding capacity, the results obtained with the nerve-ending membranes rich in acetylcholinesterase suggest that the cholinergic receptor may be a special type of proteolipid.
During vision, it is believed that neural activity in the primary visual cortex is predominantly driven by sensory input from the environment. However, visual cortical neurons respond to repeated presentations of the same stimulus with a high degree of variability. Although this variability has been considered to be noise owing to random spontaneous activity within the cortex, recent studies show that spontaneous activity has a highly coherent spatio-temporal structure. This raises the possibility that the pattern of this spontaneous activity may shape neural responses during natural viewing conditions to a larger extent than previously thought. Here, we examine the relationship between spontaneous activity and the response of primary visual cortical neurons to dynamic natural-scene and random-noise film images in awake, freely viewing ferrets from the time of eye opening to maturity. The correspondence between evoked neural activity and the structure of the input signal was weak in young animals, but systematically improved with age. This improvement was linked to a shift in the dynamics of spontaneous activity. At all ages including the mature animal, correlations in spontaneous neural firing were only slightly modified by visual stimulation, irrespective of the sensory input. These results suggest that in both the developing and mature visual cortex, sensory evoked neural activity represents the modulation and triggering of ongoing circuit dynamics by input signals, rather than directly reflecting the structure of the input signal itself.
When the landmark patient Phineas Gage died in 1861, no autopsy was performed, but his skull was later recovered. The brain lesion that caused the profound personality changes for which his case became famous has been presumed to have involved the left frontal region, but questions have been raised about the involvement of other regions and about the exact placement of the lesion within the vast frontal territory. Measurements from Gage's skull and modern neuroimaging techniques were used to reconstitute the accident and determine the probable location of the lesion. The damage involved both left and right prefrontal cortices in a pattern that, as confirmed by Gage's modern counterparts, causes a defect in rational decision making and the processing of emotion.
Transient receptor potential (TRP) proteins are cation-selective channels that function in processes as diverse as sensation and vasoregulation. Mammalian TRP channels that are gated by heat and capsaicin (>43 degrees C; TRPV1 (ref. 1)), noxious heat (>52 degrees C; TRPV2 (ref. 2)), and cooling (< 22 degrees C; TRPM8 (refs 3, 4)) have been cloned; however, little is known about the molecular determinants of temperature sensing in the range between approximately 22 degrees C and 40 degrees C. Here we have identified a member of the vanilloid channel family, human TRPV3 (hTRPV3) that is expressed in skin, tongue, dorsal root ganglion, trigeminal ganglion, spinal cord and brain. Increasing temperature from 22 degrees C to 40 degrees C in mammalian cells transfected with hTRPV3 elevated intracellular calcium by activating a nonselective cationic conductance. As in published recordings from sensory neurons, the current was steeply dependent on temperature, sensitized with repeated heating, and displayed a marked hysteresis on heating and cooling. On the basis of these properties, we propose that hTRPV3 is thermosensitive in the physiological range of temperatures between TRPM8 and TRPV1.
At any given instant, multiple potential targets for saccades are present in the visual world, implying that a "selection process" within the brain determines the target of the next eye movement. Some superior colliculus (SC) neurons begin discharging seconds before saccade initiation, suggesting involvement in target selection or, alternatively, in postselectional saccade preparation. SC neurons were recorded in monkeys who selected saccade targets on the basis of motion direction in a visual display. Some neurons carried a direction-selective visual signal, consistent with a role in target selection in this task, whereas other SC neurons appeared to be more involved in postselection specification of saccade parameters.
Recent studies in invertebrates indicate that a rapid genomic response to neuronal stimulation has a critical role in long-term changes in synaptic efficacy. Because several of the genes (immediately early genes; IEGs) that respond rapidly to growth factor stimulation of vertebrate cells in vitro are also activated by neuronal stimulation in vivo, attention has focused on the possibility that they play a part in synaptic plasticity in vertebrate nervous systems. Four IEGs thought to encode transcription factors, zif/268 (also termed Egr-1, NGFI-A, Krox 24), c-fos, c-jun, and jun-B are rapidly induced in the brain by seizure activity, and we have now studied the induction of these genes in a well-characterized model of synaptic plasticity in the vertebrate brain--long-term potentiation (LTP) of the perforant pathgranule cell (pp-gc) synapse in vivo. We found that high-frequency (but not low-frequency) stimulation of the pp-gc synapse markedly increases zif/268 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels in the ipsilateral granule cell neurons; mRNA of c-fos, c-jun and jun-B is less consistently increased. The stimulus frequency and intensity required to increase zif/268 mRNA levels are similar to those required to induce LTP, which is also seen only ipsilaterally, and both responses are blocked by NMDA-receptor antagonists as well as by convergent synaptic inhibitory inputs already known to block LTP. Accordingly, zif/268 mRNA levels and LTP seem to be regulated by similar synaptic mechanisms.
Epidemiological studies have documented a reduced prevalence of Alzheimer's disease among users of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). It has been proposed that NSAIDs exert their beneficial effects in part by reducing neurotoxic inflammatory responses in the brain, although this mechanism has not been proved. Here we report that the NSAIDs ibuprofen, indomethacin and sulindac sulphide preferentially decrease the highly amyloidogenic Abeta42 peptide (the 42-residue isoform of the amyloid-beta peptide) produced from a variety of cultured cells by as much as 80%. This effect was not seen in all NSAIDs and seems not to be mediated by inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) activity, the principal pharmacological target of NSAIDs. Furthermore, short-term administration of ibuprofen to mice that produce mutant beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) lowered their brain levels of Abeta42. In cultured cells, the decrease in Abeta42 secretion was accompanied by an increase in the Abeta(1-38) isoform, indicating that NSAIDs subtly alter gamma-secretase activity without significantly perturbing other APP processing pathways or Notch cleavage. Our findings suggest that NSAIDs directly affect amyloid pathology in the brain by reducing Abeta42 peptide levels independently of COX activity and that this Abeta42-lowering activity could be optimized to selectively target the pathogenic Abeta42 species.
In a recent study, it was concluded that natural time-varying stimuli are represented more reliably in the brain than constant stimuli are. The results presented here disagree with this conclusion, although they were obtained from the same identified neuron (H1) in the fly's visual system. For large parts of the neuron's activity range, the variability of the responses was very similar for constant and time-varying stimuli and was considerably smaller than that in many visual interneurons of vertebrates.
In rats ischemia of the forebrain induced by a 30-minute occlusion of the carotid artery, followed by 120 minutes of arterial reperfusion, produced ischemic lesions of selectively vulnerable pyramidal cells in both hippocampi. Focal microinfusion into the dorsal hippocampus of 2-amino-7-phosphonoheptanoic acid, an antagonist of excitation at the N-methyl-D-aspartate-preferring receptor, before ischemia was induced protected against the development of ischemic damage. It is proposed that excitatory neurotransmission plays an important role in selective neuronal loss due to cerebral ischemia.
For decades, neurobiologists have believed that so-called ocular dominance columns--neat columns of brain cells that respond to visual activity from one eye or the other--form as a result of visual activity. Now, in work described on page 1321, neuroscientists report that ocular dominance columns in ferrets appear long before the columns can be modified by visual experience. They propose instead that innate molecules that guide growing axons to their locations in the developing brain may be primarily responsible for building these columns. But others contest the conclusion that neural activity is not required for constructing the columns, arguing that there are other explanations for the researchers' findings.
Patients with damage to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are impaired on cognitive tasks such as the Wisconsin Card Sort Test, the Stroop Test and an anti-saccade paradigm, in which sensory-guided habitual responses must be suppressed in favour of conceptually or memory-guided responses. We report here recordings from prefrontal neurons in rhesus monkeys trained to perform a delayed anti-saccade task based on tests that have been used with humans. Activity in the same prefrontal neurons was recorded across conditions when saccades were made toward a remembered target, and also when this prepotent response was suppressed and a saccade in the opposite direction required. Our findings show that most prefrontal neurons code the location of the visual stimulus in working memory, and that this memory can be engaged to suppress as well as prescribe a response. These results establish, in a subset of prefrontal neurons, the iconic nature of the memory code, and suggest a role for visual memory in response suppression.
The electroencephalogram (EEG) is a mainstay of clinical neurology and is tightly correlated with brain function, but the specific currents generating human EEG elements remain poorly specified because of a lack of microphysiological recordings. The largest event in healthy human EEGs is the K-complex (KC), which occurs in slow-wave sleep. Here, we show that KCs are generated in widespread cortical areas by outward dendritic currents in the middle and upper cortical layers, accompanied by decreased broadband EEG power and decreased neuronal firing, which demonstrate a steep decline in network activity. Thus, KCs are isolated "down-states," a fundamental cortico-thalamic processing mode already characterized in animals. This correspondence is compatible with proposed contributions of the KC to sleep preservation and memory consolidation.
Subcellular fractions of mouse brain were prepared by differential and sucrose density-gradient centrifugation at intervals up to 130 hours after intracerebral injection of C(14)- labeled leucine. The specific activity of the nerve ending fraction continued to rise during this period. Between 2 and 130 hours after injection there was a fivefold rise in the specific activity of the soluble protein prepared by lysing the nerve ending particles with water while the specific activity of the soluble protein from the whole homogenate concomitantly fell almost by a factor of three. The data are interpreted as being consistent with the appearance of protein in nerve endings by axoplasmic flow.
Understanding the actions of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain is important in view of its roles in neuropsychiatric illnesses. Dopamine D1 receptors, which stimulate both adenylyl cyclase and phospholipase C, and D2 receptors, which inhibit them, can nevertheless act synergistically to produce many electrophysiological and behavioral responses. Because this functional synergism can occur at the level of single neurons, another, as yet unidentified, signalling pathway activated by dopamine has been hypothesized. We report here that in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells transfected with the D2 receptor complementary DNA, D2 agonists potently enhanced arachidonic acid release, provided that such release has been initiated by stimulating constitutive purinergic receptors or by increasing intracellular Ca2+. In CHO cells expressed D1 receptors, D1 agonists exert no such effect. When D1 and D2 receptors are coexpressed, however, activation of both subtypes results in a marked synergistic potentiation of arachidonic acid release. The numerous actions of arachidonic acid and its metabolites in neuronal signal transduction suggest that facilitation of its release may be implicated in dopaminergic responses, such as feedback inhibition mediated by D2 autoreceptors, and may constitute a molecular basis for D1/D2 receptor synergism.
It has been found that cells in the region of the supraoptic nucleus (SON) of the hypothalamus are sensitive to osmotic stimuli in a physiological range, and have studied the mechanism by which the osmotic sensitivity arises. An in vitro hypothalamic brain slice preparation has been used to make intracellular recordings from the SON. Cells lying in the SON respond to small increases (9--40 mosmol l-1) in the osmolarity of their external environment with a marked increase in firing rate. They respond to NaCl and mannitol although not to glucose. The osmotic sensitivity of SON neurones has a complex origin at both a pre- and a postsynaptic level, being composed first of depolarization of the primary SON neurone by an increase of extracellular osmolarity and second by an increased rate of occurrence of excitatory synaptic events which markedly augment firing rate. These results are consistent with Jewell and Verney's suggestion that osmoreception in the mammalian brain occurs in the region of the anterior hypothalamus, and extends this localization by indicating that the SON neurones are themselves both directly osmosensitive and part of an osmoreceptive complex.
Developmental integration results from coordination among components of different embryonic fields to realize the later anatomical and functional relationships. We demonstrate that in the chick head, integration between the epibranchial placodes and the hindbrain is achieved as the neuroglial hindbrain crest cells guide the epibranchial neuronal cells inward to establish their central connections. This work defines a role for the neuroglial hindbrain crest in organizing the afferent innervation of the hindbrain.
Many people infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) develop neurological complications that can culminate in dementia and paralysis. The discrepancy between the severity of impairment and the paucity of detectable HIV-1 within neurons has led to an intense search for diffusible virus- and host-derived factors that might be neurotoxic (see ref. 2 for review). The HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein gp120 is an extracellular protein that is shed from infected cells and so has the potential to diffuse and interact with distant uninfected brain cells. Studies on cultured immature cells suggest that gp120 induces neurotoxicity (reviewed in refs 2, 4), and systemic injection of gp120 in neonatal rats and intracerebroventricular injection in adult rats results in deleterious effects on the brain. To assess the pathogenic potential of gp120 in the intact brain, we have now produced gp120 in the brains of transgenic mice and found a spectrum of neuronal and glial changes resembling abnormalities in brains of HIV-1-infected humans. The severity of damage correlated positively with the brain level of gp120 expression. These results provide in vivo evidence that gp120 plays a key part in HIV-1-associated nervous system impairment. This model should facilitate the evaluation and development of therapeutic strategies aimed at HIV-brain interactions.
Benzodiazepines exert most of their pharmacological effects by a selective facilitation of the postsynaptic actions of GABA. Clinical, behavioural and electrophysiological studies have shown reduced drug response following chronic benzodiazepine administration. We present here electrophysiological evidence for decreased postsynaptic sensitivity to GABA following chronic benzodiazepine administration as measured by the direct iontophoretic application of GABA and serotonin onto serotonergic cells in the midbrain dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN), known to receive GABAergic input. The subsensitivity to GABA was found to be dose dependent and was seen when diazepam administration was three weeks or longer. Further, acute injection of the specific benzodiazepine antagonist, Ro15-1788, was found to reverse rapidly the decrease in GABA sensitivity observed in chronically diazepam-treated animals without altering GABA sensitivity in vehicle-treated rats. Decreased response to chronic benzodiazepines does not appear to be consistently related to alterations in the number or affinity of receptors for benzodiazepines. Our studies of radioligand-binding showed a decrease in the ability of GABA to enhance benzodiazepine binding in cerebral cortical membranes from chronic diazepam-treated animals without significant changes in benzodiazepine binding site density or affinity.
Peptides of the cholecystokinin family, but mainly the sulphated octapeptide (CCK8), have been found in brain extracts of several species. High amounts are present in axons and nerve endings in the rat neostriatum (caudate-putamen) and a role for cholecystokinin as a neurotransmitter in this functionally important area is possible. We have incubated slices of rat caudate-putamen (CP) to study the release of cholecystokinin-immunoreactivity (CCK-IR) in vitro. The release of CCK-IR was induced by veratridine. It was dependent on the presence of Ca2+ in the incubation medium and was blocked by tetrodotoxin. We now present evidence that dopaminergic agonists added to the slices modulate the veratridine-induced release via different groups of receptors. Receptors which mediate an enhancement of the release of CCK-IR seem to be located on afferent axons and nerve endings and are possibly of the D-2 subtype. Receptors which mediate an attenuation of the release are probably situated on cells intrinsic to the CP. These receptors seem to be coupled to adenylate cyclase and might thus be of the D-1 subtype. There is also evidence that endogenous dopamine when released enhances the secretion of CCK-IR.
Grid cells in layer II of rat entorhinal cortex fire to spatial locations in a repeating hexagonal grid, with smaller spacing between grid fields for neurons in more dorsal anatomical locations. Data from in vitro whole-cell patch recordings showed differences in frequency of subthreshold membrane potential oscillations in entorhinal neurons that correspond to different positions along the dorsal-to-ventral axis, supporting a model of physiological mechanisms for grid cell responses.
Glutamate receptors of the AMPA-subtype (AMPARs), together with the transmembrane AMPAR regulatory proteins (TARPs), mediate fast excitatory synaptic transmission in the mammalian brain. Here, we show by proteomic analysis that the majority of AMPARs in the rat brain are coassembled with two members of the cornichon family of transmembrane proteins, rather than with the TARPs. Coassembly with cornichon homologs 2 and 3 affects AMPARs in two ways: Cornichons increase surface expression of AMPARs, and they alter channel gating by markedly slowing deactivation and desensitization kinetics. These results demonstrate that cornichons are intrinsic auxiliary subunits of native AMPARs and provide previously unknown molecular determinants for glutamatergic neurotransmission in the central nervous system.
The "staggerer" mutant is recognized by its staggering gait, mild tremor, hypotonia, and small size. Symptoms develop during postnatal weeks 1 to 4 and remain stationary thereafter. The cerebellar cortex is grossly underdeveloped, with too few granule cells and unaligned Purkinje cells. Genetic linkage studies and neuropathological findings distinguish staggerer from other known mutants.
Vocal communication involves both speaking and hearing, often taking place concurrently. Vocal production, including human speech and animal vocalization, poses a number of unique challenges for the auditory system. It is important for the auditory system to monitor external sounds continuously from the acoustic environment during speaking despite the potential for sensory masking by self-generated sounds. It is also essential for the auditory system to monitor feedback of one's own voice. This self-monitoring may play a part in distinguishing between self-generated or externally generatedauditory inputs and in detecting errors in our vocal production. Previous work in humans and other animals has demonstrated that the auditory cortex is largely suppressed during speaking or vocalizing. Despite the importance of self-monitoring, the underlying neural mechanisms in the mammalian brain, in particular the role of vocalization-induced suppression, remain virtually unknown. Here we show that neurons in the auditory cortex of marmoset monkeys (Callithrix jacchus) are sensitive to auditory feedback during vocal production, and that changes in the feedback alter the coding properties of these neurons. Furthermore, we found that the previously described cortical suppression during vocalization actually increased the sensitivity of these neurons to vocal feedback. This heightened sensitivity to vocal feedback suggests that these neurons may have an important role in auditory self-monitoring.
Magnification, the relative size of the neural representation of a portion of the visual field, decreases more rapidly with increasing visual field eccentricity in striate cortex than in the retinal ganglion cell layer of the owl monkey (Aotus trivirgatus); the proportion of the cells in striate cortex devoted to central vision is much larger than the comparable proportion of retinal ganglion cells. Magnification in striate cortex is a power function of magnification in the retinal ganglion cell layer. A formula for convergence (ganglion cells to cortical neurons) follows from this relationship.
Chicks with the eyelids of one eye sutured were trained to discriminate between grains and pebbles. The learned experience was completely recognizable by the naive eye that had been occluded during training. When both eyes were opened after monocular training, the velocity of blood flow through paired left and right brain regions was identical. However, when chicks were reexposed to the discrimination situation, blood flow through the cerebral hemisphere associated with the naive eye was greater than that through the hemisphere associated with the trained eye.
The Jamaican mustached bat has delay-tuned neurons in the inferior colliculus, medial geniculate body, and auditory cortex. The responses of these neurons to an echo are facilitated by a biosonar pulse emitted by the bat when the echo returns with a particular delay from a target located at a particular distance. Electrical stimulation of cortical delay-tuned neurons increases the delay-tuned responses of collicular neurons tuned to the same echo delay as the cortical neurons and decreases those of collicular neurons tuned to different echo delays. Cortical neurons improve information processing in the inferior colliculus by way of the corticocollicular projection.
Songbirds learn a correspondence between vocal-motor output and auditory feedback during development. For neurons in a motor cortex analog of adult zebra finches, we show that the timing and structure of activity elicited by the playback of song during sleep matches activity during daytime singing. The motor activity leads syllables, and the matching sensory response depends on a sequence of typically up to three of the preceding syllables. Thus, sensorimotor correspondence is reflected in temporally precise activity patterns of single neurons that use long sensory memories to predict syllable sequences. Additionally, "spontaneous" activity of these neurons during sleep matches their sensorimotor activity, a form of song "replay." These data suggest a model whereby sensorimotor correspondences are stored during singing but do not modify behavior, and off-line comparison (e.g., during sleep) of rehearsed motor output and predicted sensory feedback is used to adaptively shape motor output.
Patients with cerebral lesions offer a unique opportunity to investigate the organization of meaning systems in the brain. Clinical neurologists have long been aware that knowledge of particular classes or categories of information may be selectively impaired in some cases and selectively spared in others. For example knowledge of letters, colours, objects, or people may be lost as a consequence of damage to the left hemisphere of the brain. Recently there has been quantitative evidence for even more specific impairment and preservation of particular classes of knowledge. More recently the evidence for knowledge of living things as compared with inanimate objects is particularly striking. Such observations have suggested that our semantic knowledge base is categorical in its organization. In this preliminary report, we describe a patient whose semantic knowledge deficit was not only category specific, but also modality specific. Although his knowledge of the visual world was almost entirely normal, his knowledge of living things (but not objects!) was gravely impaired when assessed in the verbal domain. These findings call into question the widely accepted view that the brain has a single all-purpose meaning store.
Local increases in neuronal activity within the brain lead to dilation of blood vessels and to increased regional cerebral blood flow. Increases in extracellular potassium concentration are known to dilate cerebral arterioles. Recent studies have suggested that the potassium released by active neurons is transported through astrocytic glial cells and released from their endfeet onto blood vessels. The results of computer simulations of potassium dynamics in the brain indicate that the release of potassium from astrocyte endfeet raises perivascular potassium concentration much more rapidly and to higher levels than does diffusion of potassium through extracellular space, particularly when the site of a potassium increase is some distance from the vessel wall. On the basis of this finding, it is proposed that the release of potassium from astrocyte endfeet plays an important role in regulating regional cerebral blood flow in response to changes in neuronal activity.
Horseradish peroxidase was injected in different parts of the frontal and parietal cortex in 17 rhesus monkeys. In all cases the enzyme was transported retrogradely to neurons in the substantia innominata and hypothalamus as well as in the thalamus. These new findings demonstrate that these cortical areas receive direct afferent fibers from limbic basal forebrain areas concerned with emotion and motivation.
Although phantom-limb pain is a frequent consequence of the amputation of an extremity, little is known about its origin. On the basis of the demonstration of substantial plasticity of the somatosensory cortex after amputation or somatosensory deafferentation in adult monkeys, it has been suggested that cortical reorganization could account for some non-painful phantom-limb phenomena in amputees and that cortical reorganization has an adaptive (that is, pain-preventing) function. Theoretical and empirical work on chronic back pain has revealed a positive relationship between the amount of cortical alteration and the magnitude of pain, so we predicted that cortical reorganization and phantom-limb pain should be positively related. Using non-invasive neuromagnetic imaging techniques to determine cortical reorganization in humans, we report a very strong direct relationship (r = 0.93) between the amount of cortical reorganization and the magnitude of phantom limb pain (but not non-painful phantom phenomena) experienced after arm amputation. These data indicate that phantom-limb pain is related to, and may be a consequence of, plastic changes in primary somatosensory cortex.
We have been studying a population of bipotential glial progenitor cells in the perinatal rat optic nerve and brain in an attempt to understand how cells choose between alternative fates in the developing mammalian central nervous system (CNS). This cell population gives rise initially to oligodendrocytes and then to type-2 astrocytes, both of which apparently collaborate in sheathing axons in the CNS. In vitro studies suggest that oligodendrocyte differentiation is the constitutive pathway of development for the oligodendrocyte-type-2-astrocyte (O-2A) progenitor cell, whereas type-2 astrocyte differentiation depends on a specific inducing protein. This protein is present in the developing optic nerve when type-2 astrocytes are differentiating and can induce O-2A progenitor cells in vitro to express glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a marker of astrocyte differentiation. Here we show that the type-2-astrocyte-inducing protein is similar or identical to ciliary neutrotrophic factor (CNTF), which promotes the survival of some types of peripheral neurons in vitro, including ciliary ganglion neurons. This suggests that CNTF, in addition to its effect on neurons, may be responsible for triggering type-2 astrocyte differentiation in the developing CNS.
The traditional approach to studying brain function is to measure physiological responses to controlled sensory, motor and cognitive paradigms. However, most of the brain's energy consumption is devoted to ongoing metabolic activity not clearly associated with any particular stimulus or behaviour. Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies in humans aimed at understanding this ongoing activity have shown that spontaneous fluctuations of the blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal occur continuously in the resting state. In humans, these fluctuations are temporally coherent within widely distributed cortical systems that recapitulate the functional architecture of responses evoked by experimentally administered tasks. Here, we show that the same phenomenon is present in anaesthetized monkeys even at anaesthetic levels known to induce profound loss of consciousness. We specifically demonstrate coherent spontaneous fluctuations within three well known systems (oculomotor, somatomotor and visual) and the 'default' system, a set of brain regions thought by some to support uniquely human capabilities. Our results indicate that coherent system fluctuations probably reflect an evolutionarily conserved aspect of brain functional organization that transcends levels of consciousness.
An infant who died with neurological abnormalities, mental retardation, and dislocated ocular lenses excreted in his urine abnormally large amounts of S-sulfo-L-cysteine, sulfite, and thiosulfate and virtulally no inorganic sutlfate. The present report establishes the occurrence of an ezymatic defect in this infant. His liver, brain, and kidney specifically lacked sulfite oxidase activity. Deficiency of sulfite oxidase, which has not apparently been described in man, provides a reasonable explanation for the abnormalities in this infant.
Homogenates of rat cerebral cortex contain material corresponding to prostaglandins E(1), E(2), F(1)alpha, and F(2)alpha which are concentrated mainly in the light microsomal and mitochondrial fractions. Only the former fraction exhibits significant ability to synthesize prostaglandins E(1) and F(1)alpha from bis-homo-gamma-linolenic acid. After subfractionation of the crude mitochondrial fraction, prostaglandin E and F material is found mainly in the cholinergic and noncholinergic nerve endings. We conclude that the nerve endings are a storage site, whereas the light microsomes are the site of synthesis.
Stereopsis is the perception of depth based on small positional differences between images formed on the two retinae (known as binocular disparity). Neurons that respond selectively to binocular disparity were first described three decades ago, and have since been observed in many visual areas of the primate brain, including V1, V2, V3, MT and MST. Although disparity-selective neurons are thought to form the neural substrate for stereopsis, the mere existence of disparity-selective neurons does not guarantee that they contribute to stereoscopic depth perception. Some disparity-selective neurons may play other roles, such as guiding vergence eye movements. Thus, the roles of different visual areas in stereopsis remain poorly defined. Here we show that visual area MT is important in stereoscopic vision: electrical stimulation of clusters of disparity-selective MT neurons can bias perceptual judgements of depth, and the bias is predictable from the disparity preference of neurons at the stimulation site. These results show that behaviourally relevant signals concerning stereoscopic depth are present in MT.
Appropriate preferences for light or dark conditions can be crucial for an animal's survival. Innate light preferences are not static in some animals, including the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, which prefers darkness in the feeding larval stage but prefers light in adulthood. To elucidate the neural circuit underlying light preference, we examined the neurons involved in larval phototactic behavior by regulating neuronal functions. Modulating activity of two pairs of isomorphic neurons in the central brain switched the larval light preference between photophobic and photophilic. These neurons were found to be immediately downstream of pdf-expressing lateral neurons, which are innervated by larval photoreceptors. Our results revealed a neural mechanism that could enable the adjustment of animals' response strategies to environmental stimuli according to biological needs.
Infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) results in a profound immunosuppression due predominantly to a selective depletion of helper/inducer T lymphocytes that express the receptor for the virus (the CD4 molecule). HIV also has tropism for the brain leading to neuropsychiatric abnormalities. Besides inducing cell death, HIV can interfere with T4 cell function by various mechanisms. The monocyte serves as a reservoir for HIV and is relatively refractory to its cytopathic effects. HIV can exist in a latent or chronic form which can be converted to a productive infection by a variety of inductive signals.
Monocularly deprived kittens were compared with littermates that had had their eyelids sutured for the same time but that had, in addition, been treated with 6-hydroxydopamine to deplete their forebrains of catecholamines. The visual cortices of all the catecholamine-depleted kittens showed high proportions of binocular neurons, in contrast to the control group, most of whose visual cortical neurons were driven exclusively by the nondeprived eye. Catecholamines may play an important role in the maintenance of cortical plasticity during the critical period.
There is growing evidence that two, or possibly more, neurotransmitters can coexist within the same neurone. In particular, the presence of a peptide and a biogenic amine has been demonstrated in the same terminals of central and peripheral neurones. These findings have led to the hypothesis that neurotransmitters, coexisting within the same neurones, can interact at pre- or postsynaptic sites in a functionally coordinated manner. However, interactions between neurotransmitters contained in distinct neuronal systems terminating within the same region of the central nervous system (CNS) can be envisaged. We have examined this last possibility in the cerebral cortex, an area of the CNS where the two neurotransmitters vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and noradrenaline are contained in separate neuronal systems and where they both stimulate the formation of cyclic AMP. We report here that vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and noradrenaline act synergistically to stimulate the formation of cyclic AMP and that this synergistic interaction is antagonized by the specific alpha-adrenergic antagonist phentolamine.
The ability to process temporal information is fundamental to sensory perception, cognitive processing and motor behaviour of all living organisms, from amoebae to humans. Neural circuit mechanisms based on neuronal and synaptic properties have been shown to process temporal information over the range of tens of microseconds to hundreds of milliseconds. How neural circuits process temporal information in the range of seconds to minutes is much less understood. Studies of working memory in monkeys and rats have shown that neurons in the prefrontal cortex, the parietal cortex and the thalamus exhibit ramping activities that linearly correlate with the lapse of time until the end of a specific time interval of several seconds that the animal is trained to memorize. Many organisms can also memorize the time interval of rhythmic sensory stimuli in the timescale of seconds and can coordinate motor behaviour accordingly, for example, by keeping the rhythm after exposure to the beat of music. Here we report a form of rhythmic activity among specific neuronal ensembles in the zebrafish optic tectum, which retains the memory of the time interval (in the order of seconds) of repetitive sensory stimuli for a duration of up to approximately 20 s. After repetitive visual conditioning stimulation (CS) of zebrafish larvae, we observed rhythmic post-CS activities among specific tectal neuronal ensembles, with a regular interval that closely matched the CS. Visuomotor behaviour of the zebrafish larvae also showed regular post-CS repetitions at the entrained time interval that correlated with rhythmic neuronal ensemble activities in the tectum. Thus, rhythmic activities among specific neuronal ensembles may act as an adjustable 'metronome' for time intervals in the order of seconds, and serve as a mechanism for the short-term perceptual memory of rhythmic sensory experience.
Drugs of abuse are known to cause persistent modification of neural circuits, leading to addictive behaviours. Changes in synaptic plasticity in dopamine neurons of the ventral tegmental area (VTA) may contribute to circuit modification induced by many drugs of abuse, including cocaine. Here we report that, following repeated exposure to cocaine in vivo, excitatory synapses to rat VTA dopamine neurons become highly susceptible to the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) by correlated pre- and postsynaptic activity. This facilitated LTP induction is caused by cocaine-induced reduction of GABA(A) (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor-mediated inhibition of these dopamine neurons. In midbrain slices from rats treated with saline or a single dose of cocaine, LTP could not be induced in VTA dopamine neurons unless GABA-mediated inhibition was reduced by bicuculline or picrotoxin. However, LTP became readily inducible in slices from rats treated repeatedly with cocaine; this LTP induction was prevented by enhancing GABA-mediated inhibition using diazepam. Furthermore, repeated cocaine exposure reduced the amplitude of GABA-mediated synaptic currents and increased the probability of spike initiation in VTA dopamine neurons. This cocaine-induced enhancement of synaptic plasticity in the VTA may be important for the formation of drug-associated memory.
Severe behavioural deficits in psychiatric diseases such as autism and schizophrenia have been hypothesized to arise from elevations in the cellular balance of excitation and inhibition (E/I balance) within neural microcircuitry. This hypothesis could unify diverse streams of pathophysiological and genetic evidence, but has not been susceptible to direct testing. Here we design and use several novel optogenetic tools to causally investigate the cellular E/I balance hypothesis in freely moving mammals, and explore the associated circuit physiology. Elevation, but not reduction, of cellular E/I balance within the mouse medial prefrontal cortex was found to elicit a profound impairment in cellular information processing, associated with specific behavioural impairments and increased high-frequency power in the 30-80 Hz range, which have both been observed in clinical conditions in humans. Consistent with the E/I balance hypothesis, compensatory elevation of inhibitory cell excitability partially rescued social deficits caused by E/I balance elevation. These results provide support for the elevated cellular E/I balance hypothesis of severe neuropsychiatric disease-related symptoms.
The patterns of synaptic connection that underlie brain function depend on the elaborate forms characteristic of neurons. It is therefore a central goal of neuroscience to understand the molecular basis for neuronal shape. Neuronal pathfinding during development is one major determinant of neuronal shape: growing nerve axons and dendrites must navigate, branch, and locate targets in response to extracellular cue molecules within the embryo. The leading tips of growing nerve processes, structures known as growth cones, contain especially high concentrations of the ubiquitous mechanochemical protein actin. Force generation involving this cytoskeletal molecule appears to be essential to the ability of growing nerve fibers to respond structurally to extracellular cues. New results from electronically enhanced light microscopy of living growth cones are helping to show how actin-based forces guide neurite growth and synapse formation.
Pitch perception is critical for identifying and segregating auditory objects, especially in the context of music and speech. The perception of pitch is not unique to humans and has been experimentally demonstrated in several animal species. Pitch is the subjective attribute of a sound's fundamental frequency (f(0)) that is determined by both the temporal regularity and average repetition rate of its acoustic waveform. Spectrally dissimilar sounds can have the same pitch if they share a common f(0). Even when the acoustic energy at f(0) is removed ('missing fundamental') the same pitch is still perceived. Despite its importance for hearing, how pitch is represented in the cerebral cortex is unknown. Here we show the existence of neurons in the auditory cortex of marmoset monkeys that respond to both pure tones and missing fundamental harmonic complex sounds with the same f(0), providing a neural correlate for pitch constancy. These pitch-selective neurons are located in a restricted low-frequency cortical region near the anterolateral border of the primary auditory cortex, and is consistent with the location of a pitch-selective area identified in recent imaging studies in humans.
Cues that reliably predict rewards trigger the thoughts and emotions normally evoked by those rewards. Humans and other animals will work, often quite hard, for these cues. This is termed conditioned reinforcement. The ability to use conditioned reinforcers to guide our behaviour is normally beneficial; however, it can go awry. For example, corporate icons, such as McDonald's Golden Arches, influence consumer behaviour in powerful and sometimes surprising ways, and drug-associated cues trigger relapse to drug seeking in addicts and animals exposed to addictive drugs, even after abstinence or extinction. Yet, despite their prevalence, it is not known how conditioned reinforcers control human or other animal behaviour. One possibility is that they act through the use of the specific rewards they predict; alternatively, they could control behaviour directly by activating emotions that are independent of any specific reward. In other words, the Golden Arches may drive business because they evoke thoughts of hamburgers and fries, or instead, may be effective because they also evoke feelings of hunger or happiness. Moreover, different brain circuits could support conditioned reinforcement mediated by thoughts of specific outcomes versus more general affective information. Here we have attempted to address these questions in rats. Rats were trained to learn that different cues predicted different rewards using specialized conditioning procedures that controlled whether the cues evoked thoughts of specific outcomes or general affective representations common to different outcomes. Subsequently, these rats were given the opportunity to press levers to obtain short and otherwise unrewarded presentations of these cues. We found that rats were willing to work for cues that evoked either outcome-specific or general affective representations. Furthermore the orbitofrontal cortex, a prefrontal region important for adaptive decision-making, was critical for the former but not for the latter form of conditioned reinforcement.
Most models of neural networks have assumed that neurons process information on a timescale of milliseconds and that the long-term modification of synaptic strengths underlies learning and memory. But neurons also have cellular mechanisms that operate on a timescale of tens or hundreds of milliseconds, such as a gradual rise in firing rate in response to injection of constant current or a rapid rise followed by a slower adaptation. These dynamic properties of neuronal responses are mediated by ion channels that are subject to modulation. We demonstrate here how a neural network with recurrent feedback connections can convert long-term modulation of neural responses that occur over these intermediate timescales into changes in the amplitude of the steady output from the system. This general principle may be relevant to many feedback systems in the brain. Here it is applied to the vestibulo-ocular reflex, whose amplitude is subject to long-term adaptive modification by visual inputs. The model reconciles apparently contradictory data on the neural locus of the cellular mechanisms that mediate this simple form of learning and memory.
Coincidence-detector neurons in the auditory brainstem of mammals and birds use interaural time differences to localize sounds. Each neuron receives many narrow-band inputs from both ears and compares the time of arrival of the inputs with an accuracy of 10-100 micros. Neurons that receive low-frequency auditory inputs (up to about 2 kHz) have bipolar dendrites, and each dendrite receives inputs from only one ear. Using a simple model that mimics the essence of the known electrophysiology and geometry of these cells, we show here that dendrites improve the coincidence-detection properties of the cells. The biophysical mechanism for this improvement is based on the nonlinear summation of excitatory inputs in each of the dendrites and the use of each dendrite as a current sink for inputs to the other dendrite. This is a rare case in which the contribution of dendrites to the known computation of a neuron may be understood. Our results show that, in these neurons, the cell morphology and the spatial distribution of the inputs enrich the computational power of these neurons beyond that expected from 'point neurons' (model neurons lacking dendrites).
It is rare for cerebral convolutional details to be imprinted on the internal table of cranial bone of fossil hominids. To date, the South African examples have shown the best detail, although surrounded by considerable controversy. Given that the Hadar specimens are the oldest hominids known (3-4 Myr BP), and have been the subject of considerable debate and interpretation, it is fortunate that such details are found on the cranial bones of at least one specimen, AL 162-28, a small adult. I report here a preliminary description of that endocast and it appears that despite its smallish pongid-sized brain, some degree of cerebral organization had occurred almost 3-4 Myr ago towards a more human pattern. If correct, this would mean that brain size increase may well have followed locomotion, but that brain organization may have occurred early in hominid evolution. Such a finding would call for a re-examination of our understanding about human evolution, and would require much more caution in assuming either 'gradualist' or 'punctuated equilibria' models in hominid evolution.
Synaptic transmission involves the regulated exocytosis of vesicles filled with neurotransmitter. Classical transmitters are synthesized in the cytoplasm, and so must be transported into synaptic vesicles. Although the vesicular transporters for monoamines and acetylcholine have been identified, the proteins responsible for packaging the primary inhibitory and excitatory transmitters, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate remain unknown. Studies in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans have implicated the gene unc-47 in the release of GABA. Here we show that the sequence of unc-47 predicts a protein with ten transmembrane domains, that the gene is expressed by GABA neurons, and that the protein colocalizes with synaptic vesicles. Further, a rat homologue of unc-47 is expressed by central GABA neurons and confers vesicular GABA transport in transfected cells with kinetics and substrate specificity similar to those previously reported for synaptic vesicles from the brain. Comparison of this vesicular GABA transporter (VGAT) with a vesicular transporter for monoamines shows that there are differences in the bioenergetic dependence of transport, and these presumably account for the differences in structure. Thus VGAT is the first of a new family of neurotransmitter transporters.
A juvenile Siamese cat with severe, progressive motor disability was shown to have extensive neuronal degeneration caused by accumulation of GM(1) ganglioside. Tissues from brain and kidney were markedly deficient in beta-galactosidase activity. The disease in this cat is thought to be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, and is strikingly similar to juvenile GM(1) gangliosidosis of children.
Autoradiograms prepared from adult rat brains demonstrate that nerve cells and neuropil in different brain regions selectively concentrate and retain intravenously administered triiodothyronine, by mechanisms susceptible to saturation with excess triiodothyronine. A neuroregulatory role for thyroid hormones, strongly supported by the observations, may account for their marked effects on behavior and the activity of the autonomic nervous system.
Concentrations of biogenic amine metabolites in discrete brain areas differed significantly between dogs with genetically transmitted narcolepsy and age- and breed-matched controls. Dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid were consistently elevated in the brains of narcoleptic animals, while homovanillic acid was not. Narcoleptic animals consistently exhibited lower utilization of dopamine and higher intraneuronal degradation of dopamine but no uniform decrease in serotonin utilization. Hence neuropathology appears to be associated with genetically transmitted canine narcolepsy. The data indicate a nonglobal depression of dopamine utilization or turnover or both.
Asymmetric cell division is a general process used in many developmental contexts to create two differently fated cells from a single progenitor cell. Intrinsic mechanisms like the asymmetric transmission of cell-fate determinants during cell division, and extrinsic cell-interaction mechanisms, can mediate asymmetric divisions. During embryonic development of the Drosophila central nervous system, neural stem cells called neuroblasts divide asymmetrically to produce another multipotent neuroblast and a ganglion mother cell (GMC) of more restricted developmental potential. Intrinsic mechanisms promote asymmetric division of neuroblasts: for example, the transcription factor Prospero localizes to the basal cell cortex of mitotic neuroblasts and then segregates exclusively into the GMC, which buds off from the basal side of the neuroblast. In the GMC, Prospero translocates to the nucleus, where it establishes differential gene expression between sibling cells. Here we report the identification of a gene, miranda, which encodes a new protein that co-localizes with Prospero in mitotic neuroblasts, tethers Prospero to the basal cortex of mitotic neuroblasts, directing Prospero into the GMC, and releases Prospero from the cell cortex within GMCs. miranda thus creates intrinsic differences between sibling cells by mediating the asymmetric segregation of a transcription factor into only one daughter cell during neural stem-cell division.
Memories are thought to be attractor states of neuronal representations, with the hippocampus a likely substrate for context-dependent episodic memories. However, such states have not been directly observed. For example, the hippocampal place cell representation of location was previously found to respond continuously to changes in environmental shape alone. We report that exposure to novel square and circular environments made of different materials creates attractor representations for both shapes: Place cells abruptly and simultaneously switch between representations as environmental shape changes incrementally. This enables study of attractor dynamics in a cognitive representation and may correspond to the formation of distinct contexts in context-dependent memory.
Ionotropic glutamate receptors mediate fast excitatory synaptic transmission in the central nervous system. Their modulation is believed to affect learning and memory, and their dysfunction has been implicated in the pathogenesis of neurological and psychiatric diseases. Despite a wealth of functional data, little is known about the intact, three-dimensional structure of these ligand-gated ion channels. Here, we present the structure of native AMPA receptors (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid; AMPA-Rs) purified from rat brain, as determined by single-particle electron microscopy. Unlike the homotetrameric recombinant GluR2 (ref. 3), the native heterotetrameric AMPA-R adopted various conformations, which reflect primarily a variable separation of the two dimeric extracellular amino-terminal domains. Members of the stargazin/TARP family of transmembrane proteins co-purified with AMPA-Rs and contributed to the density representing the transmembrane region of the complex. Glutamate and cyclothiazide markedly altered the conformational equilibrium of the channel complex, suggesting that desensitization is related to separation of the N-terminal domains. These data provide a glimpse of the conformational changes of an important ligand-gated ion channel of the brain.
Communication between neurons in the brain occurs primarily through synapses made onto elaborate treelike structures called dendrites. New electrical and optical recording techniques have led to tremendous advances in our understanding of how dendrites contribute to neuronal computation in the mammalian brain. The varied morphology and electrical and chemical properties of dendrites enable a spectrum of local and long-range signaling, defining the input-output relationship of neurons and the rules for induction of synaptic plasticity. In this way, diversity in dendritic signaling allows individual neurons to carry out specialized functions within their respective networks.
Brain cholinergic neurons are critical for memory function and their loss may contribute to memory impairment in Alzheimer's disease. One role of cholinergic neurons is to elicit an oscillatory activity called theta rhythm in the hippocampus, a brain region involved in memory processing. Theta rhythm occurs during periods of learning, but its effect on the synaptic plasticity that underlies learning remains unclear. We have studied synaptic plasticity in hippocampal slices during theta-frequency oscillations induced by a cholinergic agonist. Here we report that during these oscillations, synapses are in a state of heightened plasticity and can be modified by what would otherwise be ineffective stimulation. This heightened plasticity is sensitive to the timing of incoming stimuli with respect to the oscillatory activity. The results suggest that cholinergic systems may affect memory formation through the induction of an oscillatory state in which the requirements for synaptic plasticity are dramatically altered.
Taste substances applied to the oral cavity result in either ingestion or rejection, each with a characteristic muscular response pattern. These responses are the same in decerebrate and intact rats; the caudal brainstem appears to be the neural substrate of ingestion and rejection responses. The experiment determined whether decerebrates can alter these discriminative responses as a function of food deprivation or toxicosis. Food-deprived decerebrate rats, like intact ones, ingested a taste substance they had rejected when sated. However, these same decerebrates, in contrast to controls, neither rejected nor decreased ingestive reactions to a novel taste after that taste had been repeatedly paired with lithium chloride-induced illness. Although the forebrain may be important for integrating ingestion, some aspects of this control seem to be represented in caudal brain areas.
In order to see the world with high spatial acuity, an animal must sample the visual image with many detectors that restrict their analyses to extremely small regions of space. The visual cortex must then integrate the information from these localized receptive fields to obtain a more global picture of the surrounding environment. We studied this process in single neurons within the middle temporal visual area (MT) of macaques using stimuli that produced conflicting local and global information about stimulus motion. Neuronal responses in alert animals initially reflected predominantly the ambiguous local motion features, but gradually converged to an unambiguous global representation. When the same animals were anaesthetized, the integration of local motion signals was markedly impaired even though neuronal responses remained vigorous and directional tuning characteristics were intact. Our results suggest that anaesthesia preferentially affects the visual processing responsible for integrating local signals into a global visual representation.
The most prominent microtubule-associated protein of the neuronal cytoskeleton is MAP2. In the brain it exists as a pair of high-molecular weight proteins, MAP2a and MAP2b, and a smaller form, MAP2c, which is particularly abundant in the developing brain. High-molecular weight MAP2 is expressed in dendrites, where its messenger RNA is also located, but is not found in axons; it has been shown to be present in fine filaments that crosslink dendritic microtubules. This correlates with the primary structure of high-molecular weight MAP2, which consists of a short carboxy-terminal tubulin-binding domain and a long amino-terminal arm, which forms a filamentous sidearm on reconstituted microtubules. Here we report that the high- and low-molecular weight forms of MAP2 are generated by alternative splicing and share the entire C-terminal tubulin-binding domain as well as a short N-terminal sequence. In contrast to high molecular weight MAP2, embryonic brain MAP2c lacks 1,342 amino acids from the filamentous sidearm domain. Furthermore, the mRNA for low molecular weight MAP2c is not present in dendrites, indicating that the dendritic targeting signal is specific for the high-molecular weight form.
Photoreceptor loss causes irreversible blindness in many retinal diseases. Repair of such damage by cell transplantation is one of the most feasible types of central nervous system repair; photoreceptor degeneration initially leaves the inner retinal circuitry intact and new photoreceptors need only make single, short synaptic connections to contribute to the retinotopic map. So far, brain- and retina-derived stem cells transplanted into adult retina have shown little evidence of being able to integrate into the outer nuclear layer and differentiate into new photoreceptors. Furthermore, there has been no demonstration that transplanted cells form functional synaptic connections with other neurons in the recipient retina or restore visual function. This might be because the mature mammalian retina lacks the ability to accept and incorporate stem cells or to promote photoreceptor differentiation. We hypothesized that committed progenitor or precursor cells at later ontogenetic stages might have a higher probability of success upon transplantation. Here we show that donor cells can integrate into the adult or degenerating retina if they are taken from the developing retina at a time coincident with the peak of rod genesis. These transplanted cells integrate, differentiate into rod photoreceptors, form synaptic connections and improve visual function. Furthermore, we use genetically tagged post-mitotic rod precursors expressing the transcription factor Nrl (ref. 6) (neural retina leucine zipper) to show that successfully integrated rod photoreceptors are derived only from immature post-mitotic rod precursors and not from proliferating progenitor or stem cells. These findings define the ontogenetic stage of donor cells for successful rod photoreceptor transplantation.
Amyloid-b oligomers may cause cognitive deficits in Alzheimer's disease by impairing neuronal NMDA-type glutamate receptors, whose function is regulated by the receptor tyrosine kinase EphB2. Here we show that amyloid-b oligomers bind to the fibronectin repeats domain of EphB2 and trigger EphB2 degradation in the proteasome. To determine the pathogenic importance of EphB2 depletions in Alzheimer's disease and related models, we used lentiviral constructs to reduce or increase neuronal expression of EphB2 in memory centres of the mouse brain. In nontransgenic mice, knockdown of EphB2 mediated by short hairpin RNA reduced NMDA receptor currents and impaired long-term potentiation in the dentate gyrus, which are important for memory formation. Increasing EphB2 expression in the dentate gyrus of human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice reversed deficits in NMDA receptor-dependent long-term potentiation and memory impairments. Thus, depletion of EphB2 is critical in amyloid-b-induced neuronal dysfunction. Increasing EphB2 levels or function could be beneficial in Alzheimer's disease.
Animals learn that a tone can predict the occurrence of an electric shock through classical conditioning. Mice or rats trained in this manner display fear responses, such as freezing behaviour, when they hear the conditioned tone. Studies using amygdalectomized rats have shown that the amygdala is required for both the acquisition and expression of learned fear responses. Freezing to a conditioned tone is enhanced following damage to the dorsal part of the medial prefrontal cortex, indicating that this area may be involved in fear reduction. Here we show that prefrontal neurons reduce their spontaneous activity in the presence of a conditioned aversive tone as a function of the degree of fear. The depression in prefrontal spontaneous activity is related to amygdala activity but not to the freezing response itself. These data indicate that, in the presence of threatening stimuli, the amygdala controls both fear expression and prefrontal neuronal activity. They suggest that abnormal amygdala-induced modulation of prefrontal neuronal activity may be involved in the pathophysiology of certain forms of anxiety disorder.
Widespread demyelination and axonal loss are the pathological hallmarks of multiple sclerosis. The multifocal nature of this chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system complicates cellular therapy and puts emphasis on both the donor cell origin and the route of cell transplantation. We established syngenic adult neural stem cell cultures and injected them into an animal model of multiple sclerosis--experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in the mouse--either intravenously or intracerebroventricularly. In both cases, significant numbers of donor cells entered into demyelinating areas of the central nervous system and differentiated into mature brain cells. Within these areas, oligodendrocyte progenitors markedly increased, with many of them being of donor origin and actively remyelinating axons. Furthermore, a significant reduction of astrogliosis and a marked decrease in the extent of demyelination and axonal loss were observed in transplanted animals. The functional impairment caused by EAE was almost abolished in transplanted mice, both clinically and neurophysiologically. Thus, adult neural precursor cells promote multifocal remyelination and functional recovery after intravenous or intrathecal injection in a chronic model of multiple sclerosis.
Dorsal rhizotomy from C(2) or C(3) to T(4) in the primate results in failure to elicit summated cortical responses from systematic stimulation of the appropriate peripheral nerves. Under these conditions there is thus no evidence of sensory input into the cerebral cortex. A nonclassical mechanism must therefore be operational to explain the extensive purposive movements observed in the deafferented animals.
The functional architecture of the object vision pathway in the human brain was investigated using functional magnetic resonance imaging to measure patterns of response in ventral temporal cortex while subjects viewed faces, cats, five categories of man-made objects, and nonsense pictures. A distinct pattern of response was found for each stimulus category. The distinctiveness of the response to a given category was not due simply to the regions that responded maximally to that category, because the category being viewed also could be identified on the basis of the pattern of response when those regions were excluded from the analysis. Patterns of response that discriminated among all categories were found even within cortical regions that responded maximally to only one category. These results indicate that the representations of faces and objects in ventral temporal cortex are widely distributed and overlapping.
The idea that new memories undergo a time-dependent consolidation process after acquisition has received considerable experimental support. More controversial has been the demonstration that established memories, once recalled, become labile and sensitive to disruption, requiring "reconsolidation" to become permanent. By infusing antisense oligodeoxynucleotides into the hippocampus of rats, we show that consolidation and reconsolidation are doubly dissociable component processes of memory. Consolidation involves brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) but not the transcription factor Zif268, whereas reconsolidation recruits Zif268 but not BDNF. These findings confirm a requirement for BDNF specifically in memory consolidation and also resolve the role of Zif268 in brain plasticity, learning, and memory.
Three reports on mammalian brain evolution analyse the same comparative data on brain component volumes but come to partially conflicting conclusions. Clark et al. conclude from their analysis of volumetric brain proportions ("cerebro-types") that cerebellum size is invariant across mammalian taxonomic groups, the neocortex and cerebellum do not co-vary in size (in contradiction to ref. 1), and cerebrotype-based measures identify directional changes in brain architecture. Here I provide evidence that calls each of these conclusions into question. The failure of the cerebrotype measure to identify species differences in brain architecture that are independent of gross brain size undermines the proposal by Clark et al. that it could be useful for detecting evolutionary patterns and phylogenetic relationships.
The two forms of pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP-27 and -38) are neuropeptides of the secretin/glucagon/vasoactive intestinal polypeptide/growth-hormone-releasing hormone family and regulate hormone release from the pituitary and adrenal gland. They may also be involved in spermatogenesis, and PACAP-38 potently stimulates neuritogenesis and survival of cultured rat sympathetic neuroblast and promotes neurite outgrowth of PC-12 cells. The PACAP type-I receptor (found in hypothalamus, brain stem, pituitary, adrenal gland and testes), specific for PACAP, is positively coupled to adenylyl cyclase and phospholipase C. The recently cloned type II receptor does not discriminate between PACAP and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and is coupled to only adenylyl cyclase. Here we have used a new expression cloning strategy, based on the induction of a reporter gene by cyclic AMP, to isolate a complementary DNA encoding the type-I PACAP receptor. On transfection of this cDNA, both PACAP-27 and -38 stimulate adenylyl cyclase with similar EC50 values (50% effective concentration, 0.1-0.4 nM), whereas only PACAP-38 stimulates phospholipase C with high potency (EC50 = 15 nM). Four other splice variants were isolated with insertions at the C-terminal end of the third intracellular loop. Expression of these cDNAs revealed altered patterns of adenylyl cyclase and phospholipase C stimulation, suggesting a novel mechanism for fine tuning of signal transduction.
Uptake of glutamate into glial cells in the CNS maintains the extracellular glutamate concentration below neurotoxic levels and helps terminate its action as a neurotransmitter. The co-transport of two sodium ions on the glutamate carrier is thought to provide the energy needed to transport glutamate into cells. We have shown recently that glutamate uptake can be detected electrically because the excess of Na+ ions transported with each glutamate anion results in a net current flow into the cell. We took advantage of the control of the environment, both inside and outside the cell, provided by whole-cell patch-clamping and now report that glutamate uptake is activated by intracellular potassium and inhibited by extracellular potassium. Our results indicate that one K+ ion is transported out of the cell each time a glutamate anion and three Na+ ions are transported in. A carrier with this stoichiometry can accumulate glutamate against a much greater concentration gradient than a carrier co-transporting one glutamate anion and two Na+ ions. Pathological rises in extracellular potassium concentration will inhibit glutamate uptake by depolarizing glial cells and by preventing the loss of K+ from the glutamate carrier. This will facilitate a rise in the extracellular glutamate concentration to neurotoxic levels and contribute to the neuronal death occurring in brain anoxia and ischaemia.
Lack of awareness of touch associated with brain damage may transiently recover after stimulation of the vestibular system. We used positron emission tomographic regional cerebral blood flow measurements to study the neurophysiological effect of vestibular stimulation on touch imperception in a subject with a right brain lesion. We tested the hypothesis that the vestibular system aids conscious tactile perception by introducing a bias in the neural system subserving body representation. We show that in normal subjects touch and vestibular signals share projections to the putamen, insula, somatosensory area II, premotor cortex and supramarginal gyrus. In our patient a subset of these regions (right putamen and insula) was spared by the lesion and was maximally active when touch and vestibular stimulations were combined. These results support the suggestion that our phenomenological consciousness is associated with activation in circumscribed brain areas specific to the particular sensation of which we are aware.
The rate of liberation of free acetylcholine from the surface of prostigmin-treated cerebral cortex in the freely moving cat has been determined in states of slow wave sleep, paradoxical or activated sleep, and waking. The average rate during slow wave sleep (1.2 nanograms per minute per square centimeter of cortical surface) increased during paradoxical sleep (2.2 nanograms per minute) and during waking (2.1 nanograms per minute). The rate of acetylcholine release is thus related to the electroencephalogram pattern of desynchronized activatin of the cortex rahter than to the behavioral responsiveness of the animals.
Sensory experience begins when neural circuits in the cerebral cortex are still immature; however, the contribution of experience to cortical maturation remains unclear. In the visual cortex, the selectivity of neurons for oriented stimuli at the time of eye opening is poor and increases dramatically after the onset of visual experience. Here we investigate whether visual experience has a significant role in the maturation of orientation selectivity and underlying cortical circuits using two forms of deprivation: dark rearing, which completely eliminates experience, and binocular lid suture, which alters the pattern of sensory driven activity. Orientation maps were present in dark-reared ferrets, but fully mature levels of tuning were never attained. In contrast, only rudimentary levels of orientation selectivity were observed in lid-sutured ferrets. Despite these differences, horizontal connections in both groups were less extensive and less clustered than normal, suggesting that long-range cortical processing is not essential for the expression of orientation selectivity, but may be needed for the full maturation of tuning. Thus, experience is beneficial or highly detrimental to cortical maturation, depending on the pattern of sensory driven activity.
Daily life continually confronts us with an exuberance of external, sensory stimuli competing with a rich stream of internal deliberations, plans and ruminations. The brain must select one or more of these for further processing. How this competition is resolved across multiple sensory and cognitive regions is not known; nor is it clear how internal thoughts and attention regulate this competition. Recording from single neurons in patients implanted with intracranial electrodes for clinical reasons, here we demonstrate that humans can regulate the activity of their neurons in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) to alter the outcome of the contest between external images and their internal representation. Subjects looked at a hybrid superposition of two images representing familiar individuals, landmarks, objects or animals and had to enhance one image at the expense of the other, competing one. Simultaneously, the spiking activity of their MTL neurons in different subregions and hemispheres was decoded in real time to control the content of the hybrid. Subjects reliably regulated, often on the first trial, the firing rate of their neurons, increasing the rate of some while simultaneously decreasing the rate of others. They did so by focusing onto one image, which gradually became clearer on the computer screen in front of their eyes, and thereby overriding sensory input. On the basis of the firing of these MTL neurons, the dynamics of the competition between visual images in the subject's mind was visualized on an external display.
Archaeopteryx, the earliest known flying bird (avialan) from the Late Jurassic period, exhibits many shared primitive characters with more basal coelurosaurian dinosaurs (the clade including all theropods more bird-like than Allosaurus), such as teeth, a long bony tail and pinnate feathers. However, Archaeopteryx possessed asymmetrical flight feathers on its wings and tail, together with a wing feather arrangement shared with modern birds. This suggests some degree of powered flight capability but, until now, little was understood about the extent to which its brain and special senses were adapted for flight. We investigated this problem by computed tomography scanning and three-dimensional reconstruction of the braincase of the London specimen of Archaeopteryx. Here we show the reconstruction of the braincase from which we derived endocasts of the brain and inner ear. These suggest that Archaeopteryx closely resembled modern birds in the dominance of the sense of vision and in the possession of expanded auditory and spatial sensory perception in the ear. We conclude that Archaeopteryx had acquired the derived neurological and structural adaptations necessary for flight. An enlarged forebrain suggests that it had also developed enhanced somatosensory integration with these special senses demanded by a lifestyle involving flying ability.
The rostral migratory stream (RMS) is the main pathway by which newly born subventricular zone cells reach the olfactory bulb (OB) in rodents. However, the RMS in the adult human brain has been elusive. We demonstrate the presence of a human RMS, which is unexpectedly organized around a lateral ventricular extension reaching the OB, and illustrate the neuroblasts in it. The RMS ensheathing the lateral olfactory ventricular extension, as seen by magnetic resonance imaging, cell-specific markers, and electron microscopy, contains progenitor cells with migratory characteristics and cells that incorporate 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine and become mature neurons in the OB.
Antagonists of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)- or glycine-mediated neurotransmission, muscarinic cholinergic agonists, and excitatory amino acids and their analogues are all considered to be potent chemoconvulsant agents. However, although systemic injections of these agents have been used to create experimental models of generalized epilepsy, there has been no identification of a specific locus at which any of these drugs act to initiate generalized seizures. We recently located a forebrain region from which seizures can be elicited by the GABA antagonist bicuculline, and now report that manipulations of excitatory amino acid transmission and cholinergic transmission can also elicit seizures from this site. Bilateral clonic seizures can be elicited after unilateral application of picomole amounts of bicuculline, kainic acid or carbachol and micromole amounts of glutamate. Local application of the GABA agonist muscimol prevents the appearance of seizures on subsequent microinjection of all convulsant agents examined, whereas local application of the muscarinic antagonist, atropine, only prevents seizures induced by carbachol. This region is therefore a site of action for the epileptogenic effects of neuroactive agents with diverse mechanisms of action; it may also represent a site at which GABA agonists could function therapeutically to control epileptogenesis.
Trophic control over the expression and membrane distribution of voltage-dependent ion channels is one of the principal organizing events underlying the maturation of excitable cells. The myelin sheath is a major structural determinant of regional ion channel topography in central axons, but the exact molecular signals that mediate local interactions between the oligodendrocyte and axolemma are not known. We have found that large caliber fibre pathways in the brain of the mutant mouse shiverer (shi, gene on chromosome 18), whose developmental fate of myelination is averted by deletion of five exons in the myelin basic protein gene, have a striking excess of sodium channels. As cytoplasmic membranes of shiverer oligodendroglia still adhere to axons, the evidence indicates that myelin basic protein or a myelin basic protein-dependent glial transmembrane signal associated with compact myelin formation, rather than a simple glial-axon contact inhibition or an intrinsic genetic program of neuronal differentiation, could be critical in downregulating sodium channel density in axons. Here we use the shiverer mutant to show that mature central nervous system projection neurons with large caliber unmyelinated fibres sustain functional excitability by increasing sodium channel density. This axon plasticity, triggered by the absence of a single glial protein, contributes to the unexpectedly mild degree of neurological impairment in the mutant brain without myelin, and may be a potentially inducible mechanism determining the recovery of function from dysmyelinating disease.
Prenatal exposure to alcohol produces many developmental defects of the central nervous system, such as microcephaly, mental retardation, motor dysfunction, and cognitive deficiencies. Therefore, the generation of neurons in the cerebral cortex was examined in the offspring of female rats fed a diet containing ethanol. Prenatal exposure to ethanol delayed and extended the period during which cortical neurons were generated, reduced the number of neurons in the nature cortex with the same time of origin, and altered the distribution of neurons generated on a particular day. Thus, the proliferation and migration of cortical neurons are profoundly affected by in utero exposure to ethanol.
Generalization is a cognitive ability that allows similar stimuli along a given dimension to be treated as equivalents. Insects exhibit high levels of visual generalization. Honeybees trained to recognize complex visual stimuli on the basis of a single feature generalize their choice to novel stimuli sharing that common feature with the trained stimuli. The demonstration of this kind of performance has been limited to the use of a single visual feature, and the possibility that bees link different features in learning a visual pattern has been denied. Here we show that honeybees trained with a series of complex patterns sharing a common layout comprising four edge orientations remember these orientations simultaneously in their appropriate positions, and generalize their response to novel stimuli that preserve the trained layout. Honeybees also generalize their response to patterns with fewer correct orientations, depending on their match with the trained layout. Stimulation of the achromatic L-photoreceptor input is necessary for this task. The mini-brain of the honeybee can thus extract regularities in its environment and establish correspondences among correlated features. It can thus generate a large set of object descriptions from a finite set of elements.
Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) by environmental xenobiotic toxic chemicals, for instance 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (dioxin), has been implicated in a variety of cellular processes such as embryogenesis, transformation, tumorigenesis and inflammation. But the identity of an endogenous ligand activating the AHR under physiological conditions in the absence of environmental toxic chemicals is still unknown. Here we identify the tryptophan (Trp) catabolite kynurenine (Kyn) as an endogenous ligand of the human AHR that is constitutively generated by human tumour cells via tryptophan-2,3-dioxygenase (TDO), a liver- and neuron-derived Trp-degrading enzyme not yet implicated in cancer biology. TDO-derived Kyn suppresses antitumour immune responses and promotes tumour-cell survival and motility through the AHR in an autocrine/paracrine fashion. The TDO-AHR pathway is active in human brain tumours and is associated with malignant progression and poor survival. Because Kyn is produced during cancer progression and inflammation in the local microenvironment in amounts sufficient for activating the human AHR, these results provide evidence for a previously unidentified pathophysiological function of the AHR with profound implications for cancer and immune biology.
In this month's essay, Eric R. Kandel and Larry R. Squire chronicle how brain research has migrated from the peripheries of biology and psychology to assume a central position within those disciplines. The multidiscipline of neuroscience that emerged from this process now ranges from genes to cognition, from molecules to minds.
Revealing the mechanisms for neuronal somatic diversification remains a central challenge for understanding individual differences in brain organization and function. Here we show that an engineered human LINE-1 (for long interspersed nuclear element-1; also known as L1) element can retrotranspose in neuronal precursors derived from rat hippocampus neural stem cells. The resulting retrotransposition events can alter the expression of neuronal genes, which, in turn, can influence neuronal cell fate in vitro. We further show that retrotransposition of a human L1 in transgenic mice results in neuronal somatic mosaicism. The molecular mechanism of action is probably mediated through Sox2, because a decrease in Sox2 expression during the early stages of neuronal differentiation is correlated with increases in both L1 transcription and retrotransposition. Our data therefore indicate that neuronal genomes might not be static, but some might be mosaic because of de novo L1 retrotransposition events.
Abnormalities in functional connectivity between brain areas have been postulated as an important pathophysiological mechanism underlying schizophrenia. In particular, macroscopic measurements of brain activity in patients suggest that functional connectivity between the frontal and temporal lobes may be altered. However, it remains unclear whether such dysconnectivity relates to the aetiology of the illness, and how it is manifested in the activity of neural circuits. Because schizophrenia has a strong genetic component, animal models of genetic risk factors are likely to aid our understanding of the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of the disease. Here we study Df(16)A(+/-) mice, which model a microdeletion on human chromosome 22 (22q11.2) that constitutes one of the largest known genetic risk factors for schizophrenia. To examine functional connectivity in these mice, we measured the synchronization of neural activity between the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex during the performance of a task requiring working memory, which is one of the cognitive functions disrupted in the disease. In wild-type mice, hippocampal-prefrontal synchrony increased during working memory performance, consistent with previous reports in rats. Df(16)A(+/-) mice, which are impaired in the acquisition of the task, showed drastically reduced synchrony, measured both by phase-locking of prefrontal cells to hippocampal theta oscillations and by coherence of prefrontal and hippocampal local field potentials. Furthermore, the magnitude of hippocampal-prefrontal coherence at the onset of training could be used to predict the time it took the Df(16)A(+/-) mice to learn the task and increased more slowly during task acquisition. These data suggest how the deficits in functional connectivity observed in patients with schizophrenia may be realized at the single-neuron level. Our findings further suggest that impaired long-range synchrony of neural activity is one consequence of the 22q11.2 deletion and may be a fundamental component of the pathophysiology underlying schizophrenia.
Although autism is a highly heritable neurodevelopmental disorder, attempts to identify specific susceptibility genes have thus far met with limited success. Genome-wide association studies using half a million or more markers, particularly those with very large sample sizes achieved through meta-analysis, have shown great success in mapping genes for other complex genetic traits. Consequently, we initiated a linkage and association mapping study using half a million genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a common set of 1,031 multiplex autism families (1,553 affected offspring). We identified regions of suggestive and significant linkage on chromosomes 6q27 and 20p13, respectively. Initial analysis did not yield genome-wide significant associations; however, genotyping of top hits in additional families revealed an SNP on chromosome 5p15 (between SEMA5A and TAS2R1) that was significantly associated with autism (P = 2 x 10(-7)). We also demonstrated that expression of SEMA5A is reduced in brains from autistic patients, further implicating SEMA5A as an autism susceptibility gene. The linkage regions reported here provide targets for rare variation screening whereas the discovery of a single novel association demonstrates the action of common variants.
In the mouse, each class of olfactory receptor neurons expressing a given odorant receptor has convergent axonal projections to two specific glomeruli in the olfactory bulb, thereby creating an odour map. However, it is unclear how this map is represented in the olfactory cortex. Here we combine rabies-virus-dependent retrograde mono-trans-synaptic labelling with genetics to control the location, number and type of 'starter' cortical neurons, from which we trace their presynaptic neurons. We find that individual cortical neurons receive input from multiple mitral cells representing broadly distributed glomeruli. Different cortical areas represent the olfactory bulb input differently. For example, the cortical amygdala preferentially receives dorsal olfactory bulb input, whereas the piriform cortex samples the whole olfactory bulb without obvious bias. These differences probably reflect different functions of these cortical areas in mediating innate odour preference or associative memory. The trans-synaptic labelling method described here should be widely applicable to mapping connections throughout the mouse nervous system.
The NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) subclass of glutamate receptor is essential for the synaptic plasticity thought to underlie learning and memory and for synaptic refinement during development. It is currently believed that the NMDA receptor (NMDAR) is a heteromultimeric channel comprising the ubiquitous NR1 subunit and at least one regionally localized NR2 subunit. Here we report the characterization of a regulatory NMDAR subunit, NR3A (formerly termed NMDAR-L or chi-1), which is expressed primarily during brain development. NR3A co-immunoprecipitates with receptor subunits NR1 and NR2 in cerebrocortical extracts. In single-channel recordings from Xenopus oocytes, addition of NR3A to NR1 and NR2 leads to the appearance of a smaller unitary conductance. Genetic knockout of NR3A in mice results in enhanced NMDA responses and increased dendritic spines in early postnatal cerebrocortical neurons. These data suggest that NR3A is involved in the development of synaptic elements by modulating NMDAR activity.
Spatial information is conveyed to the primary visual cortex in retinal coordinates. Movement trajectory programming, however, requires a transformation from this sensory frame of reference into a frame appropriate for the selected part of the body, such as the eye, head or arms. To achieve this transformation, visual information must be combined with information from other sources: for instance, the location of an object of interest can be defined with respect to the observer's head if the position of the eyes in the orbit is known and is added to the object's retinal coordinates. Here we show that in a subdivision of the monkey parietal lobe, the ventral intraparietal area (VIP), the activity of visual neurons is modulated by eye-position signals, as in many other areas of the cortical visual system. We find that individual receptive fields of a population of VIP neurons are organized along a continuum, from eye to head coordinates. In the latter case, neurons encode the azimuth and/or elevation of a visual stimulus, independently of the direction in which the eyes are looking, thus representing spatial locations explicitly in at least a head-centred frame of reference.
Activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor is important for certain forms of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity, such as long-term potentiation (reviewed in ref. 1), and the patterning of connections during development of the visual system (reviewed in refs 2, 3). Several subunits of the NMDA receptor have been cloned: these are NMDAR1 (NR1), and NMDAR2A, 2B, 2C and 2D (NR2A-D). Based on heterologous co-expression studies, it is inferred that NR1 encodes an essential subunit of NMDA receptors and that functional diversity of NMDA receptors in vivo is effected by differential incorporation of subunits NR2A-NR2D. Little is known, however, about the actual subunit composition or heterogeneity of NMDA receptors in the brain. By co-immunoprecipitation with subunit-specific antibodies, we present here direct evidence that NMDA receptors exist in rat neocortex as heteromeric complexes of considerable heterogeneity, some containing both NR2A and NR2B subunits. A progressive alteration in subunit composition seen postnatally could contribute to NMDA-receptor variation and changing synaptic plasticity during cortical development.
The pyramidal tract, comprising those axons which pass from the neocortex to the medulla and spinal cord, is among the most thoroughly studied projections of the mammalian cortex. Recent studies using anterograde axon tracing techniques have provided information concerning the time course of the growth of pyramidal tract fibres, yet much remains to be learned about its development. We have now begun to study the distribution of the neurones of origin of the pyramidal tract during the postnatal development of the rat neocortex using the recently introduced retrogradely transported fluorescent marker, True blue. During the first postnatal week, injections of True blue into the pyramidal decussation result inthe labelling of pyramidal tract neurones which are distributed virtually throughout the tangential extent of layer V of the neocortex, whereas after comparable injections during the fourth postnatal week the distribution of such cells is much more restricted and remains restricted into adult life. This developmental restriction is most dramatic in the occipital cortex: during the first postnatal week many pyramidal tract neurones are found throughout the visual cortex while none is seen in this area of the adult. When True blue is injected into the pyramidal decussation during the first postnatal week and the animals are allowed to survive until the fourth postnatal week, the distribution of pyramidal tract neurones is as widespread as in the immediate postnatal period and includes the entire visual cortex. This implies that many of the neurones in the occipital cortex initially send a collateral into the pyramidal tract which is later eliminated, although the neurones themselves persist. These findings, together with similar recent observations on the development of the callosal connections, indicate that the elimination of axon collaterals may be a general feature of the development of cortical projection systems, and that such transitory collaterals may traverse considerable distances.
At the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, the prion protein (PrP) can be synthesized in several topological forms. The role of these different forms was explored with transgenic mice expressing PrP mutations that alter the relative ratios of the topological forms. Expression of a particular transmembrane form (termed CtmPrP) produced neurodegenerative changes in mice similar to those of some genetic prion diseases. Brains from these mice contained CtmPrP but not PrPSc, the PrP isoform responsible for transmission of prion diseases. Furthermore, in one heritable prion disease of humans, brain tissue contained CtmPrP but not PrPSc. Thus, aberrant regulation of protein biogenesis and topology at the endoplasmic reticulum can result in neurodegeneration.
The neural mechanisms underlying the transition from a drug-nondependent to a drug-dependent state remain elusive. Chronic exposure to drugs has been shown to increase brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels in ventral tegmental area (VTA) neurons. BDNF infusions into the VTA potentiate several behavioral effects of drugs, including psychomotor sensitization and cue-induced drug seeking. We found that a single infusion of BDNF into the VTA promotes a shift from a dopamine-independent to a dopamine-dependent opiate reward system, identical to that seen when an opiate-naive rat becomes dependent and withdrawn. This shift involves a switch in the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors of VTA GABAergic neurons, from inhibitory to excitatory signaling.
Saccadic eye movements, in which the eye moves rapidly between two resting positions, shift the position of our retinal images. If our perception of the world is to remain stable, the visual directions associated with retinal sites, and others they report to, must be updated to compensate for changes in the point of gaze. It has long been suspected that this compensation is achieved by a uniform shift of coordinates driven by an extra-retinal position signal, although some consider this to be unnecessary. Considerable effort has been devoted to a search for such a signal and to measuring its time course and accuracy. Here, by using multiple as well as single targets under normal viewing conditions, we show that changes in apparent visual direction anticipate saccades and are not of the same size, or even in the same direction, for all parts of the visual field. We also show that there is a compression of visual space sufficient to reduce the spacing and even the apparent number of pattern elements. The results are in part consistent with electrophysiological findings of anticipatory shifts in the receptive fields of neurons in parietal cortex and superior colliculi.
In newborn mice subcutaneous injectionis of monosodium glutamate induced acute neuronal necrosis in several regions of developing brain including the hypothanamus. As adults, treated animals showed stunted skeletal development, marked obesity, and female sterility. Pathological changes were also found in several organs associated with endocrine function. Studies of food consumption failed to demonstrate hyperphagia to explain the obesity. It is postulated that the aduls syndrome represents a multifacted nueroendocrine disturbance arising from the disruption of developing nueral centers concered in the mediation of endocrine function.
The hippocampus is necessary for the acquisition and retrieval of declarative memories. The best-characterized sensory input to the hippocampus is the perforant path projection from layer II of entorhinal cortex (EC) to the dentate gyrus. Signals are then processed sequentially in the hippocampal CA fields before returning to the cortex via CA1 pyramidal neuron spikes. There is another EC input-the temporoammonic (TA) pathway-consisting of axons from layer III EC neurons that make synaptic contacts on the distal dendrites of CA1 neurons. Here we show that this pathway modulates both the plasticity and the output of the rat hippocampal formation. Bursts of TA activity can, depending on their timing, either increase or decrease the probability of Schaffer-collateral (SC)-evoked CA1 spikes. TA bursts can also significantly reduce the magnitude of synaptic potentiation at SC-CA1 synapses. The TA-CA1 synapse itself exhibits both long-term depression (LTD) and long-term potentiation (LTP). This capacity for bi-directional plasticity can, in turn, regulate the TA modulation of CA1 activity: LTP or LTD of the TA pathway either enhances or diminishes the gating of CA1 spikes and plasticity inhibition, respectively.
During the development of the vertebrate nervous system, many neurons depend for survival on interactions with their target cells. Specific proteins are thought to be released by the target cells and to play an essential role in these interactions. So far, only one such protein, nerve growth factor, has been fully characterized. This has been possible because of the extraordinarily (and unexplained) large quantities of this protein in some adult tissues that are of no relevance to the developing nervous system. Whereas the dependency of many neurons on their target cells for normal development, and the restricted neuronal specificity of nerve growth factor have long suggested the existence of other such proteins, their low abundance has rendered their characterization difficult. Here we report the full primary structure of brain-derived neurotrophic factor. This very rare protein is known to promote the survival of neuronal populations that are all located either in the central nervous system or directly connected with it. The messenger RNA for brain-derived neurotrophic factor was found predominantly in the central nervous system, and the sequence of the protein indicates that it is structurally related to nerve growth factor. These results establish that these two neurotrophic factors are related both functionally and structurally.
In their study of prostaglandin E1 (PGE1)-sensitive adenylate cyclase (AC) in rat brain homogenates, Collier and Roy claimed that the activity of this enzyme is inhibited by opiates. They also proposed that opiates exert their analgesic and allied effects by inhibiting AC of neurones that are normally stimulated by E prostaglandins. Studies using neuroblastoma x glioma hybrid cells supported this hypothesis. However, subsequent studies with mammalian brain and rat brain tissue slices yielded conflicting results. PGE1 also inhibits platelet aggregation, probably through activation of platelet AC. Gryglewski et al. showed that morphine inhibits the anti-aggregating effect of PGE1 on ADP- and adrenaline-induced platelet aggregation, and suggested that the inhibition by morphine is mediated through platelet AC activity. We report here our attempts to reproduce the results of Gryglewski et al. and our examination of the effect of morphine on PGE1-sensitive AC activity in platelet lysates and on PGE1-induced accumulation of cyclic AMP in intact platelets. The possible existence of opiate receptors in platelets was also assessed by direct binding studies with 3H-etorphine. In contrast to Gryglewski et al., we could not detect any effect of opiates on the aggregation of human platelets, nor did we find any other evidence supporting the presence of opiate receptors in these cells. Thus we conclude that the presence of opiate receptors in human platelets is unlikely.
The interrelationships of major clades within the Arthropoda remain one of the most contentious issues in systematics, which has traditionally been the domain of morphologists. A growing body of DNA sequences and other types of molecular data has revitalized study of arthropod phylogeny and has inspired new considerations of character evolution. Novel hypotheses such as a crustacean-hexapod affinity were based on analyses of single or few genes and limited taxon sampling, but have received recent support from mitochondrial gene order, and eye and brain ultrastructure and neurogenesis. Here we assess relationships within Arthropoda based on a synthesis of all well sampled molecular loci together with a comprehensive data set of morphological, developmental, ultrastructural and gene-order characters. The molecular data include sequences of three nuclear ribosomal genes, three nuclear protein-coding genes, and two mitochondrial genes (one protein coding, one ribosomal). We devised new optimization procedures and constructed a parallel computer cluster with 256 central processing units to analyse molecular data on a scale not previously possible. The optimal 'total evidence' cladogram supports the crustacean-hexapod clade, recognizes pycnogonids as sister to other euarthropods, and indicates monophyly of Myriapoda and Mandibulata.
The underlying causes of obesity are poorly understood but probably involve complex interactions between many neurotransmitter and neuropeptide systems involved in the regulation of food intake and energy balance. Three pieces of evidence indicate that the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an important component of this system. First, MCH stimulates feeding when injected directly into rat brains; second, the messenger RNA for the MCH precursor is upregulated in the hypothalamus of genetically obese mice and in fasted animals; and third, mice lacking MCH eat less and are lean. MCH antagonists might, therefore, provide a treatment for obesity. However, the development of such molecules has been hampered because the identity of the MCH receptor has been unknown until now. Here we show that the 353-amino-acid human orphan G-protein-coupled receptor SLC-1 expressed in HEK293 cells binds MCH with sub-nanomolar affinity, and is stimulated by MCH to mobilize intracellular Ca2+ and reduce forskolin-elevated cyclic AMP levels. We also show that SLC-1 messenger RNA and protein is expressed in the ventromedial and dorsomedial nuclei of the hypothalamus, consistent with a role for SLC-1 in mediating the effects of MCH on feeding.
The effects of thyroxine and propylthiouracil on nerve growth factor concentrations in cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brainstem of adult male mice were assessed by using a sensitive radioimmunoassay for the beta-subunit of mouse nerve growth factor. Thyroxine administration significantly increased the concentration of nerve growth factor in all three brain areas compared to control values, whereas propylthiouracil was without effect. These results suggest that thyroid hormones stimulate nerve growth factor synthesis in the mature central nervous system, and raise the possibility that the influence of thyroid hormones on central nervous system development might be mediated or influenced by nerve growth factor.
Some neurons in the visual cortex of awake monkeys visually tracking a moving target showed receptive fields that were excited only by stimulus motion relative to a background, while other neurons responded to any kind of stimulus motion. This result was found with two methods, one in which tracking eye movements were identical in both relative-motion and absolute-motion conditions, and another in which stimulus motions on the retina were identical in both conditions. This response pattern can differentiate translation of the retinal image during eye movement from motion of objects in the world.
The reversal or displacement of the retinal image by prism spectacles leads to extreme disruption of visually guided behaviour, but after an extended period of visual transformation normal behaviour is gradually restored. It is unclear whether this adaptation involves a change in visual perception, the learning of new motor responses, a modification of the sensori-motor control system or a proprioceptive change in the perceived positions of the body parts. Here I describe the effects of visual field reversal on neuronal activity in the monkey visual cortex. After a few months of wearing reversing spectacles, some cells in the primary visual cortex began to respond to stimuli presented not only in the contralateral visual field but also in the ipsilateral field. These cells were not selective for orientation or direction of motion, but responded well to a light flash. This result suggests that adaptation to visual field reversal is mediated, at least in part, by a large-scale functional reorganization at an early stage in the visual processing pathway.
The cerebral cortex of Alzheimer's and Down syndrome patients is characterized by the presence of protein deposits in neurofibrillary tangles, neuritic plaques, and neuropil threads. These structures were shown to contain forms of beta amyloid precursor protein and ubiquitin-B that are aberrant (+1 proteins) in the carboxyl terminus. The +1 proteins were not found in young control patients, whereas the presence of ubiquitin-B+1 in elderly control patients may indicate early stages of neurodegeneration. The two species of +1 proteins displayed cellular colocalization, suggesting a common origin, operating at the transcriptional level or by posttranscriptional editing of RNA. This type of transcript mutation is likely an important factor in the widely occurring nonfamilial early- and late-onset forms of Alzheimer's disease.
L-Glutamate, the principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate central nervous system, acts on three classes of ionotropic glutamate receptors, named after the agonists AMPA, NMDA and kainate. AMPA receptors are known to mediate fast synaptic responses and NMDA receptors to mediate slow synaptic responses at most excitatory synapses in the brain. Kainate receptors are formed from a separate set of genes (GluR5-7, KA-1 and KA-2) and are widely distributed throughout the brain. They are implicated in epileptogenesis and cell death. However, the physiological functions of kainate receptors are not known. The development of 2,3-benzodiazepine antagonists that are selective for AMPA receptors enables kainate receptors to be specifically activated by exogenous ligands, such as kainate. Here we demonstrate that high-frequency stimulation of mossy fibres in rat hippocampal slices, in the presence of the highly selective AMPA receptor antagonist GYKI 53655 plus NMDA- and GABA-receptor antagonists, activates an inward current in CA3 neurons that has a pharmacology typical of kainate receptors. The finding that kainate receptors can be activated synaptically adds to the diversity of information transfer at glutamatergic synapses.
Estrogen and progesterone modulate gene expression in rodents by activation of intracellular receptors in the hypothalamus, which regulate neuronal networks that control female sexual behavior. However, the neurotransmitter dopamine has been shown to activate certain steroid receptors in a ligand-independent manner. A dopamine receptor stimulant and a D1 receptor agonist, but not a D2 receptor agonist, mimicked the effects of progesterone in facilitating sexual behavior in female rats. The facilitory effect of the neurotransmitter was blocked by progesterone receptor antagonists, a D1 receptor antagonist, or antisense oligonucleotides to the progesterone receptor. The results suggest that in rodents neurotransmitters may regulate in vivo gene expression and behavior by means of cross-talk with steroid receptors in the brain.
Little is known about the neuronal mechanisms that subserve long-term memory persistence in the brain. The components of the remodeled synaptic machinery, and how they sustain the new synaptic or cellwide configuration over time, are yet to be elucidated. In the rat cortex, long-term associative memories vanished rapidly after local application of an inhibitor of the protein kinase C isoform, protein kinase M zeta (PKMzeta). The effect was observed for at least several weeks after encoding and may be irreversible. In the neocortex, which is assumed to be the repository of multiple types of long-term memory, persistence of memory is thus dependent on ongoing activity of a protein kinase long after that memory is considered to have consolidated into a long-term stable form.
The effects of amitriptyline, lithium, and electroconvulsive shock on cerebral permeability and blood flow were tested. These three treatments share in common (i) the ability to influence the functional activity of central adrenergic neurons by way of effects on the release, reuptake, or metabolism of norepinephrine and (ii) therapeutic efficacy in mood disturbances. Under control conditions, cerebral permeability increases linealy with increasing arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide and hence cerebral blood flow. All three treatments altered this relationship in a manner consistent with their adrenergic effects. Amitriptyline potentiated this increase in cerebral permeability whereas lithium and electroconvulsive shock blunted this phenomenon. These results support the hypothesis that one function of central adrenergic neurons is regulation of the blood-brain barrier and raise the possibility that a related effect may underlie the clinical usefulness of such treatment.
A series of findings over the past decade has begun to identify the brain circuitry and neurotransmitters that regulate our daily cycles of sleep and wakefulness. The latter depends on a network of cell groups that activate the thalamus and the cerebral cortex. A key switch in the hypothalamus shuts off this arousal system during sleep. Other hypothalamic neurons stabilize the switch, and their absence results in inappropriate switching of behavioural states, such as occurs in narcolepsy. These findings explain how various drugs affect sleep and wakefulness, and provide the basis for a wide range of environmental influences to shape wake-sleep cycles into the optimal pattern for survival.
Long-term depression (LTD) is an activity-dependent decrease in synaptic efficacy that together with its counterpart, long-term potentiation, is thought to be an important cellular mechanism for learning and memory in the mammalian brain. The induction of LTD in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons in neonatal rats is shown to depend on postsynaptic calcium ion entry through L-type voltage-gated calcium channels paired with the activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors. Although induced postsynaptically, LTD is due to a long-term decrease in transmitter release from presynaptic terminals. This suggests that LTD is likely to require the production of a retrograde messenger.
The incubation of slices of cerebral cortex under hyperbaric oxygen pressures from 1 to 10 atmospheres in the presence of radioactive glucose, pyruvate, succinate, fumarate, L-glutamate, and gamma-aminobutyric acid causes a marked diminution of tissue oxidative reactions. There is a simultaneous decrease in phosphocreatine and adenosine triphosphate, and a reduction of the apparent intracellular ionic gradients. The increase of lipid peroxides, measured directly, is attributed to the toxic effects of hyperbaric oxygen.
Decision making in an uncertain environment poses a conflict between the opposing demands of gathering and exploiting information. In a classic illustration of this 'exploration-exploitation' dilemma, a gambler choosing between multiple slot machines balances the desire to select what seems, on the basis of accumulated experience, the richest option, against the desire to choose a less familiar option that might turn out more advantageous (and thereby provide information for improving future decisions). Far from representing idle curiosity, such exploration is often critical for organisms to discover how best to harvest resources such as food and water. In appetitive choice, substantial experimental evidence, underpinned by computational reinforcement learning (RL) theory, indicates that a dopaminergic, striatal and medial prefrontal network mediates learning to exploit. In contrast, although exploration has been well studied from both theoretical and ethological perspectives, its neural substrates are much less clear. Here we show, in a gambling task, that human subjects' choices can be characterized by a computationally well-regarded strategy for addressing the explore/exploit dilemma. Furthermore, using this characterization to classify decisions as exploratory or exploitative, we employ functional magnetic resonance imaging to show that the frontopolar cortex and intraparietal sulcus are preferentially active during exploratory decisions. In contrast, regions of striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex exhibit activity characteristic of an involvement in value-based exploitative decision making. The results suggest a model of action selection under uncertainty that involves switching between exploratory and exploitative behavioural modes, and provide a computationally precise characterization of the contribution of key decision-related brain systems to each of these functions.
A hallmark of the human motor system is its ability to adapt motor patterns for different environmental conditions, such as when a skilled ice-hockey player accurately shoots a puck with or without protective equipment. Each object (stick, shoulder pad, elbow pad) imparts a distinct load upon the limb, and a key problem in motor neuroscience is to understand how the brain controls movement for different mechanical contexts. We addressed this issue by training non-human primates to make reaching movements with and without viscous loads applied to the shoulder and/or elbow joints, and then examined neural representations in primary motor cortex (MI) for each load condition. Even though the shoulder and elbow loads are mechanically independent, we found that some neurons responded to both of these single-joint loads. Furthermore, changes in activity of individual neurons during multi-joint loads could be predicted from their response to subordinate single-joint loads. These findings suggest that neural representations of different mechanical contexts in MI are organized in a highly structured manner that may provide a neural basis for how complex motor behaviour is learned from simpler motor tasks.
The affective dimension of pain is made up of feelings of unpleasantness and emotions associated with future implications, termed secondary affect. Experimental and clinical studies show serial interactions between pain sensation intensity, pain unpleasantness, and secondary affect. These pain dimensions and their interactions relate to a central network of brain structures that processes nociceptive information both in parallel and in series. Spinal pathways to limbic structures and medial thalamic nuclei provide direct inputs to brain areas involved in affect. Another source is from spinal pathways to somatosensory thalamic and cortical areas and then through a cortico-limbic pathway. The latter integrates nociceptive input with contextual information and memory to provide cognitive mediation of pain affect. Both direct and cortico-limbic pathways converge on the same anterior cingulate cortical and subcortical structures whose function may be to establish emotional valence and response priorities.
Transection of vagi and carotid sinus nerves in anesthetized cats results in a rise of blood pressure and subsequent decerebration results in a fall. Decerebration alone results in a slight drop in blood pressure unchanged by subsequent nerve section. Rostral brain structures principally influence tonically brainstem mechanisms subserving baroreceptor reflex excitability rather than those maintaining normal blood pressure.
Nerve growth factor plays an important part in neuron-target interactions in the late embryonic and adult brain. We now report that this growth factor controls the proliferation of neuronal precursors in a defined culture system of cells derived from the early embryonic brain. Neuronal precursor cells were identified by expression of the intermediate filament protein nestin. These cells proliferate in response to nerve growth factor but only after they have been exposed to basic fibroblast growth factor. On withdrawal of nerve growth factor, the proliferative cells differentiate into neurons. Thus, in combination with other growth factors, nerve growth factor regulates the proliferation and terminal differentiation of neuroepithelial stem cells.
Members of a previously unidentified family of potassium channel subunits were cloned from rat and human brain. The messenger RNAs encoding these subunits were widely expressed in brain with distinct yet overlapping patterns, as well as in several peripheral tissues. Expression of the messenger RNAs in Xenopus oocytes resulted in calcium-activated, voltage-independent potassium channels. The channels that formed from the various subunits displayed differential sensitivity to apamin and tubocurare. The distribution, function, and pharmacology of these channels are consistent with the SK class of small-conductance, calcium-activated potassium channels, which contribute to the afterhyperpolarization in central neurons and other cell types.
Nitric oxide is a messenger molecule, mediating the effect of endothelium-derived relaxing factor in blood vessels and the cytotoxic actions of macrophages, and playing a part in neuronal communication in the brain. Cloning of a complementary DNA for brain nitric oxide synthase reveals recognition sites for NADPH, FAD, flavin mononucleotide and calmodulin as well as phosphorylation sites, indicating that the synthase is regulated by many different factors. The only known mammalian enzyme with close homology is cytochrome P-450 reductase.
A hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal enkephalinergic pathway has been described and the pars nervosa of the rat pituitary contains enkephalin-like material which may coexist in vasopressin and oxytocin terminals. At the level of the pars nervosa itself, stereospecific opiate receptors with properties very similar to those of brain receptors have been described, and opiates have been shown to inhibit the release of both vasopressin and oxytocin. The location of the opiate receptors involved has been presumed to be pre-terminal on the neurosecretory fibres. Using an autoradiographic technique to visualize opiate receptors, however, we now report that destruction of the neurosecretory fibres following pituitary stalk section does not result in a significant change in the neural lobe opiate receptor population. This suggests that the opiate receptors within the neural lobe may be present on pituicytes rather than on neurosecretory fibres.
How the immense population of neurons that constitute the human cerebral neocortex is generated from progenitors lining the cerebral ventricle and then distributed to appropriate layers of distinctive cytoarchitectonic areas can be explained by the radial unit hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, the ependymal layer of the embryonic cerebral ventricle consists of proliferative units that provide a proto-map of prospective cytoarchitectonic areas. The output of the proliferative units is translated via glial guides to the expanding cortex in the form of ontogenetic columns, whose final number for each area can be modified through interaction with afferent input. Data obtained through various advanced neurobiological techniques, including electron microscopy, immunocytochemistry, [3H]thymidine and receptor autoradiography, retrovirus gene transfer, neural transplants, and surgical or genetic manipulation of cortical development, furnish new details about the kinetics of cell proliferation, their lineage relationships, and phenotypic expression that favor this hypothesis. The radial unit model provides a framework for understanding cerebral evolution, epigenetic regulation of the parcellation of cytoarchitectonic areas, and insight into the pathogenesis of certain cortical disorders in humans.
The onsert of neuronal differentiation is characterised by intensive neurite growth; because microtubule formation is strictly required during this process, in vitro assembly of the tubulin present in the rat brain has been studied at different stages of development: the rate of assembly is very slow in the early stages and increases progressively with age from birth until adulthood. Other data also suggested that the limiting factor in the young brain is the amount or activity of one or several of the minor components which co-polymerise into microtubules with tubulin. We show here that both the composition and the activity of the microtubule-associated proteins change during the time course of rat brain development.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channels are activated by various metabolic stresses, including hypoxia. The substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr), the area with the highest expression of K(ATP) channels in the brain, plays a pivotal role in the control of seizures. Mutant mice lacking the Kir6.2 subunit of K(ATP) channels [knockout (KO) mice] were susceptible to generalized seizures after brief hypoxia. In normal mice, SNr neuron activity was inactivated during hypoxia by the opening of the postsynaptic K(ATP) channels, whereas in KO mice, the activity of these neurons was enhanced. K(ATP) channels exert a depressant effect on SNr neuronal activity during hypoxia and may be involved in the nigral protection mechanism against generalized seizures.
The asymmetrical positioning of neural structures on the left or right side of the brain in vertebrates and in invertebrates may be correlated with brain laterality, which is associated with cognitive skills. But until now this has not been illustrated experimentally. Here we describe an asymmetrically positioned brain structure in the fruitfly Drosophila and find that the small proportion of wild-type flies that have symmetrical brains with two such structures lack a normal long-term memory, although their short-term memory is intact. Our results indicate that brain asymmetry may be required for generating or retrieving long-term memory.
Cholinergic neurons are widespread, and pharmacological modulation of acetylcholine receptors affects numerous brain processes, but such modulation entails side effects due to limitations in specificity for receptor type and target cell. As a result, causal roles of cholinergic neurons in circuits have been unclear. We integrated optogenetics, freely moving mammalian behavior, in vivo electrophysiology, and slice physiology to probe the cholinergic interneurons of the nucleus accumbens by direct excitation or inhibition. Despite representing less than 1% of local neurons, these cholinergic cells have dominant control roles, exerting powerful modulation of circuit activity. Furthermore, these neurons could be activated by cocaine, and silencing this drug-induced activity during cocaine exposure (despite the fact that the manipulation of the cholinergic interneurons was not aversive by itself) blocked cocaine conditioning in freely moving mammals.
To plan an action, we must first select an object to act on and the body part (or parts) to use to accomplish our intention. To plan the motor task of reaching, we specify both the target to reach for and the arm to use. In the process of planning and preparing a motor task, information about the motor target and the arm to use must be integrated before a motor program can be formulated to generate the appropriate limb movement. One of the structures in the brain that is probably involved in integrating these two sets of information is the premotor area in the cerebral cortex of primates. The lateral sector of the dorsal premotor cortex is known to receive both visual and somatosensory input, and we show here that neurons in this area gather information about both the target and the body part, while subsequent activity specifies the planned action.
Secretion of leptin from adipocytes communicates body energy status to the brain by activating the leptin receptor long form (LRb). LRb regulates energy homeostasis and neuroendocrine function; the absence of LRb in db/db mice results in obesity, impaired growth, infertility and diabetes. Tyr 1138 of LRb mediates activation of the transcription factor STAT3 during leptin action. To investigate the contribution of STAT3 signalling to leptin action in vivo, we replaced the gene encoding the leptin receptor (lepr) in mice with an allele coding for a replacement of Tyr 1138 in LRb with a serine residue (lepr(S1138)) that specifically disrupts the LRb-STAT3 signal. Here we show that, like db/db mice, lepr(S1138) homozygotes (s/s) are hyperphagic and obese. However, whereas db/db mice are infertile, short and diabetic, s/s mice are fertile, long and less hyperglycaemic. Furthermore, hypothalamic expression of neuropeptide Y (NPY) is elevated in db/db mice but not s/s mice, whereas the hypothalamic melanocortin system is suppressed in both db/db and s/s mice. LRb-STAT3 signalling thus mediates the effects of leptin on melanocortin production and body energy homeostasis, whereas distinct LRb signals regulate NPY and the control of fertility, growth and glucose homeostasis.
A dramatic and specific induction of c-fos was observed in identifiable neuronal populations in vivo after administration of the convulsant Metrazole. This effect was time- and dose-dependent and was abolished by prior treatment with the anticonvulsant drugs diazepam or pentobarbital. About 60 minutes after administration of Metrazole, c-fos messenger RNA reached a maximum and declined to basal levels after 180 minutes. A further decrease below that in normal brain was observed before a return to basal levels after 16 hours. While Metrazole still elicited seizures during this period, reinduction of c-fos was largely refractory. At 90 minutes, c-fos protein was observed in the nuclei of neurons in the dentate gyrus, and in the pyriform and cingulate cortices. Subsequently, c-fos protein appeared throughout the cortex, hippocampus, and limbic system. Thus, seizure activity results in increased c-fos gene expression in particular subsets of neurons.
For many types of behaviours, it is necessary to monitor the position or movement of objects that are temporarily occluded. The primate posterior parietal cortex contains neurons that are active during visual guidance tasks: in some cases, even if the visual target disappears transiently. It has been proposed that activity of this sort could be related to current or planned eye movements, but it might also provide a more generalized abstract representation of the spatial disposition of targets, even when they are not visible. We have recorded from monkey posterior parietal cortex while the animal viewed a visual stimulus that disappeared, and then, depending on experimental context, could be inferred to be either moving or stationary. During this temporary absence of the stimulus, about half of the neurons were found to be significantly more active on those trials in which the stimulus could be presumed to be moving rather than stationary. The activity was thus present in the absence of either sensory input or motor output, suggesting that it may indeed constitute a generalized representation of target motion.
A rhesus monkey was trained to move its arm in a direction that was perpendicular to and counterclockwise from the direction of a target light that changed in position from trial to trial. Solution of this problem was hypothesized to involve the creation and mental rotation of an imagined movement vector from the direction of the light to the direction of the movement. This hypothesis was tested directly by recording the activity of cells in the motor cortex during performance of the task and computing the neuronal population vector in successive time intervals during the reaction time. The population vector rotated gradually counterclockwise from the direction of the light to the direction of the movement at an average rate of 732 degrees per second. These results provide direct, neural evidence for the mental rotation hypothesis and indicate that the neuronal population vector is a useful tool for "reading out" and identifying cognitive operations of neuronal ensembles.
Adult female hypogonadal mice, in whom hypogonadism is secondary to a genetic deficiency in hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), are infertile. Mating, pregnancy, and delivery of healthy litters were achieved after transplantation of normal fetal preoptic area tissue, a major site of GnRH-containing cell bodies, into the third ventricle of adult female hypogonadal mice. Immunocytochemistry revealed GnRH-containing neurons in the grafts and GnRH-containing processes extending to the lateral median eminence of the host brains.
The rise in brain temperature in the rabbit during paradoxical sleep originates in a temperature rise of the cerebral arterial blood. Heat loss from the ear is a major factor in the regulation of arterial blood temperature in the rabbit, and the primary thermal event in paradoxical sleep is a vasoconstriction of the skin of the ear which results in a rise in arterial blood and brain temperatures. These thermal correlates of paradoxical sleep are not present in a cold environment when the ear skin is already maximally vasoconstricted. The persistence of peripheral vasoconstriction during paradoxical sleep in a hot environment suggests a disturbance in autonomic thermoregulatory control.
Drosophila show innate olfactory-driven behaviours that are observed in naive animals without previous learning or experience, suggesting that the neural circuits that mediate these behaviours are genetically programmed. Despite the numerical simplicity of the fly nervous system, features of the anatomical organization of the fly brain often confound the delineation of these circuits. Here we identify a neural circuit responsive to cVA, a pheromone that elicits sexually dimorphic behaviours. We have combined neural tracing using an improved photoactivatable green fluorescent protein (PA-GFP) with electrophysiology, optical imaging and laser-mediated microlesioning to map this circuit from the activation of sensory neurons in the antennae to the excitation of descending neurons in the ventral nerve cord. This circuit is concise and minimally comprises four neurons, connected by three synapses. Three of these neurons are overtly dimorphic and identify a male-specific neuropil that integrates inputs from multiple sensory systems and sends outputs to the ventral nerve cord. This neural pathway suggests a means by which a single pheromone can elicit different behaviours in the two sexes.
The representation of pain in the cerebral cortex is less well understood than that of any other sensory system. However, with the use of magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography in humans, it has now been demonstrated that painful heat causes significant activation of the contralateral anterior cingulate, secondary somatosensory, and primary somatosensory cortices. This contrasts with the predominant activation of primary somatosensory cortex caused by vibrotactile stimuli in similar experiments. Furthermore, the unilateral cingulate activation indicates that this forebrain area, thought to regulate emotions, contains an unexpectedly specific representation of pain.
Synaptic vesicle protein 2 (SV2) is a membrane glycoprotein specifically localized to secretory vesicles in neurons and endocrine cells. As a first step toward understanding the function of SV2 in neural secretion, a rat brain complementary DNA (cDNA) that encodes SV2 was isolated and characterized. Analyses of this cDNA predict that SV2 contains 12 transmembrane domains. The NH2-terminal half of the protein shows significant amino acid sequence identity to a family of bacterial proteins that transport sugars, citrate, and drugs. Expression of the SV2 cDNA in COS cells yielded a high level of SV2-like immunoreactivity distributed in a reticular and punctate pattern, which suggests localization to intracellular membranes. Its localization to vesicles, predicted membrane topology, and sequence identity to known transporters suggest that SV2 is a synaptic vesicle-specific transporter.
Infection with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is frequently complicated in its late stages by the AIDS dementia complex, a neurological syndrome characterized by abnormalities in cognition, motor performance, and behavior. This dementia is due partially or wholly to a direct effect of the virus on the brain rather than to opportunistic infection, but its pathogenesis is not well understood. Productive HIV-1 brain infection is detected only in a subset of patients and is confined largely or exclusively to macrophages, microglia, and derivative multinucleated cells that are formed by virus-induced cell fusion. Absence of cytolytic infection of neurons, oligodentrocytes, and astrocytes has focused attention on the possible role of indirect mechanisms of brain dysfunction related to either virus or cell-coded toxins. Delayed development of the AIDS dementia complex, despite both early exposure of the nervous system to HIV-1 and chronic leptomeningeal infection, indicates that although this virus is "neurotropic," it is relatively nonpathogenic for the brain in the absence of immunosuppression. Within the context of the permissive effect of immunosuppression, genetic changes in HIV-1 may underlie the neuropathological heterogeneity of the AIDS dementia complex and its relatively independent course in relation to the systemic manifestations of AIDS noted in some patients.
Neuromedin U (NMU) is a neuropeptide with potent activity on smooth muscle which was isolated first from porcine spinal cord and later from other species. It is widely distributed in the gut and central nervous system. Peripheral activities of NMU include stimulation of smooth muscle, increase of blood pressure, alteration of ion transport in the gut, control of local blood flow and regulation of adrenocortical function. An NMU receptor has not been molecularly identified. Here we show that the previously described orphan G-protein-coupled receptor FM-3 (ref. 15) and a newly discovered one (FM-4) are cognate receptors for NMU. FM-3, designated NMU1R, is abundantly expressed in peripheral tissues whereas FM-4, designated NMU2R, is expressed in specific regions of the brain. NMU is expressed in the ventromedial hypothalamus in the rat brain, and its level is significantly reduced following fasting. Intracerebroventricular administration of NMU markedly suppresses food intake in rats. These findings provide a molecular basis for the biochemical activities of NMU and may indicate that NMU is involved in the central control of feeding.
Slices of cat cerebral cortex, heart, and spleen that have been incubated in media containing approximately 5 to 25 mmicrog of dl-norepinephrine-7H(8) per milliliter contain levels of isotopic amine greater than those in the medium. The effects of norepinephrine concentration, reserpine, and ouabain on the uptake suggest that the amine enters cells both by diffusion and by a concentrating miechanism that is saturated at low levels of norepinephrine. The drugs inhibit the latter.
Sensory stimuli to the body are conveyed by the spinal cord to the primary somatosensory cortex. It has long been thought that dorsal column afferents of the spinal cord represent the main pathway for these signals, but the physiological and behavioural consequences of cutting the dorsal column have been reported to range from mild and transitory to marked. We have re-examined this issue by sectioning the dorsal columns in the cervical region and recording the responses to hand stimulation in the contralateral primary somatosensory cortex (area 3b). Following a complete section of the dorsal columns, neurons in area 3b become immediately and perhaps permanently unresponsive to hand stimulation. Following a partial section, the remaining dorsal column afferents continue to activate neurons within their normal cortical target territories, but after five or more weeks the area of activation is greatly expanded. After prolonged recovery periods of six months or more, the deprived hand territory becomes responsive to inputs from the face (which are unaffected by spinal cord section). Thus, area 3b of somatosensory cortex is highly dependent on dorsal spinal column inputs, and other spinal pathways do not substitute for the dorsal columns even after injury.
Tatemoto and Mutt recently used the presence of a C-terminal NH2 group to identify and isolate a new peptide, neuropeptide Y (NPY), from porcine brain. This 36 amino acid peptide was subsequently shown to be active on isolated vas deferens, vascular smooth muscle and pancreatic acinar cells in very low molar concentrations. In view of these potent effects we have now investigated its distribution in the human brain by radioimmunoassay and immunocytochemistry. High concentrations of NPY have been found, exceeding those of cholecystokinin and somatostatin, hitherto considered to be the most abundant neuropeptides. The distribution of NPY was different from that of any other peptide system described, being particularly concentrated in the basal ganglia, amygdala and nucleus accumbens. Immunocytochemistry demonstrated a large number of NPY neuronal cell bodies especially in the caudate and putamen. Immunoreactive neuronal cell bodies were also clearly localized in cortical areas, particularly layers V and VI. NPY, a newly discovered peptide with potent biological activity, thus seems to be among the most abundant of human neuropeptides. The massive numbers of NPY neurones in the basal ganglia suggest NPY to be of fundamental importance in the control of human motor function.
Rearing cats in the dark extends the critical period for development of visual cortical neurons, which indicates that the experience of visual input is necessary to begin the developmental process. A single brief pulse of visual input (6 hours) during a period of dark-rearing eliminates delayed development in the visual cortex. Light therefore seems to rapidly trigger the developmental process, and once triggered, that process runs to completion in the absence of further input.
The putative excitatory transmitters glutamate and aspartate, as well as their excitatory analogues, can kill neurones in the central nervous system and may thus be involved in the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative disorders. Several studies have suggested that postsynaptic receptors are important in the mechanism of toxicity. However, presynaptic factors might also be involved because, in some brain areas, the neurotoxicity of kainate (a potent structural analogue of glutamate) is greatly reduced following elimination of afferent excitatory innervation, even though the postsynaptic excitatory potency of kainate may be unaltered in these conditions. The supply of glutamate from the afferent nerve endings has been suggested to be a necessary factor. Recently, Ferkany, Zaczec and Coyle concluded from studies on slices of mouse cerebellum that kainate activates presynaptic kainate receptors on parallel fibre terminals to release glutamate and that it is the postsynaptic interaction between kainate and the released amino acid that is instrumental in causing neuronal necrosis. The more direct evidence we report here does not support these conclusions.
PSD-95 is a component of postsynaptic densities in central synapses. It contains three PDZ domains that localize N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit 2 (NMDA2 receptor) and K+ channels to synapses. In mouse forebrain, PSD-95 bound to the cytoplasmic COOH-termini of neuroligins, which are neuronal cell adhesion molecules that interact with beta-neurexins and form intercellular junctions. Neuroligins bind to the third PDZ domain of PSD-95, whereas NMDA2 receptors and K+ channels interact with the first and second PDZ domains. Thus different PDZ domains of PSD-95 are specialized for distinct functions. PSD-95 may recruit ion channels and neurotransmitter receptors to intercellular junctions formed between neurons by neuroligins and beta-neurexins.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is widely used to study the operational organization of the human brain, but the exact relationship between the measured fMRI signal and the underlying neural activity is unclear. Here we present simultaneous intracortical recordings of neural signals and fMRI responses. We compared local field potentials (LFPs), single- and multi-unit spiking activity with highly spatio-temporally resolved blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI responses from the visual cortex of monkeys. The largest magnitude changes were observed in LFPs, which at recording sites characterized by transient responses were the only signal that significantly correlated with the haemodynamic response. Linear systems analysis on a trial-by-trial basis showed that the impulse response of the neurovascular system is both animal- and site-specific, and that LFPs yield a better estimate of BOLD responses than the multi-unit responses. These findings suggest that the BOLD contrast mechanism reflects the input and intracortical processing of a given area rather than its spiking output.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) induces neurite outgrowth and promotes survival of embryonic sensory and sympathetic neurons in culture. In vivo, NGF decreases the extent of naturally occurring cell death in developing sympathetic ganglia and protects cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain and caudatoputamen. NGF interacts with the low-affinity p75 receptor and with Trk, a receptor tyrosine kinase encoded by the trk proto-oncogene. To study the role of Trk in vivo, we have ablated the gene in embryonic stem cells by homologous recombination. Mice lacking Trk have severe sensory and sympathetic neuropathies and most die within one month of birth. They have extensive neuronal cell loss in trigeminal, sympathetic and dorsal root ganglia, as well as a decrease in the cholinergic basal forebrain projections to the hippocampus and cortex. These findings demonstrate that Trk is the primary mediator of the trophic actions of NGF in vivo and that this signalling pathway plays a crucial role in the development of both the peripheral and the central nervous systems.
The rate of biosynthesis of ribonucleic acid (as judged by the rate of incorporation of uridine into ribonucleic acid) in infant and adullt rat brain cortex slices, incubated (aerobically in tile presenice of various substrates, is directly proportionial to the adenosine triphosphate concentration. This suggests that the adenosine triphosphate concentration is one of the factors involved in the control of ribonucleic acid biosynthesis in infant and adult rat brain. Acetoacetate or beta-hydroxybutyrate is about 70 percent as effective as glucose, with both infant and adult brain, for the promotion of ribonucleic acid biosynthesis. but they are considerably mnore effective than succinate in infant brain than in adult brain.
Intelligence quotient (IQ) is a standardized measure of human intellectual capacity that takes into account a wide range of cognitive skills. IQ is generally considered to be stable across the lifespan, with scores at one time point used to predict educational achievement and employment prospects in later years. Neuroimaging allows us to test whether unexpected longitudinal fluctuations in measured IQ are related to brain development. Here we show that verbal and non-verbal IQ can rise or fall in the teenage years, with these changes in performance validated by their close correlation with changes in local brain structure. A combination of structural and functional imaging showed that verbal IQ changed with grey matter in a region that was activated by speech, whereas non-verbal IQ changed with grey matter in a region that was activated by finger movements. By using longitudinal assessments of the same individuals, we obviated the many sources of variation in brain structure that confound cross-sectional studies. This allowed us to dissociate neural markers for the two types of IQ and to show that general verbal and non-verbal abilities are closely linked to the sensorimotor skills involved in learning. More generally, our results emphasize the possibility that an individual's intellectual capacity relative to their peers can decrease or increase in the teenage years. This would be encouraging to those whose intellectual potential may improve, and would be a warning that early achievers may not maintain their potential.
Certain human talents, such as musical ability, have been associated with left-right differences in brain structure and function. In vivo magnetic resonance morphometry of the brain in musicians was used to measure the anatomical asymmetry of the planum temporale, a brain area containing auditory association cortex and previously shown to be a marker of structural and functional asymmetry. Musicians with perfect pitch revealed stronger leftward planum temporale asymmetry than nonmusicians or musicians without perfect pitch. The results indicate that outstanding musical ability is associated with increased leftward asymmetry of cortex subserving music-related functions.
In rats, striatal neuronal destruction by so-called excitotoxic amino acids, kainic acid or ibotenic acid (IA) produce neuropathological and neurochemical changes in the basal ganglia which resemble those seen in patients with Huntington's chorea. Such lesioned animals show a behavioural syndrome which is reminiscent of the cardinal symptoms of the disease, accompanied by a substantial increase in local cerebral metabolic activity in several striatal target structures within the extrapyramidal motor system. The study was designed to explore the potential of grafted fetal striatal neurones implanted into the IA-lesioned striatum to compensate for the structural, neurochemical, metabolic and behavioural defects of IA-lesioned rats. Extending previous studies, we report here that such striatal implants can significantly ameliorate the lesion-induced locomotor hyperactivity and at least partly normalize the metabolic hyperactivity in the extrapyramidal neuronal system.
Biochemical investigation of receptors for neurotransmitters and drugs in the brain has been one of the most active areas of molecular neuroscience during the past decade. This work has permitted fundamental insights into how binding of neurotransmitters to their receptors excites or inhibits neuronal firing or changes cellular metabolism. The recognition of receptor subtypes has suggested subtle ways for neurotransmitters to modulate neuronal functioning. Finally, the ability to measure receptor sites in simple test tube systems and to distinguish readily between agonists and antagonists has provided useful probes for drug discovery programs.
The inhibitory effect of ethanol on neurotransmitter release has been suggested to be due to either reduced Ca2+ entry or increased removal of free intracellular Ca2+ from the synapse. The use of the Ca2+ ionophore, A23187, to allow direct access of external Ca2+ to the presynaptic interior should help to determine which of these two factors is the more important, as ethanol should inhibit A23187-induced release of transmitter only if increased Ca2+ removal from the synapse is important. Here we show in rat striatal slices that, although 3H-dopamine release evoked by depolarization with 40 mM K+ is inhibited by 50 mM ethanol, the release evoked by A23187 is enhanced by the presence of ethanol in vitro. The results suggest that ethanol reduces depolarization-induced transmitter release by reducing Ca2+ entry to the presynaptic terminal. However, for brain slices taken from rats made tolerant to ethanol, 3H-dopamine release in the absence of ethanol showed altered characteristics; both K+ depolarization and A23187 released a significantly greater fraction of 3H-dopamine from these slices than from controls. Thus tolerance to the inhibitory effect of ethanol on release may develop by a mechanism involving increased sensitivity of the terminal to Ca2+ entry.
During normal vertebrate development, about half of spinal motoneurons are lost by a process of naturally occurring or programmed cell death. Additional developing motoneurons degenerate after the removal of targets or afferents. Naturally occurring motoneuron death as well as motoneuron death after loss of targets or after axotomy can be prevented by in vivo treatment with putative target (muscle) derived or other neurotrophic agents. Motoneurons can also be prevented from dying in vitro and in vivo (Y.Q.-W., R.W., D.P., J. Johnson and L. Van Eldik, unpublished data and refs 7, 13, 14) by treatment with central nervous system extracts (brain or spinal cord) and purified central nervous system and glia-derived proteins. Here we report that in vivo treatment of chick embryos with brain-derived neurotrophic factor rescues motoneurons from naturally occurring cell death. Furthermore, in vivo treatment with brain-derived neurotrophic factor (and nerve growth factor) also prevents the induced death of motoneurons that occurs following the removal of descending afferent input (deafferentation). These data indicate that members of the neurotrophin family can promote the survival of developing avian motoneurons.
In layer 4 of cat visual cortex, the monocular, concentric receptive fields of thalamic neurons, which relay retinal input to the cortex, are transformed into 'simple' cortical receptive fields that are binocular and selective for the precise orientation, direction of motion, and size of the visual stimulus. These properties are thought to arise from the pattern of connections from thalamic neurons, although anatomical studies show that most excitatory inputs to layer 4 simple cells are from recurrently connected circuits of cortical neurons. We examined single fibre inputs to spiny stellate neurons. We examined single fibre inputs to spiny stellate neurons in slices of cat visual cortex, and conclude that thalamocortical synapses are powerful and the responses they evoke are unusually invariant for central synapses. However, the responses to intracortical inputs, although less invariant, are strong enough to provide most of the excitation to simple cells in vivo. Our results suggest that the recurrent excitatory circuits of cortex may amplify the initial feedforward thalamic signal, subserving dynamic modifications of the functional properties of cortical neurons.
Amyloid beta peptide (Abeta), the pathogenic agent of Alzheimer's disease (AD), is a physiological metabolite in the brain. We examined the role of neprilysin, a candidate Abeta-degrading peptidase, in the metabolism using neprilysin gene-disrupted mice. Neprilysin deficiency resulted in defects both in the degradation of exogenously administered Abeta and in the metabolic suppression of the endogenous Abeta levels in a gene dose-dependent manner. The regional levels of Abeta in the neprilysin-deficient mouse brain were in the distinct order of hippocampus, cortex, thalamus/striatum, and cerebellum, where hippocampus has the highest level and cerebellum the lowest, correlating with the vulnerability to Abeta deposition in brains of humans with AD. Our observations suggest that even partial down-regulation of neprilysin activity, which could be caused by aging, can contribute to AD development by promoting Abeta accumulation.
Twenty-five split-brain monkeys were taught to discriminate two types of visual stimuli that engage lateralized cerebral processing in human subjects. Differential lateralization for the two kinds of discriminations was found; the left hemisphere was better at distinguishing between tilted lines and the right hemisphere was better at discriminating faces. These results indicate that lateralization of cognitive processing appeared in primates independently of language or handedness. In addition, cerebral lateralization in monkeys may provide an appropriate model for studying the biological basis of hemispheric specialization.
Saccades are controlled by neurons in the brainstem reticular formation that receive input from the superior colliculus and cortex. Recently two quantitative models have been proposed for the role of the colliculus in the generation of three-dimensional eye movements. In order to test these models, three-dimensional eye movements were measured in the alert monkey to investigate whether the saccadic motor map of the superior colliculus is two-dimensional, representing retinal target vectors, or three-dimensional, representing three-dimensional motor error for the rotation of the eye. Electrical stimulation of the superior colliculus produced two-dimensional, not three-dimensional, eye movements. It is therefore concluded that the collicular motor map is two-dimensional.
The direction of frequency-modulated (FM) sweeps is an important temporal cue in animal and human communication. FM direction-selective neurons are found in the primary auditory cortex (A1), but their topography and the mechanisms underlying their selectivity remain largely unknown. Here we report that in the rat A1, direction selectivity is topographically ordered in parallel with characteristic frequency (CF): low CF neurons preferred upward sweeps, whereas high CF neurons preferred downward sweeps. The asymmetry of 'inhibitory sidebands', suppressive regions flanking the tonal receptive field (TRF) of the spike response, also co-varied with CF. In vivo whole-cell recordings showed that the direction selectivity already present in the synaptic inputs was enhanced by cortical synaptic inhibition, which suppressed the synaptic excitation of the non-preferred direction more than that of the preferred. The excitatory and inhibitory synaptic TRFs had identical spectral tuning, but with inhibition delayed relative to excitation. The spectral asymmetry of the synaptic TRFs co-varied with CF, as had direction selectivity and sideband asymmetry, and thus suggested a synaptic mechanism for the shaping of FM direction selectivity and its topographic ordering.
In idiopathic Parkinson's disease massive cell death occurs in the dopamine-containing substantia nigra. A link between the vulnerability of nigral neurons and the prominent pigmentation of the substantia nigra, though long suspected, has not been proved. This possibility is supported by evidence that N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) and its metabolite MPP+, the latter of which causes destruction of nigral neurons, bind to neuromelanin. We have directly tested this hypothesis by a quantitative analysis of neuromelanin-pigmented neurons in control and parkinsonian midbrains. The findings demonstrate first that the dopamine-containing cell groups of the normal human midbrain differ markedly from each other in the percentage of neuromelanin-pigmented neurons they contain. Second, the estimated cell loss in these cell groups in Parkinson's disease is directly correlated (r = 0.97, P = 0.0057) with the percentage of neuromelanin-pigmented neurons normally present in them. Third, within each cell group in the Parkinson's brains, there is greater relative sparing of non-pigmented than of neuromelanin-pigmented neurons. This evidence suggests a selective vulnerability of the neuromelanin-pigmented subpopulation of dopamine-containing mesencephalic neurons in Parkinson's disease.
Many of the cognitive deficits of normal ageing (forgetfulness, distractibility, inflexibility and impaired executive functions) involve prefrontal cortex (PFC) dysfunction. The PFC guides behaviour and thought using working memory, which are essential functions in the information age. Many PFC neurons hold information in working memory through excitatory networks that can maintain persistent neuronal firing in the absence of external stimulation. This fragile process is highly dependent on the neurochemical environment. For example, elevated cyclic-AMP signalling reduces persistent firing by opening HCN and KCNQ potassium channels. It is not known if molecular changes associated with normal ageing alter the physiological properties of PFC neurons during working memory, as there have been no in vivo recordings, to our knowledge, from PFC neurons of aged monkeys. Here we characterize the first recordings of this kind, revealing a marked loss of PFC persistent firing with advancing age that can be rescued by restoring an optimal neurochemical environment. Recordings showed an age-related decline in the firing rate of DELAY neurons, whereas the firing of CUE neurons remained unchanged with age. The memory-related firing of aged DELAY neurons was partially restored to more youthful levels by inhibiting cAMP signalling, or by blocking HCN or KCNQ channels. These findings reveal the cellular basis of age-related cognitive decline in dorsolateral PFC, and demonstrate that physiological integrity can be rescued by addressing the molecular needs of PFC circuits.
Action potentials of single cells, recorded by means of extracellular microelectrodes from the cat's cerebral cortex after topical application of penicillin, undergo characteristic changes in the course of seizure episodes. In individual neurons, these changes in spike configuration are fully reversible and are repeatedly observed with each of such episodes. Two alternative interpretations offered for these findings appear to be critically dependent upon the relationship between the position of the microelectrode and the cell itself: there might be a transitory failure of the spike to invade part of the neuronal membrane or transitory neuronal swelling.
Much of what is known about the functional organization and plasticity of adult sensory cortex is derived from animals housed in standard laboratory cages. Here we report that the transfer of adult rats reared in standard laboratory cages to a naturalistic habitat modifies the functional and morphological organization of the facial whisker representation in the somatosensory 'barrel' cortex. Cortical whisker representations, visualized with repeated intrinsic signal optical imaging in the same animals, contracted by 46% after four to six weeks of exposure to the naturalistic habitat. Acute, multi-site extracellular recordings demonstrated suppressed evoked neuronal responses and smaller, sharper constituent receptive fields in the upper cortical layers (II/III), but not in the thalamic recipient layer (IV), of rats with naturalistic experience. Morphological plasticity of the layer IV barrel field was observed, but on a substantially smaller scale than the functional plasticity. Thus, transferring animals to an environment that promotes the expression of natural, innate behaviours induces a large-scale functional refinement of cortical sensory maps.
An endogenous polypeptide of rat brain has been identified that is capable of displacing 1,4-benzodiazepines and the esters of the 3-carboxylic acid derivatives of beta-carbolines from their specific synaptic binding sites. This polypeptide was termed diazepam-binding inhibitor (DBI). Previous studies have shown that DBI injected intraventricularly in rodents elicits "proconflict" responses and antagonizes the "anticonflict" action of benzodiazepines. An antiserum to this peptide, directed toward an immunodeterminant near its amino terminus, makes it possible to detect, measure, and study the neuronal location of this peptide in rat brain. In the rat cerebral cortex, DBI immunoreactivity is located in neurons that are not GABAergic (GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid); in the cerebellum and hippocampus, however, it might be present also in GABAergic neurons.
Recordings from monkey primary visual cortex (V1) were used to test a model for the visually driven responses of simple cells. According to the model, simple cells compute a linear sum of the responses of lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) neurons. In addition, each simple cell's linear response is divided by the pooled activity of a large number of other simple cells. The cell membrane performs both operations; synaptic currents are summed and then divided by the total membrane conductance. Current and conductance are decoupled (by a complementary arrangement of excitation and inhibition) so that current depends only on the LGN inputs and conductance depends only on the cortical inputs. Closed form expressions were derived for fitting and interpreting physiological data. The model accurately predicted responses to drifting grating stimuli of various contrasts, orientations, and spatiotemporal frequencies.
The hypothesis tested was that the effects of early experiences are asymmetrically distributed in the two brain hemispheres. Litters were either handled or not handled between birth and weaning, and the weanlings were reared in either laboratory cages or enriched environments between 21 and 50 days. When approximately 135 days old, animals within each of the four treatment groups had a right neocortical ablation, a left neocortical ablation, a sham operation, or no surgery. About 1 month later, all animals were given the open-field test for emotionality and exploratory behavior. Ablating either the right or left neocortex increased the activity scores of nonhandled controls, but there was no evidence of lateralization. However, the groups handled in infancy did show lateralization. Ablating the left brain did not significantly increase activity, but ablating the right brain caused extreme scores: handled rats without enrichment experience were the most active, and handled rats also placed into the enriched environment had near-zero scores in the open field.
The way in which the brain integrates fragmentary neural events at multiple locations to produce unified perceptual experience and behaviour is called the binding problem. Binding has been proposed to involve correlated activity at different cortical sites during perceptuomotor behaviour, particularly by synchronization of narrow-band oscillations in the gamma-frequency range (30-80 Hz). In the rabbit olfactory system, inhalation induces increased gamma-correlation between sites in olfactory bulb and cortex. In the cat visual system, coherent visual stimuli increase gamma-correlation between sites in both the same and different visual cortical areas. In monkeys, some groups have found that gamma-oscillations transiently synchronize within striate cortex, superior temporal sulcus and somatosensorimotor cortex. Others have reported that visual stimuli produce increased broad-band power, but not gamma-oscillations, in several visual cortical areas. But the absence of narrow-band oscillations in itself does not disprove interregional synchronization, which may be a broad-band phenomenon. We now describe episodes of increased broad-band coherence among local field potentials from sensory, motor and higher-order cortical sites of macaque monkeys performing a visual discrimination task. Widely distributed sites become coherent without involving other intervening sites. Spatially selective multiregional cortical binding, in the form of broad-band synchronization, may thus play a role in primate perceptuomotor behaviour.
The cerebral cortex of cats with chronic or permanent mesencephalic transections of the brain stem showed both high-voltage, slow-wave synchronized electroencephalographic patterns and low- voltage, fast-wave desynchronized rhythms when studied postoperatively. The alternation of sleep and wakefulness electrical activity in the permanently isolated forebrain is contrasted with the observations of Bremer in the acute "cerveau isole" preparation.
Advances in genetics and genomics have fuelled a revolution in discovery-based, or hypothesis-generating, research that provides a powerful complement to the more directly hypothesis-driven molecular, cellular and systems neuroscience. Genetic and functional genomic studies have already yielded important insights into neuronal diversity and function, as well as disease. One of the most exciting and challenging frontiers in neuroscience involves harnessing the power of large-scale genetic, genomic and phenotypic data sets, and the development of tools for data integration and mining. Methods for network analysis and systems biology offer the promise of integrating these multiple levels of data, connecting molecular pathways to nervous system function.
Glial-lial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) has been isolated as neurotrophic factor for midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Because of its neurotrophic activity on a wide range of neuronal populations in vitro and in vivo, GDNF is being considered as a potential therapeutic agent for neuronal disorders. During mammalian development, it is expressed not only in the nervous system, but also very prominently in the metanephric kidney and the gastrointestinal tract, suggesting possible functions during organogenesis. We have investigated the role of GDNF during development by generating a null mutation in the murine GDNF locus, and found that mutant mice show kidney agenesis or dysgenesis and defective enteric innervation. We demonstrate that GDNF induces ureter bud formation and branching during metanephros development, and is essential for proper innervation of the gastrointestinal tract.
When cysteine labeled with sulfur-35 is injected into the third ventricle of the rat brain, it is first incorporated into only one of the two populations of neurosecretory granules that can be isolated on an isosmotic gradient. The second population of granules is labeled much later. Stimulation of hormone release from isolated labeled neural lobes and subsequent isolation of neurosecretory granules at different times after the injection of labeled cysteine shows that the radioactivity decreases in only one population of granules. One of the fractions of the gradient represents the granules found near the release site; the second population is probably located deeper in the nerve endings or in the nerve swellings. Whereas neurophysins are found in both populations, smaller proteins can only be detected in one. Thus it appears that neurosecretory granules undergo an aging process and that isosmotic gradients can separate the aged granules from those newly formed.
California scorpionfish, Scorpaena guttata, were implanted with a pair of thermodes which straddled the anterior brainstem. When the fish were in water of about 20 degrees C, warming the thermodes to temperatures above 20 degrees C caused a proportional increase in the ventilatory minute volume. Cooling the thermodes below 20 degrees C caused a proportional decrease in the ventilatory minute volume. It is concluded that the anterior brainstem temperature provides an important input to the respiratory control center in teleost fish.
Studies of human auditory and somatosensory modalities have shown that there is an oscillatory response in the gamma-band (at about 40 Hz) frequency which is elicited by either steady state or transient stimulation. The auditory 40-Hz response is generated at least partially in the auditory cortex as a result of thalamocortical interaction and may serve perceptual integration and conscious perception. A connection to selective attention has been implied in human and animal studies, although the evidence is inconclusive. Moreover, fundamental differences between the human and animal 40-Hz responses prohibit generalization. Furthermore, most experiments have used steady-state stimulation during which the brain does not regain its resting state between stimuli as it does when transient stimulation is used. Here we study the effect of selective attention on the auditory gamma-band (40-Hz) transient response using subjects listening to tone pips presented in one ear while ignoring a concurrent sequence of tone pips in the other ear. The 40-Hz response was larger when subjects paid attention to stimuli rather than ignored them. This attention effect was most pronounced over the frontal and central scalp areas. Our results demonstrate a physiological correlate of selective attention in the 40-Hz transient response in humans.
Interactions between neural cell surfaces seem to be of prime importance during neuroontogenesis, and responsible for the guidance of migrating neuroblasts and growing axons and for the formation of synapses. Little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms, but most hypotheses imply the existence of cell-surface molecules that mediate the formation of transient or permanent bonds between neural cells. Recently, a membrane glycoprotein called neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) has been characterized in chick and rodent nervous tissue that appears to act as a ligand in adhesion among neural cell bodies or neurites. We have identified a mouse neural surface glycoprotein, named BSP-2 (ref. 7), which by criteriaof electrophoretic migration, developmental changes, amino acid and sugar composition seems to be closely related or identical to N-CAM. Both BSP-2 (refs 8, 9) and N-CAM undergo conversion from an embryonic to an adult form during brain development and it has been suggested that this transition changes the adhesive properties or the binding specificity of the molecule. Using a neuroblastoma line to study functional differences between embryonic and adult BSP-2/N-CAM molecules, we show here that liposomes bearing adult BSP-2 but not those bearing the embryonic form adhere to neuroblastoma cells, demonstrating that the two forms do indeed possess different binding properties.
Behavioural and imaging studies suggest that when humans mentally rehearse a familiar action they execute some of the same neural operations used during overt motor performance. Similarly, neural activation is present during action observation in many of the same brain regions normally used for performance, including premotor cortex. Here we present behavioural evidence that monkeys also engage in mental rehearsal during the observation of sensory events associated with a well-learned motor task. Furthermore, most task-related neurons in dorsal premotor cortex exhibit the same activity patterns during observation as during performance, even during an instructed-delay period before any actual observed motion. This activity might be a single-neuron correlate of covert mental rehearsal.
Blockade of gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor function by direct microinjection of bicuculline into the nucleus ambiguous in cats produced a marked increase in gastric motility which was mediated by the vagus nerve. This effect was reversed by muscimol. These data indicate that the nucleus ambiguous may be an important brain site influencing gastric function and that the neurotransmitter controlling parasympathetic overflow from this nucleus to the stomach is gamma-aminobutyric acid.
The requirement of protein and messenger RNA synthesis for long-term memory suggests that neural activity induced by learning initiates a cascade of gene expression. Here we use differential screening to identify five immediate-early genes induced by neuronal activity. One of these is tissue-plasminogen activator (tPA), an extracellular serine protease, which is induced with different spatial patterns in the brain by three activity-dependent events: (1) convulsive seizure increases expression of tPA in the whole brain; (2) stimulation of the perforant path produces an epileptiform after-discharge that ultimately leads to kindling increases the levels of tPA throughout the hippocampus bilaterally; and (3) brief high-frequency stimulation of the perforant path that produces long-term potentiation (LTP) causes an NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor-mediated increase in the levels of tPA mRNA which is restricted to the granule cells of the ipsilateral dentate gyrus. As release of tPA is correlated with morphological differentiation, the increased expression of tPA may play a role in the structural changes that accompany activity-dependent plasticity.
Do new synapses form in the adult cortex to support experience-dependent plasticity? To address this question, we repeatedly imaged individual pyramidal neurons in the mouse barrel cortex over periods of weeks. We found that, although dendritic structure is stable, some spines appear and disappear. Spine lifetimes vary greatly: stable spines, about 50% of the population, persist for at least a month, whereas the remainder are present for a few days or less. Serial-section electron microscopy of imaged dendritic segments revealed retrospectively that spine sprouting and retraction are associated with synapse formation and elimination. Experience-dependent plasticity of cortical receptive fields was accompanied by increased synapse turnover. Our measurements suggest that sensory experience drives the formation and elimination of synapses and that these changes might underlie adaptive remodelling of neural circuits.
Volumetric estimates of the total number of granule cells in rats 30, 120, 200, and 365 days old increase linearly by approximately 35 to 43 percent between 1 month and 1 year. Total volume of the granular layer also grows linearly during that time. These results demonstrate a numerical increase in a neuronal population during adulthood in the mammalian brain.
Plasticity in neural circuits can result from alterations in synaptic strength or connectivity, as well as from changes in the excitability of the neurons themselves. To better understand the role of plasticity in the brain, we need to establish how brain circuits work and the kinds of computations that different circuit structures achieve. By linking theoretical and experimental studies, we are beginning to reveal the consequences of plasticity mechanisms for network dynamics, in both simple invertebrate circuits and the complex circuits of mammalian cerebral cortex.
Retinoblastoma (RB) tumours form in the eyes of young children when homozygosity for a mutation at the Rb-1 locus develops in a somatic retinal cell. A similar shift to homozygosity for the RB mutation has been observed in osteogenic sarcoma (OS) tumours that commonly arise as second tumours in children who survive RB. This observation suggests that the Rb-1 locus controls the expression of genes with oncogenic potential; a possible target is the oncogene N-myc, which is sometimes amplified and over-expressed in the neuroectodermal tumours neuroblastoma and RB. However, N-myc is developmentally regulated in normal murine embryogenesis, and an alternative possibility is that the expression of the gene in tumour cells reflects their embryonic origin and is unrelated to the RB mutation. We have therefore examined N-myc expression in various fetal, adult and tumour tissues, and report here that the gene is expressed in fetal but not in adult brain and retina and in near-diploid RB tumour samples at levels similar to those observed in normal fetal retina. Only RB tumours with genomic amplification of the N-myc gene exhibited increased levels of expression; and no N-myc transcripts were detected in osteogenic sarcomas initiated by mutations at the Rb-1 locus. We therefore conclude that the expression of N-myc in RB tumours probably reflects the origin of the tumour from an embryonic tissue normally expressing the gene and is not directly associated with the mutation at the RB locus.
A mutation in the tub gene causes maturity-onset obesity, insulin resistance, and sensory deficits. In contrast to the rapid juvenile-onset weight gain seen in diabetes (db) and obese (ob) mice, obesity in tubby mice develops gradually, and strongly resembles the late-onset obesity seen in the human population. Excessive deposition of adipose tissue eventually leads to a twofold increase of body weight. Tubby mice also suffer retinal degeneration and neurosensory hearing loss. The tripartite character of the tubby phenotype shows striking similarity to human obesity syndromes, such as Alstrom and Bardet-Biedl. Here we report the identification of a G --> T transversion in a candidate gene that abolishes a donor splice site in the 3' coding region and results in a larger transcript containing the unspliced intron. This alteration is predicted to replace the 44-carboxyterminal amino acids with a 20-amino-acid sequence not found in the wide-type protein. Additionally, a second, prematurely truncated transcript with the unspliced intron is observed in testis messenger RNA and a 2-3-fold increase in brain mRNA is observed in tubby mice compared to B6. The phenotype features of tubby mice may be the result of cellular apoptosis triggered by expression of the mutuated tub gene.
Cells sense the environment's mechanical stiffness to control their own shape, migration, and fate. To better understand stiffness sensing, we constructed a stochastic model of the "motor-clutch" force transmission system, where molecular clutches link F-actin to the substrate and mechanically resist myosin-driven F-actin retrograde flow. The model predicts two distinct regimes: (i) "frictional slippage," with fast retrograde flow and low traction forces on stiff substrates and (ii) oscillatory "load-and-fail" dynamics, with slower retrograde flow and higher traction forces on soft substrates. We experimentally confirmed these model predictions in embryonic chick forebrain neurons by measuring the nanoscale dynamics of single-growth-cone filopodia. Furthermore, we experimentally observed a model-predicted switch in F-actin dynamics around an elastic modulus of 1 kilopascal. Thus, a motor-clutch system inherently senses and responds to the mechanical stiffness of the local environment.
Brain mechanisms for communication must establish a correspondence between sensory and motor codes used to represent the signal. One idea is that this correspondence is established at the level of single neurons that are active when the individual performs a particular gesture or observes a similar gesture performed by another individual. Although neurons that display a precise auditory-vocal correspondence could facilitate vocal communication, they have yet to be identified. Here we report that a certain class of neurons in the swamp sparrow forebrain displays a precise auditory-vocal correspondence. We show that these neurons respond in a temporally precise fashion to auditory presentation of certain note sequences in this songbird's repertoire and to similar note sequences in other birds' songs. These neurons display nearly identical patterns of activity when the bird sings the same sequence, and disrupting auditory feedback does not alter this singing-related activity, indicating it is motor in nature. Furthermore, these neurons innervate striatal structures important for song learning, raising the possibility that singing-related activity in these cells is compared to auditory feedback to guide vocal learning.
Many tasks require rapid and fine-tuned adjustment of motor performance based on incoming sensory information. This process of sensorimotor adaptation engages two parallel subcorticocortical neural circuits, involving the cerebellum and basal ganglia, respectively. How these distributed circuits are functionally coordinated has not been shown in humans. The cerebellum and basal ganglia show very similar convergence of input-output organization, which presents an ideal neuroimaging model for the study of parallel processing at a systems level. Here we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to measure the temporal coherence of brain activity during a tactile discrimination task. We found that, whereas the prefrontal cortex maintained a high level of activation, output activities in the cerebellum and basal ganglia showed different phasic patterns. Moreover, cerebellar activity significantly correlated with the activity of the supplementary motor area but not with that of the primary motor cortex; in contrast, basal ganglia activity was more strongly associated with the activity of the primary motor cortex than with that of the supplementary motor area. These results demonstrate temporally partitioned activity in the cerebellum and basal ganglia, implicating functional independence in the parallel subcortical outputs. This further supports the idea of task-related dynamic reconfiguration of large-scale neural networks.
The areas of the brain that mediate knowledge about objects were investigated by measuring changes in regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) using positron emission tomography (PET). Subjects generated words denoting colors and actions associated with static, achromatic line drawings of objects in one experiment, and with the written names of objects in a second experiment. In both studies, generation of color words selectively activated a region in the ventral temporal lobe just anterior to the area involved in the perception of color, whereas generation of action words activated a region in the middle temporal gyrus just anterior to the area involved in the perception of motion. These data suggest that object knowledge is organized as a distributed system in which the attributes of an object are stored close to the regions of the cortex that mediate perception of those attributes.
Glucose is the principal energy substrate for the brain and studies have shown that the brain is able to increase glucose availability in the face of glucose starvation (neuroglycopaenia). The mechanisms, believed to be hypothalamic, that may be involved in a brain/blood glucose control system have not yet been identified. We have used novel techniques for assessing brain monoamine neuronal activity to investigate its relationship to blood glucose concentrations in the rat. We describe here two important relationships which emerge from these studies. One is that activation of hypothalamic noradrenaline (NA) activity following stress is associated with concurrent increases in plasma glucose concentrations. This relationship is linear and independent of the adrenal or pituitary glands. The second is an inverse relationship between plasma glucose concentration and hypothalamic NA neuronal activity--high blood glucose levels significantly inhibited the hypothalamic NA activity responses to stress, alpha 2-adrenergic blockade and adrenalectomy. Thus glucose (or a metabolite of it) seems to provide a negative feedback signal sensed by hypothalamic NA neuronal systems which, in turn, appear to stimulate liver glucose output by a neural mechanism.
Any analysis of plastic reorganization at a neuronal locus needs a veridical measure of changes in the functional output--that is, spiking responses of the neurons in question. In a study of the effect of retinal lesions on adult primary visual cortex (V1), Smirnakis et al. propose that there is no cortical reorganization. Their results are based, however, on BOLD (blood-oxygen-level-dependent) fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging), which provides an unreliable gauge of spiking activity. We therefore question their criterion for lack of plasticity, particularly in the light of the large body of earlier work that demonstrates cortical plasticity.
Of the vertebrate senses, touch is the least understood at the molecular level The ion channels that form the core of the mechanosensory complex and confer touch sensitivity remain unknown. However, the similarity of the brain sodium channel 1 (BNC1) to nematode proteins involved in mechanotransduction indicated that it might be a part of such a mechanosensor. Here we show that disrupting the mouse BNC1 gene markedly reduces the sensitivity of a specific component of mechanosensation: low-threshold rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors. In rodent hairy skin these mechanoreceptors are excited by hair movement. Consistent with this function, we found BNC1 in the lanceolate nerve endings that lie adjacent to and surround the hair follicle. Although BNC1 has been proposed to have a role in pH sensing, the acid-evoked current in cultured sensory neurons and the response of acid-stimulated nociceptors were normal in BNC1 null mice. These data identify the BNC1 channel as essential for the normal detection of light touch and indicate that BNC1 may be a central component of a mechanosensory complex.
Nova proteins are a neuron-specific alternative splicing factors. We have combined bioinformatics, biochemistry and genetics to derive an RNA map describing the rules by which Nova proteins regulate alternative splicing. This map revealed that the position of Nova binding sites (YCAY clusters) in a pre-messenger RNA determines the outcome of splicing. The map correctly predicted Nova's effect to inhibit or enhance exon inclusion, which led us to examine the relationship between the map and Nova's mechanism of action. Nova binding to an exonic YCAY cluster changed the protein complexes assembled on pre-mRNA, blocking U1 snRNP (small nuclear ribonucleoprotein) binding and exon inclusion, whereas Nova binding to an intronic YCAY cluster enhanced spliceosome assembly and exon inclusion. Assays of splicing intermediates of Nova-regulated transcripts in mouse brain revealed that Nova preferentially regulates removal of introns harbouring (or closest to) YCAY clusters. These results define a genome-wide map relating the position of a cis-acting element to its regulation by an RNA binding protein, namely that Nova binding to YCAY clusters results in a local and asymmetric action to regulate spliceosome assembly and alternative splicing in neurons.
The regional distributions of monoamine oxidase (MAO) types A and B have been identified in human brain in vivo with intravenously injected 11C-labeled suicide enzyme inactivators, clorgyline and L-deprenyl, and positron emission tomography. The rapid brain uptake and retention of radioactivity for both 11C tracers indicated irreversible trapping. The anatomical distribution of 11C paralleled the distribution of MAO A and MAO B in human brain in autopsy material. The corpus striatum, thalamus, and brainstem contained high MAO activity. The magnitudes of uptake of both [11C]clorgyline and L-[11C]deprenyl were markedly reduced in one subject treated with the antidepressant MAO inhibitor phenelzine. A comparison of the brain uptake and retention of the 11C-labeled inactive (D-) and active (L-) enantiomers of deprenyl showed rapid clearance of the inactive enantiomer and retention of the active enantiomer within MAO B-rich brain structures, in agreement with the known stereoselectivity of MAO B for L-deprenyl. Prior treatment with unlabeled L-deprenyl prevented retention of L-[11C]deprenyl. Thus, suicide enzyme inactivators labeled with positron emitters can be used to quantitate the distribution and kinetic characteristics of MAO in human brain structures.
The concept of working memory is central to theories of human cognition because working memory is essential to such human skills as language comprehension and deductive reasoning. Working memory is thought to be composed of two parts, a set of buffers that temporarily store information in either a phonological or visuospatial form, and a central executive responsible for various computations such as mental arithmetic. Although most data on working memory come from behavioural studies of normal and brain-injured humans, there is evidence about its physiological basis from invasive studies of monkeys. Here we report positron emission tomography (PET) studies of regional cerebral blood flow in normal humans that reveal activation in right-hemisphere prefrontal, occipital, parietal and premotor cortices accompanying spatial working memory processes. These results begin to uncover the circuitry of a working memory system in humans.
Many object-related actions can be recognized by their sound. We found neurons in monkey premotor cortex that discharge when the animal performs a specific action and when it hears the related sound. Most of the neurons also discharge when the monkey observes the same action. These audiovisual mirror neurons code actions independently of whether these actions are performed, heard, or seen. This discovery in the monkey homolog of Broca's area might shed light on the origin of language: audiovisual mirror neurons code abstract contents-the meaning of actions-and have the auditory access typical of human language to these contents.
Orientation tuning of neurons is one of the chief emergent characteristics of the primary visual cortex, V1. Neurons of the lateral geniculate nucleus, which comprise the thalamic input to V1, are not orientation-tuned, but the majority of V1 neurons are quite selective. How orientation tuning arises within V1 is still controversial. To study this problem, we measured how the orientation tuning of neurons evolves with time using a new method: reverse correlation in the orientation domain. Orientation tuning develops after a delay of 30-45 milliseconds and persists for 40-85 ms. Neurons in layers 4C alpha or 4C beta, which receive direct input from the thalamus, show a single orientation preference which remains unchanged throughout the response period. In contrast, the preferred orientations of output layer neurons (in layers 2, 3, 4B, 5 or 6) usually change with time, and in many cases the orientation tuning may have more than one peak. This difference in dynamics is accompanied by a change in the sharpness of orientation tuning; cells in the input layers are more broadly tuned than cells in the output layers. Many of these observed properties of output layer neurons cannot be explained by simple feedforward models, whereas they arise naturally in feedback networks. Our results indicate that V1 is more than a bank of static oriented filters; the dynamics of output layer cells appear to be shaped by intracortical feedback.
Learning causes a change in how information is processed by neuronal circuits. Whereas synaptic plasticity, an important cellular mechanism, has been studied in great detail, we know much less about how learning is implemented at the level of neuronal circuits and, in particular, how interactions between distinct types of neurons within local networks contribute to the process of learning. Here we show that acquisition of associative fear memories depends on the recruitment of a disinhibitory microcircuit in the mouse auditory cortex. Fear-conditioning-associated disinhibition in auditory cortex is driven by foot-shock-mediated cholinergic activation of layer 1 interneurons, in turn generating inhibition of layer 2/3 parvalbumin-positive interneurons. Importantly, pharmacological or optogenetic block of pyramidal neuron disinhibition abolishes fear learning. Together, these data demonstrate that stimulus convergence in the auditory cortex is necessary for associative fear learning to complex tones, define the circuit elements mediating this convergence and suggest that layer-1-mediated disinhibition is an important mechanism underlying learning and information processing in neocortical circuits.
The hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal complex (HNC) of the fetal guinea pig shows a dramatic increase in its content of vasopressin and neurophysin between the 40th and 55th days of gestation. The values for radioimmunoassayable hormone and binding protein are at day 40, 2 milliunits and less than 0.1 microgram; and at day 55, about 100 milliunits and 10 micrograms, respectively. Isotope incorporation experiments with organ cultures of the fetal HNC taken prior to the 35th day of gestation added additional confirmation of the inability of the hypothalamic neurosecretory cells to synthesize vasopressin or neurophysin at this time. However, by the 45th day, similar organ cultures show a vigorous incorporation of labeled amino acids into both hormone and binding protein. Furthermore, the HNC of the 45-day-old fetus apparently contains a factor that stimulates specifically the biosynthesis of vasopressin and neurophysin in HNC cultures from the adult guinea pig. This factor is not detectable in either cortex or liver of the 45-day-old fetus or in the fetal HNC taken prior to or after the period of exponential rise (40th to 55th days) of hormone and binding protein.
Complementary DNAs for three different muscarinic acetylcholine receptors were isolated from a rat cerebral cortex library, and the cloned receptors were expressed in mammalian cells. Analysis of human and rat genomic clones indicates that there are at least four functional muscarinic receptor genes and that these genes lack introns in the coding sequence. This gene family provides a new basis for evaluating the diversity of muscarinic mechanisms in the nervous system.
Several neurotoxins have been isolated from bee venom. One of these, the mast cell degranulating peptide (MCD), releases histamine from mast cells and on central administration produces arousal at low concentrations and convulsions at higher doses. These effects are mediated through specific high-affinity binding sites which are concentrated in cortical structures, notably the hippocampus. This structure appears to be the source of changes in the electrocorticogram that follow injections of MCD into the cerebral ventricle, and which induce a quasi-permanent hippocampal theta rhythm in the motionless rat alternating with epileptiform spike waves. We report here that brief application of MCD to the CA1 region of hippocampal slices induces long-term potentiation, that is, a long-lasting increase in the efficacy of synaptic transmission. This potentiation seems to be indistinguishable from the classical LTP produced by trains of high-frequency electrical stimulation and considered to be related in some way to memory. Using binding to synaptosomal membranes and radioimmunoassay techniques, we have also found an endogenous peptide equivalent of MCD in brain extracts. This raises the possibility that a MCD-like peptide may be important in long-term potentiation.
Paradoxical, concurrent hyper-and hyporeactivity of a profound nature to specific stimuli occurred when 10 micrograms of morphine was microinjected bilaterally into the periaqueductal gray matter of the rat brain. Both effects at this site were dose-dependent. The hyperreactivity (to previously neutral auditory and visual stimuli) was obtained only with intracerebrally injected morphine and never with intraperitoneally injected morphine or with other opiates administered either way. Rapid tolerance to toxic doses of morphine developed at this site, as well as cross tolerance of the hyporeactivity to painful stimuli between routes (intracerebral to intraperitoneal) of morphine administration. Both the hyper- and hyporeactivity were fully reversible by intracerebral injection of naloxone in the periaqueductal gray. Thus, the periaqueductal gray appears to be a major pathway for morphine action.
In the vast majority of brain areas, the firing rates of neurons, averaged over several hundred milliseconds to several seconds, can be strongly modulated by, and provide accurate information about, properties of their inputs. This is referred to as the rate code. However, the biophysical laws of synaptic plasticity require precise timing of spikes over short timescales (<10 ms). Hence it is critical to understand the physiological mechanisms that can generate precise spike timing in vivo, and the relationship between such a temporal code and a rate code. Here we propose a mechanism by which a temporal code can be generated through an interaction between an asymmetric rate code and oscillatory inhibition. Consistent with the predictions of our model, the rate and temporal codes of hippocampal pyramidal neurons are highly correlated. Furthermore, the temporal code becomes more robust with experience. The resulting spike timing satisfies the temporal order constraints of hebbian learning. Thus, oscillations and receptive field asymmetry may have a critical role in temporal sequence learning.
Cocaine blocks the reuptake of dopamine, a neurotransmitter involved in the control of movement, cognition, motivation and reward. This leads to an increase in extracellular dopamine; the reinforcing effect of cocaine is associated with elevated dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens. But addiction to cocaine involves other effects, such as craving, loss of control and compulsive drug intake; the role of the dopamine system in these effects is less well-understood. We therefore used positron emission tomography (PET) to compare the responses of cocaine addicts and normal controls to intravenous methylphenidate, a drug that, like cocaine, causes an increase in synaptic dopamine. Addicts showed reduced dopamine release in the striatum, the brain region where the nucleus accumbens is located, and also had a reduced 'high' relative to controls. In contrast, addicts showed an increased response to methylphenidate in the thalamus (a region that conveys sensory input to the cortex). This thalamic response was associated with cocaine craving and was not seen in control subjects. Thus, our findings challenge the notion that addiction involves an enhanced striatal dopamine response to cocaine and/or an enhanced induction of euphoria. Moreover, they suggest a participation of thalamic dopamine pathways in cocaine addiction, a possibility that merits further investigation.
Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) and neurotrophin-4/5 (NT-4), together with nerve growth factor and brain-derived neurotrophic factor, are members of the neurotrophin family of proteins, which supports the survival of vertebrate neurons. However, no function in vivo has been described for NT-4 and limited information is available on the role of the other neurotrophins in the central nervous system in vivo. Nerve growth factor prevents the degeneration of lesioned septal cholinergic neurons in the adult brain, whereas brain-derived neurotrophic factor prevents the death of developing motor neurons and a subpopulation of adult septal cholinergic neurons. Finally, NT-3 partially prevents the death of facial motor neurons in newborn rats. To assess the role of NT-3 and NT-4 in the adult brain in vivo, we implanted genetically modified fibroblasts that constitutively express high levels of NT-3 or NT-4. The results show that NT-3, but no other neurotrophin, prevents the degeneration of noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus in a 6-hydroxydopamine lesion model that resembles the pattern of cell loss found in Alzheimer's disease. These results imply that NT-3 may have therapeutic potential for preventing the death of noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus.
Epilepsy is characterized by highly synchronized paroxysmal bursts of activity within a large population of cortical neurones. Because such spontaneous, synchronized discharges can occur even in isolated blocks of neocortex, mechanisms for initiating and coordinating this activity must reside within the cortex itself. However, the specific cellular properties and local neural circuitry responsible for such behaviour are unknown. In a previous study of neocortex in vitro, we found that treatment with the convulsants penicillin and bicuculline led to synchronized bursts which were driven by unusually large and long-lasting excitatory synaptic conductances. I now report evidence that synchronized bursts are initiated by a small, spacially discrete subpopulation of cells located in the area comprising layer IV and upper layer V. Neural elements in these layers appear to project paroxysmal synaptic excitation radially, onto the neurones of other layers.
Formation of myelinated tracts in central nervous system (CNS) regions such as the optic nerve seems to depend on two glial cell types, both of which derive from a common progenitor cell. This oligodendrocyte--type-2 astrocyte (O-2A) progenitor cell gives rise to oligodendrocytes, which produce internodal myelin sheaths, and to type-2 astrocytes, which extend fine processes in the region of the nodal axolemma. The optic nerve also contains a third glial cell, the type-1 astrocyte, which derives from a separate precursor. These three glial cells develop in a fixed sequence over a two-week period: type-1 astrocytes appear at embryonic day 16 (E16), oligodendrocytes at the day of birth (E21 or postnatal day P0), and type-2 astrocytes between P8 and P10. Type-1 astrocytes secrete a potent mitogen which causes expansion of the O-2A progenitor cell population in vitro. Here, we report that dividing O-2A progenitor cells are highly motile and seem to migrate from the brain into the optic nerve, beginning at its chiasmal end. Our results indicate that long-distance migration along the neural axis is characteristic only of progenitors of the O-2A lineage and may serve to distribute these cells to regions of the CNS that will become myelinated. These results also suggest that the intrinsic neuroepithelial cells of the optic stalk may be even more restricted than previously thought, giving rise only to type-1 astrocytes.
Neurons in the primary auditory cortex are tuned to the intensity and specific frequencies of sounds, but the synaptic mechanisms underlying this tuning remain uncertain. Inhibition seems to have a functional role in the formation of cortical receptive fields, because stimuli often suppress similar or neighbouring responses, and pharmacological blockade of inhibition broadens tuning curves. Here we use whole-cell recordings in vivo to disentangle the roles of excitatory and inhibitory activity in the tone-evoked responses of single neurons in the auditory cortex. The excitatory and inhibitory receptive fields cover almost exactly the same areas, in contrast to the predictions of classical lateral inhibition models. Thus, although inhibition is typically as strong as excitation, it is not necessary to establish tuning, even in the receptive field surround. However, inhibition and excitation occurred in a precise and stereotyped temporal sequence: an initial barrage of excitatory input was rapidly quenched by inhibition, truncating the spiking response within a few (1-4) milliseconds. Balanced inhibition might thus serve to increase the temporal precision and thereby reduce the randomness of cortical operation, rather than to increase noise as has been proposed previously.
The inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3) receptor acts as an InsP3-gated Ca2+ release channel in a variety of cell types. Type 1 InsP3 receptor (IP3R1) is the major neuronal member of the IP3R family in the central nervous system, predominantly enriched in cerebellar Purkinje cells but also concentrated in neurons in the hippocampal CA1 region, caudate-putamen, and cerebral cortex. Here we report that most IP3R1-deficient mice generated by gene targeting die in utero, and born animals have severe ataxia and tonic or tonic-clonic seizures and die by the weaning period. An electroencephalogram showed that they suffer from epilepsy, indicating that IP3R1 is essential for proper brain function. However, observation by light microscope of the haematoxylin-eosin staining of the brain and peripheral tissues of IP3R1-deficient mice showed no abnormality, and the unique electrophysiological properties of the cerebellar Purkinje cells of IP3R1-deficient mice were not severely impaired.
Two visuospatial phenomena, serial search and inhibition of return, have recently gained the attention of scientists from such diverse disciplines as neuroscience, artificial intelligence and cognitive psychology. A linear increase in search latency with increasing display size has been assumed to reflect serial focused attention to each item in the display. A delay in the detection of a signal in a previously attended location has been assumed to reflect an inhibitory process that may be used to prevent attention from returning to the same stimulus. The following study of human performance supports these assumptions and, by demonstrating that inhibition of return operates in serial search, presumably to improve search efficiency, provides a functional link between these two phenomena.
The response to different environmental conditions and negative air ions was investigated on cerebral cortical serotonin and cyclic nucleotides. The results indicated that negative air ions alter the weight of the cerebral cortex and that concentrations of serotonin and cyclic nucleotides can be altered both by different environments and by negative air ions. The data stress the importance of the role of the environment when studying the structure and chemistry of the cerebral cortex.
Responses of norepiniephrine sensitive adeniosinie 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP)-generating systems in combined midbrain-striatal slices of four rat strains correlate positively with spontaneous behavioral activity and negatively with levels of midbrain and striatal tyrosine hydroxylase. Responses of cerebral cortical norepinephrine-sensitive cyclic AMP systems correlate negatively with spontaneous behavioral activity antd positively with midbrain and striatal tyrosine hydroxylase. Such correlations were not found with responses of the cyclic AMP- generatinlg systems to isoproterenol, adenosine. veratridine or of an adenosne and norepinephrine combination.
Genetic linkage analysis of rats that were selectively bred for alcohol preference identified a chromosomal region that includes the neuropeptide Y (NPY) gene. Alcohol-preferring rats have lower levels of NPY in several brain regions compared with alcohol-non-preferring rats. We therefore studied alcohol consumption by mice that completely lack NPY as a result of targeted gene disruption. Here we report that NPY-deficient mice show increased consumption, compared with wild-type mice, of solutions containing 6%, 10% and 20% (v/v) ethanol. NPY-deficient mice are also less sensitive to the sedative/hypnotic effects of ethanol, as shown by more rapid recovery from ethanol-induced sleep, even though plasma ethanol concentrations do not differ significantly from those of controls. In contrast, transgenic mice that overexpress a marked NPY gene in neurons that usually express it have a lower preference for ethanol and are more sensitive to the sedative/hypnotic effects of this drug than controls. These data are direct evidence that alcohol consumption and resistance are inversely related to NPY levels in the brain.
Food intake, energy expenditure and body adiposity are homeostatically regulated. Central and peripheral signals communicate information about the current state of energy balance to key brain regions, including the hypothalamus and brainstem. Hunger and satiety represent coordinated responses to these signals, which include neural and hormonal messages from the gut. In recent years our understanding of how neural and hormonal brain-gut signalling regulates energy homeostasis has advanced considerably. Gut hormones have various physiological functions that include specifically targeting the brain to regulate appetite. New research suggests that gut hormones can be used to specifically regulate energy homeostasis in humans, and offer a target for anti-obesity drugs.
Some neurodegenerative disorders may be caused by abnormal synthesis or utilization of trophic molecules required to support neuronal survival. A test of this hypothesis requires that trophic agents specific for the affected neurons be identified. Cholinergic neurons in the corpus striatum of neonatal rats were found to respond to intracerebroventricular administration of nerve growth factor with prominent, dose-dependent, selective increases in choline acetyltransferase activity. Cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain also respond to nerve growth factor in this way. These actions of nerve growth factor may indicate its involvement in the normal function of forebrain cholinergic neurons as well as in neurodegenerative disorders involving such cells.
The venom of the funnel-web spider Agelenopsis aperta contains several peptides that paralyze prey by blocking voltage-sensitive calcium channels. Two peptides, omega-Aga-IVB (IVB) and omega-Aga-IVC (IVC), have identical amino acid sequences, yet have opposite absolute configurations at serine 46. These toxins had similar selectivities for blocking voltage-sensitive calcium channel subtypes but different potencies for blocking P-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels in rat cerebellar Purkinje cells as well as calcium-45 influx into rat brain synaptosomes. An enzyme purified from venom converts IVC to IVB by isomerizing serine 46, which is present in the carboxyl-terminal tail, from the L to the D configuration. Unlike the carboxyl terminus of IVC, that of IVB was resistant to the major venom protease. These results show enzymatic activities in A. aperta venom being used in an unprecedented strategy for coproduction of necessary neurotoxins that possess enhanced stability and potency.
Transformed, oncogenic precursors, possessing both defining neural-stem-cell properties and the ability to initiate intracerebral tumours, have been identified in human brain cancers. Here we report that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), amongst which BMP4 elicits the strongest effect, trigger a significant reduction in the stem-like, tumour-initiating precursors of human glioblastomas (GBMs). Transient in vitro exposure to BMP4 abolishes the capacity of transplanted GBM cells to establish intracerebral GBMs. Most importantly, in vivo delivery of BMP4 effectively blocks the tumour growth and associated mortality that occur in 100% of mice after intracerebral grafting of human GBM cells. We demonstrate that BMPs activate their cognate receptors (BMPRs) and trigger the Smad signalling cascade in cells isolated from human glioblastomas (GBMs). This is followed by a reduction in proliferation, and increased expression of markers of neural differentiation, with no effect on cell viability. The concomitant reduction in clonogenic ability, in the size of the CD133+ population and in the growth kinetics of GBM cells indicates that BMP4 reduces the tumour-initiating cell pool of GBMs. These findings show that the BMP-BMPR signalling system--which controls the activity of normal brain stem cells--may also act as a key inhibitory regulator of tumour-initiating, stem-like cells from GBMs and the results also identify BMP4 as a novel, non-cytotoxic therapeutic effector, which may be used to prevent growth and recurrence of GBMs in humans.
The mammalian forebrain, including the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (LGNd) and the visual cortex, continues both structural and functional development postnatally and is therefore a useful model for the study of developmental processes in the central nervous system (CNS). We report here the first description and comparison of the structural development of individual, functionally identified neurones in the mammalian forebrain. This comparison is made for the three main cell groups of the central visual pathways (W-, X- and Y-cells), in the neonate and the adult. In the adult, these three classes of neurones have different characteristic electrophysiological properties(1-9) and relay information in parallel about different features of a visual scene8,9 from the retina through the LGNd to the visual cortex. In addition, each of the three functional cell types has a characteristic structure in the adult10,11. By injection of the enzyme marker substance, horseradish peroxidase, into electrophysiologically identified neurones, the present study demonstrates that each of these functional classes of neurones also has a characteristic morphology in the neonate (in the LGNd of kitten 3-4 postnatal weeks of age). However, striking differences in the rates of maturation are seen. The W-cells are already mature at this age. The X-cells are the least developed. Surprisingly, some Y-cells are mature. Due to the susceptibility of Y-cells to an abnormal visual environment during development12-18, they had previously been thought to be slower to mature.
A heparin binding mitogenic protein isolated from bovine uterus shares NH2-terminal amino acid sequence with a protein isolated from newborn rat brain. The cDNA's of the bovine, human, and rat genes have been isolated and encode extraordinarily conserved proteins unrelated to known growth or neurotrophic factors, although identity of nearly 50 percent has been found with the predicted sequence of a retinoic acid induced transcript in differentiating mouse embryonal carcinoma cells. Lysates of COS-7 cells transiently expressing this protein were mitogenic for NRK cells and initiated neurite outgrowth from mixed cultures of embryonic rat brain cells. RNA transcripts encoding this protein were widely distributed in tissues and were developmentally regulated. This protein, previously designated as heparin binding growth factor (HBGF)-8, is now renamed pleiotrophin (PTN) to reflect its diverse activities. PTN may be the first member of a family of developmentally regulated cytokines.
Understanding how neural activity in sensory cortices relates to perception is a central theme of neuroscience. Action potentials of sensory cortical neurons can be strongly correlated to properties of sensory stimuli and reflect the subjective judgements of an individual about stimuli. Microstimulation experiments have established a direct link from sensory activity to behaviour, suggesting that small neuronal populations can influence sensory decisions. However, microstimulation does not allow identification and quantification of the stimulated cellular elements. The sensory impact of individual cortical neurons therefore remains unknown. Here we show that stimulation of single neurons in somatosensory cortex affects behavioural responses in a detection task. We trained rats to respond to microstimulation of barrel cortex at low current intensities. We then initiated short trains of action potentials in single neurons by juxtacellular stimulation. Animals responded significantly more often in single-cell stimulation trials than in catch trials without stimulation. Stimulation effects varied greatly between cells, and on average in 5% of trials a response was induced. Whereas stimulation of putative excitatory neurons led to weak biases towards responding, stimulation of putative inhibitory neurons led to more variable and stronger sensory effects. Reaction times for single-cell stimulation were long and variable. Our results demonstrate that single neuron activity can cause a change in the animal's detection behaviour, suggesting a much sparser cortical code for sensations than previously anticipated.
We report the observation of neural processing that occurs within 265 milliseconds after outcome stimuli that inform human participants about gains and losses in a gambling task. A negative-polarity event-related brain potential, probably generated by a medial-frontal region in or near the anterior cingulate cortex, was greater in amplitude when a participant's choice between two alternatives resulted in a loss than when it resulted in a gain. The sensitivity to losses was not simply a reflection of detecting an error; gains did not elicit the medial-frontal activity when the alternative choice would have yielded a greater gain, and losses elicited the activity even when the alternative choice would have yielded a greater loss. Choices made after losses were riskier and were associated with greater loss-related activity than choices made after gains. It follows that medial-frontal computations may contribute to mental states that participate in higher level decisions, including economic choices.
Considerable evidence indicates that a stimulus that is subthreshold, and thus consciously invisible, influences brain activity and behavioral performance. However, it is not clear how subthreshold stimuli are processed in the brain. We found that a task-irrelevant subthreshold coherent motion led to a stronger disturbance in task performance than did suprathreshold motion. With the subthreshold motion, activity in the visual cortex measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging was higher, but activity in the lateral prefrontal cortex was lower, than with suprathreshold motion. These results suggest that subthreshold irrelevant signals are not subject to effective inhibitory control.
This study challenges the use of adult neuropsychological models for explaining developmental disorders of genetic origin. When uneven cognitive profiles are found in childhood or adulthood, it is assumed that such phenotypic outcomes characterize infant starting states, and it has been claimed that modules subserving these abilities start out either intact or impaired. Findings from two experiments with infants with Williams syndrome (a phenotype selected to bolster innate modularity claims) indicate a within-syndrome double dissociation: For numerosity judgments, they do well in infancy but poorly in adulthood, whereas for language, they perform poorly in infancy but well in adulthood. The theoretical and clinical implications of these results could lead to a shift in focus for studies of genetic disorders.
The localization of brain succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase, a specific gamma-aminobutyric acid degradative enzyme, could potentially yield valuable information concerning the function of the enzyme. Application of a new histochemical technique for this enzyme has revealed characteristic patterns of neuronal staining that are contsistent within embryologically and functionally similar nuclei of the brainstem of the rat.
Two specific antiserums were produced, one to rat neurons and one to lamb oligodendroglia isolated in bulk from brain. On the basis of immunofluorescence and absorption studies with bulk isolated cells, the antiserums were produced to specific surface components. The antiserums are useful as markers for cell identification and for studying proteins in plasma membranes.
Parkinson's disease is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder. Growing evidence indicates a causative role of misfolded forms of the protein a-synuclein in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. Intraneuronal aggregates of a-synuclein occur in Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, the cytopathological hallmarks of Parkinson's disease and related disorders called synucleinopathies. a-Synuclein has long been defined as a 'natively unfolded' monomer of about 14 kDa (ref. 6) that is believed to acquire a-helical secondary structure only upon binding to lipid vesicles. This concept derives from the widespread use of recombinant bacterial expression protocols for in vitro studies, and of overexpression, sample heating and/or denaturing gels for cell culture and tissue studies. In contrast, we report that endogenous a-synuclein isolated and analysed under non-denaturing conditions from neuronal and non-neuronal cell lines, brain tissue and living human cells occurs in large part as a folded tetramer of about 58 kDa. Several methods, including analytical ultracentrifugation, scanning transmission electron microscopy and in vitro cell crosslinking confirmed the occurrence of the tetramer. Native, cell-derived a-synuclein showed a-helical structure without lipid addition and had much greater lipid-binding capacity than the recombinant a-synuclein studied heretofore. Whereas recombinantly expressed monomers readily aggregated into amyloid-like fibrils in vitro, native human tetramers underwent little or no amyloid-like aggregation. On the basis of these findings, we propose that destabilization of the helically folded tetramer precedes a-synuclein misfolding and aggregation in Parkinson's disease and other human synucleinopathies, and that small molecules that stabilize the physiological tetramer could reduce a-synuclein pathogenicity.
There is compelling evidence that sleep contributes to the long-term consolidation of new memories. This function of sleep has been linked to slow (<1 Hz) potential oscillations, which predominantly arise from the prefrontal neocortex and characterize slow wave sleep. However, oscillations in brain potentials are commonly considered to be mere epiphenomena that reflect synchronized activity arising from neuronal networks, which links the membrane and synaptic processes of these neurons in time. Whether brain potentials and their extracellular equivalent have any physiological meaning per se is unclear, but can easily be investigated by inducing the extracellular oscillating potential fields of interest. Here we show that inducing slow oscillation-like potential fields by transcranial application of oscillating potentials (0.75 Hz) during early nocturnal non-rapid-eye-movement sleep, that is, a period of emerging slow wave sleep, enhances the retention of hippocampus-dependent declarative memories in healthy humans. The slowly oscillating potential stimulation induced an immediate increase in slow wave sleep, endogenous cortical slow oscillations and slow spindle activity in the frontal cortex. Brain stimulation with oscillations at 5 Hz--another frequency band that normally predominates during rapid-eye-movement sleep--decreased slow oscillations and left declarative memory unchanged. Our findings indicate that endogenous slow potential oscillations have a causal role in the sleep-associated consolidation of memory, and that this role is enhanced by field effects in cortical extracellular space.
A motor illusion was created to separate human subjects' perception of arm movement from their actual movement during figure drawing. Trajectories constructed from cortical activity recorded in monkeys performing the same task showed that the actual movement was represented in the primary motor cortex, whereas the visualized, presumably perceived, trajectories were found in the ventral premotor cortex. Perception and action representations can be differentially recognized in the brain and may be contained in separate structures.
It is possible that brain cortical function is mediated by dynamic modulation of coherent firing in groups of neurons. Indeed, a correlation of firing between cortical neurons, seen following sensory stimuli or during motor behaviour, has been described. However, the time course of modifications of correlation in relation to behaviour was not evaluated systematically. Here we show that correlated firing between single neurons, recorded simultaneously in the frontal cortex of monkeys performing a behavioural task, evolves within a fraction of a second, and in systematic relation to behavioural events. Moreover, the dynamic patterns of correlation depend on the distance between neurons, and can emerge even without modulation of the firing rates. These findings support the notion that neurons can associate rapidly into a functional group in order to perform a computational task, at the same time becoming dissociated from concurrently activated competing groups. Thus, they call for a revision of prevailing models of neural coding that rely solely on single neuron firing rates.
The interplay between bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and their antagonists governs developmental and cellular processes as diverse as establishment of the embryonic dorsal-ventral axis, induction of neural tissue, formation of joints in the skeletal system and neurogenesis in the adult brain. So far, the three-dimensional structures of BMP antagonists and the structural basis for inactivation have remained unknown. Here we report the crystal structure of the antagonist Noggin bound to BMP-7, which shows that Noggin inhibits BMP signalling by blocking the molecular interfaces of the binding epitopes for both type I and type II receptors. The BMP-7-binding affinity of site-specific variants of Noggin is correlated with alterations in bone formation and apoptosis in chick limb development, showing that Noggin functions by sequestering its ligand in an inactive complex. The scaffold of Noggin contains a cystine (the oxidized form of cysteine) knot topology similar to that of BMPs; thus, ligand and antagonist seem to have evolved from a common ancestral gene.
Panic disorder is characterized by recurrent anxiety attacks in the absence of a frightening stimulus. It is a common disorder, affecting 2-5% of the general population and 10-14% of patients seen in cardiology practice. Infusion of sodium (DL)lactate precipitates an anxiety attack in most persons with this disorder but rarely does so in normal controls, suggesting a neurobiological basis for the problem. Despite this observation, the pathophysiology of panic disorder remains unknown. We have now used positron emission tomography to measure cerebral blood flow (CBF) in patients with panic disorder in the absence of a panic attack. Analysis of CBF in regions thought to mediate symptoms of panic, anxiety and vigilance reveals a significant (P less than 0.005) abnormal asymmetry of CBF (left less than right) located in a region of the parahippocampal gyrus. This asymmetry was present in seven patients with panic disorder and a positive response to lactate infusion but was absent in six normal controls and in three patients with panic disorder associated with a negative response to lactate. We believe this to be the first study to identify a discrete brain abnormality in patients with this severe form of anxiety.
The consensual response of the pupil in the cat was driven by means of a light flux impinging on the contralateral retina. Spike trains recorded extracellularly from single units in the midbrain show correlation with the concurrently recorded pupil area. The temporal dynamics found confirm two earlier studies of sinigle-unit responses and quantitative nerve stimulation. Both of these indicate that most of the 200-millisecond transport delay resides in the neuromuscular apparatus. Neurons whose activity correlated either with constriction with dilatation phases of Change in the pupil area were observed.
In primates, the premotor cortex is involved in the sensory guidance of movement. Many neurons in ventral premotor cortex respond to visual stimuli in the space adjacent to the hand or arm. These visual receptive fields were found to move when the arm moved but not when the eye moved; that is, they are in arm-centered, not retinocentric, coordinates. Thus, they provide a representation of space near the body that may be useful for the visual control of reaching.
The primary psychoactive ingredient in cannabis, Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Delta9-THC), affects the brain mainly by activating a specific receptor (CB1). CB1 is expressed at high levels in many brain regions, and several endogenous brain lipids have been identified as CB1 ligands. In contrast to classical neurotransmitters, endogenous cannabinoids can function as retrograde synaptic messengers: They are released from postsynaptic neurons and travel backward across synapses, activating CB1 on presynaptic axons and suppressing neurotransmitter release. Cannabinoids may affect memory, cognition, and pain perception by means of this cellular mechanism.
We found that, in the mouse visual cortex, action potentials generated in a single layer-2/3 pyramidal (excitatory) neuron can reliably evoke large, constant-latency inhibitory postsynaptic currents in other nearby pyramidal cells. This effect is mediated by axo-axonic ionotropic glutamate receptor-mediated excitation of the nerve terminals of inhibitory interneurons, which connect to the target pyramidal cells. Therefore, individual cortical excitatory neurons can generate inhibition independently from the somatic firing of inhibitory interneurons.
Perception of depth is a fundamental challenge for the visual system, particularly for observers moving through their environment. The brain makes use of multiple visual cues to reconstruct the three-dimensional structure of a scene. One potent cue, motion parallax, frequently arises during translation of the observer because the images of objects at different distances move across the retina with different velocities. Human psychophysical studies have demonstrated that motion parallax can be a powerful depth cue, and motion parallax seems to be heavily exploited by animal species that lack highly developed binocular vision. However, little is known about the neural mechanisms that underlie this capacity. Here we show, by using a virtual-reality system to translate macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta) while they viewed motion parallax displays that simulated objects at different depths, that many neurons in the middle temporal area (area MT) signal the sign of depth (near versus far) from motion parallax in the absence of other depth cues. To achieve this, neurons must combine visual motion with extra-retinal (non-visual) signals related to the animal's movement. Our findings suggest a new neural substrate for depth perception and demonstrate a robust interaction of visual and non-visual cues in area MT. Combined with previous studies that implicate area MT in depth perception based on binocular disparities, our results suggest that area MT contains a more general representation of three-dimensional space that makes use of multiple cues.
The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the related medial wall play a critical role in recruiting cognitive control. Although ACC exhibits selective error and conflict responses, it has been unclear how these develop and become context-specific. With use of a modified stop-signal task, we show from integrated computational neural modeling and neuroimaging studies that ACC learns to predict error likelihood in a given context, even for trials in which there is no error or response conflict. These results support a more general error-likelihood theory of ACC function based on reinforcement learning, of which conflict and error detection are special cases.
The visual response properties of single neurons in the owl's visual Wulst suggest that this forebrain structure is an analog of the mammalian visual cortex. Features in common with the cat and the monkey visual cortex include a precise topographic organization, a high degree of binocular interaction, and selectivity for orientation, direction of movement, and binocular disparity of straight-line contours.
Learning and memory in humans rely upon several memory systems, which appear to have dissociable brain substrates. A fundamental question concerns whether, and how, these memory systems interact. Here we show using functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) that these memory systems may compete with each other during classification learning in humans. The medial temporal lobe and basal ganglia were differently engaged across subjects during classification learning depending upon whether the task emphasized declarative or nondeclarative memory, even when the to-be-learned material and the level of performance did not differ. Consistent with competition between memory systems suggested by animal studies and neuroimaging, activity in these regions was negatively correlated across individuals. Further examination of classification learning using event-related FMRI showed rapid modulation of activity in these regions at the beginning of learning, suggesting that subjects relied upon the medial temporal lobe early in learning. However, this dependence rapidly declined with training, as predicted by previous computational models of associative learning.
The cerebellum has many properties that make it a useful model for investigating neural development. Purkinje cells, the major output neurons of the cerebellar cortex, have drawn special attention because of the availability of biochemical markers and mutants that affect their development. The spatial expression of L7, a protein specific for Purkinje cells, and L7 beta Gal, a gene expressed in transgenic mice that was constructed from the L7 promoter and the marker beta-galactosidase, delineated bands of Purkinje cells that increased in number during early postnatal development. Expression of the transgene in adult reeler mutant mice, which show inverted cortical lamination, and in primary culture showed that the initial expression of L7 is intrinsic to Purkinje cells and does not depend on extracellular signals. This may reflect an underlying developmental map in cerebellum.
During a critical period of postnatal development, the temporary closure of one eye in kittens will permanently shift the ocular dominance (OD) of neurones in the striate cortex to the eye that remains open. The OD plasticity can be substantially reduced if the cortex is infused continuously with the catecholamine neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) during the period of monocular deprivation, an effect that has been attributed to selective depletion of cortical noradrenaline. However, several other methods causing noradrenaline (NA) depletion leave the plasticity intact. Here we present a possible explanation for the conflicting results. Combined destruction of the cortical noradrenergic and cholinergic innervations reduces the physiological response to monocular deprivation although lesions of either system alone are ineffective. We also find that 6-OHDA can interfere directly with the action of acetylcholine (ACh) on cortical neurones. Taken together, our results suggest that intracortical 6-OHDA disrupts plasticity by interfering with both cholinergic and noradrenergic transmission and raise the possibility that ACh and NA facilitate synaptic modifications in the striate cortex by a common molecular mechanism.
Eph proteins are receptors with tyrosine-kinase activity which, with their ephrin ligands, mediate contact-dependent cell interactions that are implicated in the repulsion mechanisms that guide migrating cells and neuronal growth cones to specific destinations. Ephrin-B proteins have conserved cytoplasmic tyrosine residues that are phosphorylated upon interaction with an EphB receptor, and may transduce signals that regulate a cellular response. Because Eph receptors and ephrins have complementary expression in many tissues during embryogenesis, bidirectional activation of Eph receptors and ephrin-B proteins could occur at interfaces of their expression domains, for example at segment boundaries in the vertebrate hindbrain. Previous work has implicated Eph receptors and ephrin-B proteins in the restriction of cell intermingling between hindbrain segments. We therefore analysed whether complementary expression of Eph receptors and ephrins restricts cell intermingling, and whether this requires bidirectional or unidirectional signalling. Here we report that bidirectional but not unidirectional signalling restricts the intermingling of adjacent cell populations, whereas unidirectional activation is sufficient to restrict cell communication through gap junctions. These results reveal that Eph receptors and ephrins regulate two aspects of cell behaviour that can stabilize a distinct identity of adjacent cell populations.
Astrocytes have many neuronal characteristics, such as neurotransmitter receptors, ion channels, and neurotransmitter uptake systems. Cultured astrocytes were shown to express certain neuropeptide genes, with specificity for both the gene expressed and the brain region from which the cells were prepared. Somatostatin messenger RNA and peptides were detected only in cerebellar astrocytes, whereas proenkephalin messenger RNA and enkephalin peptides were present in astrocytes of cortex, cerebellum, and striatum. Cholecystokinin was not expressed in any of the cells. These results support the hypothesis that peptides synthesized in astrocytes may play a role in the development of the central nervous system.
The retina has long been regarded as 'an approachable part of the brain' for investigating neurosensory processes. Cell biologists are now capitalizing on the accessibility of the retina to investigate important aspects of developmental angiogenesis, including how it relates to neuronal and glial development, morphogenesis, oxygen sensing and progenitor cells. Pathological angiogenesis also occurs in the retina and is a major feature of leading blinding diseases, particularly diabetic retinopathy. The retina and its clinical disorders have a pivotal role in angiogenesis research and provide model systems in which to investigate neurovascular relationships and angiogenic diseases.
Phosphorylation of the neurofilament proteins of high and medium relative molecular mass, as well as of the Alzheimer's tau protein, is thought to be catalysed by a protein kinase with Cdc2-like substrate specificity. We have purified a novel Cdc2-like kinase from bovine brain capable of phosphorylating both the neurofilament proteins and tau. The purified enzyme is a heterodimer of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) and a novel regulatory subunit, p25 (ref. 8). When overexpressed and purified from Escherichia coli, p25 can activate Cdk5 in vitro. Unlike Cdk5, which is ubiquitously expressed in human tissue, the p25 transcript is expressed only in brain. A full-length complementary DNA clone showed that p25 is a truncated form of a larger protein precursor, p35, which seems to be the predominant form of the protein in crude brain extract. Cdk5/p35 is the first example of a Cdc2-like kinase with neuronal function.
A major challenge of current neuroscience is to elucidate the brain mechanisms that underlie cognitive function. There is no doubt that cognitive processing in the brain engages large populations of cells. This article explores the logic of investigating these problems by combining psychological studies in human subjects and neurophysiological studies of neuronal populations in the motor cortex of behaving monkeys. The results obtained show that time-varying psychological processes can be visualized in the time-varying activity of neuronal populations. Moreover, the functional interactions between cells in the motor cortex are very similar to those observed in a massively interconnected artificial network performing the same computation.
Amyloid B-protein/amyloid A4 is a peptide present in the neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and cerebrovascular deposits in patients with Alzheimer's disease and Down's syndrome (trisomy 21) and may be involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Recent molecular genetic studies have indicated that amyloid protein is encoded as part of a larger protein by a gene on human chromosome 21 (refs 6-9). The amyloid protein precursor (APP) gene is expressed in brain and in several peripheral tissues, but the specific biochemical events leading to deposition of amyloid are not known. We have now screened complementary DNA libraries constructed from peripheral tissues to determine whether the messenger RNA encoding APP in these tissues is identical to that expressed in brain, and we identify a second APP mRNA that encodes an additional internal domain with a sequence characteristic of a Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor. The alternative APP mRNA is present in both brain and peripheral tissues of normal individuals and those with Alzheimer's disease, but its pattern of expression differs from that of the previously reported APP mRNA.
The role of dopamine in monitoring negative action outcomes and feedback-based learning was tested in a neuroimaging study in humans grouped according to the dopamine D2 receptor gene polymorphism DRD2-TAQ-IA. In a probabilistic learning task, A1-allele carriers with reduced dopamine D2 receptor densities learned to avoid actions with negative consequences less efficiently. Their posterior medial frontal cortex (pMFC), involved in feedback monitoring, responded less to negative feedback than others' did. Dynamically changing interactions between pMFC and hippocampus found to underlie feedback-based learning were reduced in A1-allele carriers. This demonstrates that learning from errors requires dopaminergic signaling. Dopamine D2 receptor reduction seems to decrease sensitivity to negative action consequences, which may explain an increased risk of developing addictive behaviors in A1-allele carriers.
The transmission of visual information from retina to cortex through the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (LGNd) is controlled by non-retinal inputs. Enhanced visually evoked responses in cat LGNd relay cells during periods of increased alertness have been attributed in large part to increased rate of acetylcholine (ACh) release by fibres ascending from the brainstem reticular formation. ACh can modulate geniculate visual responses in vivo, but comparatively little is known about the underlying ionic mechanisms of these cholinergic actions. Although direct excitation of LGNd relay neurons has been shown in vitro, the situation is complicated because cholinergic axons form numerous and complex synapses not only with relay cells, but also with inhibitory interneurons, and electrical activation of the brainstem cholinergic neurons reduces inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in the LGNd. We report here that morphologically characterized interneurons in the cat LGNd possess distinctive electrophysiological properties in comparison with those of relay cells and are inhibited by ACh through a muscarinic receptor-mediated increase in potassium conductance. Together the direct excitation of relay cells and inhibition of intrageniculate interneurons allow the ascending cholinergic system to exert a powerful facilitatory influence over the transfer of visual information to the cerebral cortex.
Many central nervous system regions at all stages of life contain neural stem cells (NSCs). We explored how these disparate NSC pools might emerge. A traceable clone of human NSCs was implanted intraventricularly to allow its integration into cerebral germinal zones of Old World monkey fetuses. The NSCs distributed into two subpopulations: One contributed to corticogenesis by migrating along radial glia to temporally appropriate layers of the cortical plate and differentiating into lamina-appropriate neurons or glia; the other remained undifferentiated and contributed to a secondary germinal zone (the subventricular zone) with occasional members interspersed throughout brain parenchyma. An early neurogenetic program allocates the progeny of NSCs either immediately for organogenesis or to undifferentiated pools for later use in the "postdevelopmental" brain.
Analysis of neuronal migration in mouse cerebellar slice preparations by a laser scanning confocal microscope revealed that postmitotic granule cells initiate their migration only after the expression of N-type calcium channels on their plasmalemmal surface. Furthermore, selective blockade of these channels by addition of omega-conotoxin to the incubation medium curtailed cell movement. In contrast, inhibitors of L- and T-type calcium channels, as well as those of sodium and potassium channels, had no effect on the rate of granule cell migration. These results suggest that N-type calcium channels, which have been predominantly associated with neurotransmitter release in adult brain, also play a transient but specific developmental role in directed migration of immature neurons before the establishment of their synaptic circuits.
An as-yet unresolved issue in developmental neurobiology is whether the discrete areas that form the mammalian cortex emerge from a uniform cortical plate or whether they are already specified in the germinal zone. A feature of the primate striate cortex is that the number of neurons per unit area is twice that of anywhere else in the cerebral cortex. Here we take advantage of this unique structural feature to investigate whether the extra striate cortical cells are due to increased neuron production during neurogenesis. We labelled precursors undergoing terminal cell division with 3H-thymidine and allowed them to migrate to the cortical plate. Cell counts revealed that their rate of production in the germinal zone of striate cortex is higher than in that given rise to extrastriate cortex. Also, we used 3H-thymidine pulse injections to investigate cell cycle dynamics and found that this phase of increased production of striate cortical cells is associated with changes in the parameters of the cell cycle. These results show that cortical area identity is at least partially determined at the level of the ventricular zone.
Intracaudate injections of kainic acid destroy striatal neurons containing acetylcholine and gamma-aminobutyric acid but leave dopaminergic nerve terminals in this brain region intact. Rats injected with the drug are aphagic and adipsic, and have other behavioral abnormalities strikingly similar to those seen in animals with lesions in the dopaminergic nigrostriatal bundle.
Poly(adenosine 5'-diphosphoribose) synthetase (PARS) is a nuclear enzyme which, when activated by DNA strand breaks, adds up to 100 adenosine 5'-diphosphoribose (ADP-ribose) units to nuclear proteins such as histones and PARS itself. This activation can lead to cell death through depletion of beta-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (the source of ADP-ribose) and adenosine triphosphate. Nitric oxide (NO) stimulated ADP-ribosylation of PARS in rat brain. Benzamide and other derivatives, which inhibit PARS, blocked N-methyl-D-aspartate- and NO-mediated neurotoxicity with relative potencies paralleling their ability to inhibit PARS. Thus, NO appeared to elicit neurotoxicity by activating PARS.
Frontal cortex and cerebellar tissue from fetal rats was implanted into the damaged frontal cortex of adults. Cognitive deficits in spatial alternation learning that follow bilateral destruction of medial frontal cortex were reduced in rats with frontal cortex implants but not in those with implants of cerebellum. Histological evaluation showed that connections were made between the frontal cortex implants and host brain tissue.
The neurotrophins are a family of neurotrophic factors that promote survival and differentiation of various neuronal populations. Although the long-term effects of neurotrophins on neuronal survival and differentiation have been intensively studied, nothing is known about their effects on synaptic function. Here we report that acute exposure to neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) or brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), but not nerve growth factor (NGF), rapidly potentiates the spontaneous and impulse-evoked synaptic activity of developing neuromuscular synapses in culture. The effect appears to be presynaptic in origin and to be mediated by the Trk family of receptor tyrosine kinases. These results provide evidence for the regulation of the function of developing synapses by neurotrophins.
The ability to group stimuli into meaningful categories is a fundamental cognitive process. To explore its neural basis, we trained monkeys to categorize computer-generated stimuli as "cats" and "dogs." A morphing system was used to systematically vary stimulus shape and precisely define the category boundary. Neural activity in the lateral prefrontal cortex reflected the category of visual stimuli, even when a monkey was retrained with the stimuli assigned to new categories.
A neuroscientist explores what brain imaging can reveal about deliberative and intuitive decision-making.
The proto-oncogene c-fos is expressed in neurons in response to direct stimulation by growth factors and neurotransmitters. In order to determine whether the c-fos protein (Fos) and Fos-related proteins can be induced in response to polysynaptic activation, rat hindlimb motor/sensory cortex was stimulated electrically and Fos expression examined immunohistochemically. Three hours after the onset of stimulation, focal nuclear Fos staining was seen in motor and sensory thalamus, pontine nuclei, globus pallidus, and cerebellum. Moreover, 24-hour water deprivation resulted in Fos expression in paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei. Fos immunohistochemistry therefore provides a cellular method to label polysynaptically activated neurons and thereby map functional pathways.
Differential uptake of [(3)H]testosterone in male chick brain was found in periventricular areas of preoptic-hypothalamic continuum. Concentration of silver grains for all decapitation periods was especially high in the medial preoptic area, particularly the nucleus praeopticus paraventricularis magnocellularis. Distribution of testosterone-sensitive cells is in agreement with studies showing neuroanatomical control of reproductive behavior by the avian forebrain.
Addiction profoundly alters motivational circuits so that drugs become powerful reinforcers of behavior. The interoceptive system continuously updates homeostatic and emotional information that are important elements in motivational decisions. We tested the idea that interoceptive information is essential in drug craving and in the behavioral signs of malaise. We inactivated the primary interoceptive cortex in amphetamine-experienced rats, which prevented the urge to seek amphetamine in a place preference task. Interoceptive insula inactivation also blunted the signs of malaise induced by acute lithium administration. Drug-seeking and malaise both induced Fos expression, a marker of neuronal activation, in the insula. We conclude that the insular cortex is a key structure in the perception of bodily needs that provides direction to motivated behaviors.
The mammalian cortex is organized in a columnar fashion: neurons lying below each other from the pia to the white matter usually share many functional properties. Across the cortical surface, cells with similar response properties are also clustered together, forming elongated bands or patches. Some response properties, such as orientation preference in the visual cortex, change gradually across the cortical surface forming 'orientation maps'. To determine the precise layout of iso-orientation domains, knowledge of responses not only to one but to many stimulus orientations is essential. Therefore, the exact depiction of orientation maps has been hampered by technical difficulties and remained controversial for almost thirty years. Here we use in vivo optical imaging based on intrinsic signals to gather information on the responses of a piece of cortex to gratings in many different orientations. This complete set of responses then provides detailed information on the structure of the orientation map in a large patch of cortex from area 18 of the cat. We find that cortical regions that respond best to one orientation form highly ordered patches rather than elongated bands. These iso-orientation patches are organized around 'orientation centres', producing pinwheel-like patterns in which the orientation preference of cells is changing continuously across the cortex. We have also analysed our data for fast changes in orientation preference and find that these 'fractures' are limited to the orientation centres. The pinwheels and orientation centres are such a prominent organizational feature that it should be important to understand their development as well as their function in the processing of visual information.
Although it has been established that the left cerebral hemisphere subserves spoken language, the nature of brain organization for sign language remains relatively unexplored. The issue is especially important because sign language displays the complex linguistic structure of spoken languages, but conveys it through manipulation of visuo-spatial relations, thereby exhibiting properties for which the hemispheres of hearing individuals show opposing specializations. We had the unique opportunity to study a hearing signer proficient in American sign language (ASL), during the left intracarotid injection of a barbiturate (the Wada test), and before and after a right temporal lobectomy. The subject was a strong right-hander. Neuropsychological and anatomical asymmetries suggested left cerebral dominance for auditory-based language. Emission tomography revealed lateralized activity of left Broca's and Wernicke's regions for spoken language. The Wada test, during which all left language areas were rendered inoperative, caused a marked aphasia in both English and ASL. After partial ablation of the right temporal lobe, the abilities to sign and understand signing were unchanged. These data add further support to the notion that anatomical structures of the left cerebral hemisphere subserve language in a visuo-spatial as well as an auditory mode.
Acetylcholine (ACh) plays a key role in the transitions between the different phases of sleep: Slow-wave sleep requires low ACh concentrations in the brain, whereas rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep is associated with high levels of ACh. Also, these phases of sleep are differentially sensitive to a number of endogenous neuropeptides and cytokines, including somatostatin, which has been shown to increase REM sleep without significantly affecting other phases. Here we report the cloning and initial characterization of cortistatin, a neuropeptide that exhibits strong structural similarity to somatostatin, although it is the product of a different gene. Administration of cortistatin depresses neuronal electrical activity but, unlike somatostatin, induces low-frequency waves in the cerebral cortex and antagonizes the effects of acetylcholine on hippocampal and cortical measures of excitability. This suggests a mechanism for cortical synchronization related to sleep.
CP-96,345, a nonpeptide substance P antagonist, is selective for the tachykinin NK1 receptor. The compound binds to a single population of sites in guinea pig brain and potently inhibits substance P-induced excitation of locus ceruleus neurons. CP-96,345 should be a useful tool for studying the action of substance P in the central nervous system.
How does the bilingual brain distinguish and control which language is in use? Previous functional imaging experiments have not been able to answer this question because proficient bilinguals activate the same brain regions irrespective of the language being tested. Here, we reveal that neuronal responses within the left caudate are sensitive to changes in the language or the meaning of words. By demonstrating this effect in populations of German-English and Japanese-English bilinguals, we suggest that the left caudate plays a universal role in monitoring and controlling the language in use.
In response to stress, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) is released by corticotrophs in the anterior pituitary under the control of several central and peripheral factors including corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), which was recently isolated from the brain and sequenced. Immunocytochemical studies have shown that most of the CRF-containing cell bodies that project to the median eminence are present in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN). A dense PNMT(phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase)-containing fibre network was also observed in the same region--PNMT is the final enzyme in the biosynthesis of adrenaline and has been demonstrated in the brain. In the present study we found an association of adrenergic nerve fibres and CRF neurones by immunohistochemistry using antisera to PNMT and CRF. To examine the functional significance of the adrenergic projection to the PVN, we blocked the synthesis of adrenaline using a specific inhibitor of PNMT. The depletion of adrenaline resulted in an increase in CRF immunoreactivity. The present results suggest that, as well as catecholamines which regulate ACTH release at the anterior pituitary level via a beta 2-adrenergic receptor mechanism, central catecholamines (mainly adrenaline) also affect ACTH release through their action on CRF cells. Peripheral catecholamines seem to have a direct stimulatory effect on the pituitary corticotroph cells, whereas the present findings suggest that central adrenaline-containing neurones have an inhibitory role in the physiological response to stress.
The mechanism for object location in the environment, and the perception of the external world as stable when eyes, head and body are moved, have long been thought to be centred on the posterior parietal cortex. However, head position signals, and their integration with visual and eye position signals to form a representation of space referenced to the body, have never been examined in any area of the cortex. Here we show that the visual and saccadic activities of parietal neurons are strongly affected by head position. The eye and head position effects are equivalent for individual neurons, indicating that the modulation is a function of gaze direction, regardless of whether the eyes or head are used to direct gaze. These data are consistent with the idea that the posterior parietal cortex contains a distributed representation of space in body-centred coordinates.
Populations of single neurons in visual cortex, middle suprasylvian association cortex, and brain stem of cat show greater variance of spontaneous discharge rates during waking than during sleep; this change in variance occurs in the absence of significant changes in mean discharge rates. Neurons which discharge rapidly during sleep tend to discharge even more rapidly during waking, whereas neurons with relatively low rates of discharge during sleep tend to have reduced spontaneous activity during waking.
Human memory is a polygenic trait. We performed a genome-wide screen to identify memory-related gene variants. A genomic locus encoding the brain protein KIBRA was significantly associated with memory performance in three independent, cognitively normal cohorts from Switzerland and the United States. Gene expression studies showed that KIBRA was expressed in memory-related brain structures. Functional magnetic resonance imaging detected KIBRA allele-dependent differences in hippocampal activations during memory retrieval. Evidence from these experiments suggests a role for KIBRA in human memory.
Self-renewal and differentiation are cardinal features of stem cells. Asymmetric cell division provides one fundamental mechanism by which stem cell self-renewal and differentiation are balanced. A failure of this balance could lead to diseases such as cancer. During asymmetric division of stem cells, factors controlling their self-renewal and differentiation are unequally segregated between daughter cells. Numb is one such factor that is segregated to the differentiating daughter cell during the stem-cell-like neuroblast divisions in Drosophila melanogaster, where it inhibits self-renewal. The localization and function of Numb is cell-cycle-dependent. Here we show that Polo (ref. 13), a key cell cycle regulator, the mammalian counterparts of which have been implicated as oncogenes as well as tumour suppressors, acts as a tumour suppressor in the larval brain. Supernumerary neuroblasts are produced at the expense of neurons in polo mutants. Polo directly phosphorylates Partner of Numb (Pon, ref. 16), an adaptor protein for Numb, and this phosphorylation event is important for Pon to localize Numb. In polo mutants, the asymmetric localization of Pon, Numb and atypical protein kinase C are disrupted, whereas other polarity markers are largely unaffected. Overexpression of Numb suppresses neuroblast overproliferation caused by polo mutations, suggesting that Numb has a major role in mediating this effect of Polo. Our results reveal a biochemical link between the cell cycle and the asymmetric protein localization machinery, and indicate that Polo can inhibit progenitor self-renewal by regulating the localization and function of Numb.
Each half of the body surface is represented topographically in the contralateral cerebral hemisphere. Physiological data are presented showing that homotopic regions of primary somatosensory cortex are linked such that plasticity induced in one hemisphere, in the form of receptive field expansion brought about by a small peripheral denervation, is immediately mirrored in the other hemisphere. Neurons which display the plasticity show no responsiveness to stimulation of the ipsilateral body surface. This suggests that the pathways and mechanisms mediating this transfer are specific to the role of maintaining balance, or integration, between corresponding cortical fields.
The exuberant growth of neurites during development becomes markedly reduced as cortical neurons mature. In vitro studies of neurons from mouse cerebral cortex revealed that contact-mediated Notch signaling regulates the capacity of neurons to extend and elaborate neurites. Up-regulation of Notch activity was concomitant with an increase in the number of interneuronal contacts and cessation of neurite growth. In neurons with low Notch activity, which readily extend neurites, up-regulation of Notch activity either inhibited extension or caused retraction of neurites. Conversely, in more mature neurons that had ceased their growth after establishing numerous connections and displayed high Notch activity, inhibition of Notch signaling promoted neurite extension. Thus, the formation of neuronal contacts results in activation of Notch receptors, leading to restriction of neuronal growth and a subsequent arrest in maturity.
Psychophysical measurements indicate that human subjects can store approximately seven short-term memories. Physiological studies suggest that short-term memories are stored by patterns of neuronal activity. Here it is shown that activity patterns associated with multiple memories can be stored in a single neural network that exhibits nested oscillations similar to those recorded from the brain. Each memory is stored in a different high-frequency ("40 hertz") subcycle of a low-frequency oscillation. Memory patterns repeat on each low-frequency (5 to 12 hertz) oscillation, a repetition that relies on activity-dependent changes in membrane excitability rather than reverberatory circuits. This work suggests that brain oscillations are a timing mechanism for controlling the serial processing of short-term memories.
It is essential to keep track of the movements we make, and one way to do that is to monitor correlates, or corollary discharges, of neuronal movement commands. We hypothesized that a previously identified pathway from brainstem to frontal cortex might carry corollary discharge signals. We found that neuronal activity in this pathway encodes upcoming eye movements and that inactivating the pathway impairs sequential eye movements consistent with loss of corollary discharge without affecting single eye movements. These results identify a pathway in the brain of the primate Macaca mulatta that conveys corollary discharge signals.
A type of synaptic plasticity in the brain called long-term potentiation (LTP) is thought to form the molecular basis of learning and memory. In a Perspective, Manabe discusses new findings (Kovalchuk et al.) showing brain-derived neurotropic factor modulates LTP by binding to TrkB receptors on the postsynaptic neuron.
Intracellular electrical recordings in an in vitro slice preparation of the brainstem medial pontine reticular formation, a region thought to be important in mediation of desynchronized sleep phenomena, demonstrate a population of neurons that have a calcium-dependent, low threshold spike. This low threshold spike was inactivated at relatively depolarized membrane potential levels and, when this spike was deinactivated, it induced a burst of action potentials. The membrane potential dependence of the spike may underlie changes in action potential firing patterns associated with behavioral state change because the baseline membrane potential in neurons of the medial pontine reticular population depolarizes during passage from waking and slow wave sleep to desynchronized sleep, which is characterized by the absence of burst firing.
Marijuana affects brain function primarily by activating the G-protein-coupled cannabinoid receptor-1 (CB1), which is expressed throughout the brain at high levels. Two endogenous lipids, anandamide and 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG), have been identified as CB1 ligands. Depolarized hippocampal neurons rapidly release both anandamide and 2-AG in a Ca2+-dependent manner. In the hippocampus, CB1 is expressed mainly by GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-mediated inhibitory interneurons, where CB1 clusters on the axon terminal. A synthetic CB1 agonist depresses GABA release from hippocampal slices. These findings indicate that the function of endogenous cannabinoids released by depolarized hippocampal neurons might be to downregulate GABA release. Here we show that the transient suppression of GABA-mediated transmission that follows depolarization of hippocampal pyramidal neurons is mediated by retrograde signalling through release of endogenous cannabinoids. Signalling by the endocannabinoid system thus represents a mechanism by which neurons can communicate backwards across synapses to modulate their inputs.
Cellular responses in the V2 secondary visual cortex to simple as well as complex visual stimuli have been well studied. However, the role of area V2 in visual memory remains unexplored. We found that layer 6 neurons of V2 are crucial for the processing of object-recognition memory (ORM). Using the protein regulator of G protein signaling-14 (RGS-14) as a tool, we found that the expression of this protein into layer 6 neurons of rat-brain area V2 promoted the conversion of a normal short-term ORM that normally lasts for 45 minutes into long-term memory detectable even after many months. Furthermore, elimination of the same-layer neurons by means of injection of a selective cytotoxin resulted in the complete loss of normal as well as protein-mediated enhanced ORM.
Dopamine, synthesized in rat brain slices from labeled L-tyrosine or L-dopa, can be released by electrical stimulation of a type known to induce neuronal depolarization. Pretreatment of the animals with 6-hydroxydopamine, which destroys central catecholamine-containing nerve terminals, substantially reduced the release of dopamine synthesized from [(14)C]tyrosine or from a low concentration of [(3)H]dopa, whereas the release of dopamine formed from a high concentration of [(3)H]dopa remained essentially unchanged. The observations that at high concentrations L-dopa may enter noncatecholaminergic cells, undergo decarboxylation to dopamine, and subsequently be liberated in response to depolarization suggest that dopamine may act as a substitute central transmitter, possibly in serotonergic neurons. This mechanism may contribute to L-dopa's clinical effects in parkinsonian patients.
The cell adhesion molecules L1, N-CAM and Ng-CAM have been implicated in cell-cell interactions among developing neural cells. L1 and N-CAM are structurally and functionally distinct molecular entities and act synergistically in mediating Ca2+-independent adhesion between re-aggregating early postnatal cerebellar cells. N-CAM has been reported to be neurone-specific in the chicken and to mediate fasciculation of neurites and of nerve-muscle interactions. L1, which in the central nervous system has been found only on post-mitotic neurones, mediates migration of granule cell neurones in the mouse cerebellar cortex. In view of the molecules' distinct effects on cell interactions, we wondered whether different neural cell types are involved in the actions of each molecule. Here we report that L1 antigen promotes neurone-neurone adhesion. N-CAM, which is expressed on both neurones and glia, mediates neurone-neurone, neurone-astrocyte and astrocyte-astrocyte adhesion. The L2 carbohydrate epitope shared between the two adhesion molecules seems to be involved in neurone-astrocyte and astrocyte-astrocyte adhesion and acts in a more than additive manner in N-CAM-mediated neurone-neurone adhesion.
Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of progressive intellectual failure in aged humans. The filamentous brain lesions which define the disease occur within neurons (neurofibrillary tangles), in extracellular cerebral deposits (amyloid plaques) and in meningocerebral blood vessels (amyloid angiopathy). They are found in lesser numbers in the brains of virtually all old humans. A protein with a relative molecular mass (Mr) of approximately 4,000, designated amyloid beta-protein or amyloid A4 protein, is the subunit of the vascular and plaque amyloid filaments in individuals with Alzheimer's disease, normal ageing and trisomy 21 (Down's syndrome). The amyloid beta-protein is a small fragment of a membrane-associated glycoprotein, encoded by a gene on human chromosome 21 which is telomeric to a genetic defect that causes at least some cases of familial Alzheimer's disease. Until now, the pathological lesions of the disease have been found only in the brain, although reports of phenotypic abnormalities in non-neural tissues have suggested that Alzheimer's disease may be a widespread, systemic disorder. Here we report the detection of amyloid beta-protein deposits in non-neural tissues and blood vessels of Alzheimer's disease patients, including skin, subcutaneous tissue and intestine. The protein was also present in non-neural tissues in a proportion of aged, normal subjects. Our findings indicate that a principal feature of the disease process is expressed subclinically in tissues other than brain. The occurrence of amyloid beta-protein deposits in multiple tissues suggests that the protein may be produced locally in numerous organs or may, as in other human amyloidoses, be derived from a common circulating precursor. These observations affect the rationale for many experiments analysing the amyloid beta-protein precursor and its messenger RNAs in Alzheimer's disease brain tissue and have major implications for the pathogenesis and treatment of the disease.
Synapses in the central nervous system undergo various short- and long-term changes in their strength, but it is often difficult to distinguish whether presynaptic or postsynaptic mechanisms are responsible for these changes. Using patch-clamp recording from giant synapses in the mouse auditory brainstem, we show here that short-term synaptic depression can be largely attributed to rapid depletion of a readily releasable pool of vesicles. Replenishment of this pool is highly dependent on the recent history of synaptic activity. High-frequency stimulation of presynaptic terminals significantly enhances the rate of replenishment. Broadening the presynaptic action potential with the potassium-channel blocker tetraethylammonium, which increases Ca2+ entry, further enhances the rate of replenishment. As this increase can be suppressed by the Ca2+-channel blocker Cd2+ or by the Ca2+ buffer EGTA, we conclude that Ca2+ influx through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels is the key signal that dynamically regulates the refilling of the releasable pool of synaptic vesicles in response to different patterns of inputs.
In situ hybridization with complementary DNA probes for nerve growth factor (NGF) was used to identify cells containing NGF messenger RNA in rat and mouse brain. The most intense labeling occurred in hippocampus, where hybridizing neurons were found in the dentate gyrus and the pyramidal cell layer. The neuronal identity of NGF mRNA-containing cells was further assessed by a loss of NGF-hybridizing mRNA in hippocampal areas where neurons had been destroyed by kainic acid or colchicine. RNA blot analysis also revealed a considerable decrease in the level of NGF mRNA in rat dentate gyrus after a lesion was produced by colchicine. This lesion also caused a decrease in the level of Thy-1 mRNA and an increase in the level of glial fibrillary acidic protein mRNA. Neuronal death was thus associated with the disappearance of NGF mRNA. These results suggest a synthesis of NGF by neurons in the brain and imply that, in hippocampus, NGF influences NGF-sensitive neurons through neuron-to-neuron interactions.
Early visual processing is characterized by two independent parallel pathways: the magnocellular stream, which carries information useful for motion analysis, and the parvocellular stream, which carries information useful for analyses of shape and colour. Although increasing anatomical and physiological evidence indicates some degree of convergence of the two streams, the pathway through layer 4B of primary visual cortex (VI) and on to higher cortical areas is usually considered to carry only magnocellular input. This is inferred from anatomical descriptions of local circuitry in V1, and functional studies of area MT, which receives input from layer 4B. We have directly measured the sources of local functional input to individual layer 4B neurons by combining intracellular recording and biocytin labelling with laser-scanning photostimulation. We found that most layer 4B neurons receive strong input from both magnocellular-stream-recipient layer 4Calpha neurons and parvocellular-stream-recipient layer 4Cbeta neurons. Thus higher cortical areas that receive input either directly or indirectly from layer 4B are likely to be more strongly influenced by the parvocellular pathway than previously believed.
What aspects of movement are represented in the primary motor cortex (M1): relatively low-level parameters like muscle force, or more abstract parameters like handpath? To examine this issue, the activity of neurons in M1 was recorded in a monkey trained to perform a task that dissociates three major variables of wrist movement: muscle activity, direction of movement at the wrist joint, and direction of movement in space. A substantial group of neurons in M1 (28 out of 88) displayed changes in activity that were muscle-like. Unexpectedly, an even larger group of neurons in M1 (44 out of 88) displayed changes in activity that were related to the direction of wrist movement in space independent of the pattern of muscle activity that generated the movement. Thus, both "muscles" and "movements" appear to be strongly represented in M1.
Dopaminergic neurons exert a major modulatory effect on the forebrain. Dopamine and adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-regulated phosphoprotein (32 kilodaltons) (DARPP-32), which is enriched in all neurons that receive a dopaminergic input, is converted in response to dopamine into a potent protein phosphatase inhibitor. Mice generated to contain a targeted disruption of the DARPP-32 gene showed profound deficits in their molecular, electrophysiological, and behavioral responses to dopamine, drugs of abuse, and antipsychotic medication. The results show that DARPP-32 plays a central role in regulating the efficacy of dopaminergic neurotransmission.
A potentially powerful information processing strategy in the brain is to take advantage of the temporal structure of neuronal spike trains. An increase in synchrony within the neural representation of an object or location increases the efficacy of that neural representation at the next synaptic stage in the brain; thus, increasing synchrony is a candidate for the neural correlate of attentional selection. We investigated the synchronous firing of pairs of neurons in the secondary somatosensory cortex (SII) of three monkeys trained to switch attention between a visual task and a tactile discrimination task. We found that most neuron pairs in SII cortex fired synchronously and, furthermore, that the degree of synchrony was affected by the monkey's attentional state. In the monkey performing the most difficult task, 35% of neuron pairs that fired synchronously changed their degree of synchrony when the monkey switched attention between the tactile and visual tasks. Synchrony increased in 80% and decreased in 20% of neuron pairs affected by attention.
Effects on the monoamine Oxidase activity of the hypothalamus, amygdala, and frontal cortex of untrained mice exposed to repeated defeat by trained fighters for two 5-minute periods a day for 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 14, or 20 days were studied. Activity in the hypothalamus increased significantly during the first 2 days of fighting, while the activity in the amygdala and frontal cortex remained essentially unchanged. After 8 days, activity in all three brain areas declined. After 14 days of fighting the monoamine Oxidase activity returned to normal, but another decrease was observed in the three areas after 20 days of fighting.
The cerebral cortex receives input from lower brain regions, and its function is traditionally considered to be processing that input through successive stages to reach an appropriate output. However, the cortical circuit contains many interconnections, including those feeding back from higher centres, and is continuously active even in the absence of sensory inputs. Such spontaneous firing has a structure that reflects the coordinated activity of specific groups of neurons. Moreover, the membrane potential of cortical neurons fluctuates spontaneously between a resting (DOWN) and a depolarized (UP) state, which may also be coordinated. The elevated firing rate in the UP state follows sensory stimulation and provides a substrate for persistent activity, a network state that might mediate working memory. Using two-photon calcium imaging, we reconstructed the dynamics of spontaneous activity of up to 1,400 neurons in slices of mouse visual cortex. Here we report the occurrence of synchronized UP state transitions ('cortical flashes') that occur in spatially organized ensembles involving small numbers of neurons. Because of their stereotyped spatiotemporal dynamics, we conclude that network UP states are circuit attractors--emergent features of feedback neural networks that could implement memory states or solutions to computational problems.
Mossy fiber synaptic transmission at hippocampal CA3 pyramidal cells and interneurons was compared in rat brain slices to determine whether mossy terminals are functionally equivalent. Tetanic stimulation of mossy fibers induced long-term potentiation in pyramidal neurons but was either without effect or it induced depression at synapses onto interneurons. Unlike transmission onto pyramidal neurons, transmission onto interneurons was not potentiated after adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) activation. Furthermore, metabotropic glutamate receptor depression of transmission onto interneurons did not involve cAMP-dependent pathways. Thus, synaptic terminals arising from a common afferent pathway do not function as a single compartment but are specialized, depending on their postsynaptic target.
Systemic treatment of newborn rats with the catecholamine neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine alters the postnatal development of the central norepinephrine neurons. The changes are permanent and consist of denervation of distant nerve terminal projections (for example, cerebral cortex) and hyperinnervation of terminal areas close to the cell bodies (for example, cerebellum). Intracisternal injection of substance P counteracted both of these alterations. The results indicate that substance P may prevent degeneration of damaged norepinephrine neurons during ontogeny or may have a regrowth stimulatory action on these cells. Substance P might prove of use in the prevention or reduction of other types of neurodegenerative disease.
It has been known for over 45 years that electrical stimulation of the midbrain reticular formation and of the thalamic intralaminar nuclei of the brain alerts animals. However, lesions of these sectors fail to impair arousal and vigilance in some cases, making the role of the ascending activating reticular system controversial. Here, a positron emission tomographic study showed activation of the midbrain reticular formation and of thalamic intralaminar nuclei when human participants went from a relaxed awake state to an attention-demanding reaction-time task. These results confirm the role of these areas of the brain and brainstem in arousal and vigilance.
The discovery of high-affinity binding sites for psychoactive drugs such as benzodiazepines, opiates and neuroleptics has opened up new approaches to the study of these drugs and their mechanisms of action. Although most tricyclic antidepressants inhibit neuronal uptake of noradrenaline and serotonin, their mechanism of action remains unclear. Changes in the sensitivity of the beta-receptor after chronic tricyclic antidepressant treatment suggest that they modulate noradrenergic neurotransmission. Tricyclic antidepressants also act directly on cholinergic, histaminergic, alpha-adrenergic and serotonergic receptors. It is not clear, however, which, if any, of these effects are related to the primary antidepressant effect or whether they are simply responsible for some of the side effects. We have thus investigated the possibility that specific binding sites for tricyclic antidepressants exist in the central nervous system. So far, binding studies using 3H-labelled tricyclic antidepressant drugs have only detected binding to histaminergic H2 and cholinergic muscarinic receptors and low-affinity binding. We demonstrate here a population of specific high-affinity binding sites for 3H-imipramine on brain membranes which may be responsible for the antidepressant effects of these drugs.
The structures of five neurotrophic molecules have so far been published. Nerve growth factor, fibroblast growth factor and purpurin, have been identified as nerve-cell survival molecules. More recently, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and ciliary neurotrophic factor have been cloned and sequenced. As all these proteins stimulate the survival of ciliary or sensory neurons, a new cell survival assay is required if novel neurotrophic molecules are to be discovered. P19 teratoma cells differentiate to nerve-like cells in the presence of 5 x 10(-7) M retinoic acid (RA). But when P19 cells are plated in N2 synthetic medium without being exposed to RA, they die within 48 h. In an attempt to identify a molecule(s) that can substitute for RA in promoting P19 survival, we assayed serum-free growth-conditioned media for their ability to promote P19 survival. One cell line from the rat eye secreted a molecule that promoted the survival of P19 cells and some types of nerve cell. We identified this molecule as activin, better known for its role in hormone secretion.
A potential treatment for paralysis resulting from spinal cord injury is to route control signals from the brain around the injury by artificial connections. Such signals could then control electrical stimulation of muscles, thereby restoring volitional movement to paralysed limbs. In previously separate experiments, activity of motor cortex neurons related to actual or imagined movements has been used to control computer cursors and robotic arms, and paralysed muscles have been activated by functional electrical stimulation. Here we show that Macaca nemestrina monkeys can directly control stimulation of muscles using the activity of neurons in the motor cortex, thereby restoring goal-directed movements to a transiently paralysed arm. Moreover, neurons could control functional stimulation equally well regardless of any previous association to movement, a finding that considerably expands the source of control signals for brain-machine interfaces. Monkeys learned to use these artificial connections from cortical cells to muscles to generate bidirectional wrist torques, and controlled multiple neuron-muscle pairs simultaneously. Such direct transforms from cortical activity to muscle stimulation could be implemented by autonomous electronic circuitry, creating a relatively natural neuroprosthesis. These results are the first demonstration that direct artificial connections between cortical cells and muscles can compensate for interrupted physiological pathways and restore volitional control of movement to paralysed limbs.
The basal ganglia are neural structures within the motor and cognitive control circuits in the mammalian forebrain and are interconnected with the neocortex by multiple loops. Dysfunction in these parallel loops caused by damage to the striatum results in major defects in voluntary movement, exemplified in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. These parallel loops have a distributed modular architecture resembling local expert architectures of computational learning models. During sensorimotor learning, such distributed networks may be coordinated by widely spaced striatal interneurons that acquire response properties on the basis of experienced reward.
Insulin receptors (IRs) and insulin signaling proteins are widely distributed throughout the central nervous system (CNS). To study the physiological role of insulin signaling in the brain, we created mice with a neuron-specific disruption of the IR gene (NIRKO mice). Inactivation of the IR had no impact on brain development or neuronal survival. However, female NIRKO mice showed increased food intake, and both male and female mice developed diet-sensitive obesity with increases in body fat and plasma leptin levels, mild insulin resistance, elevated plasma insulin levels, and hypertriglyceridemia. NIRKO mice also exhibited impaired spermatogenesis and ovarian follicle maturation because of hypothalamic dysregulation of luteinizing hormone. Thus, IR signaling in the CNS plays an important role in regulation of energy disposal, fuel metabolism, and reproduction.
Vesicle fusion and recycling are particularly critical for ongoing neurotransmitter release in the small nerve terminals of the brain, which typically contain about 30 functional vesicles. However, the modes of exocytosis and endocytosis that operate at synapses of the central nervous system are incompletely understood. Here we show real-time visualization of a single vesicle fusing at a small synapse of the central nervous system, made possible by highly intensified charge-coupled device imaging of hippocampal synaptic terminals, in which a single vesicle was labelled with the fluorescent membrane marker FM1-43 (ref. 6). In a small number of cases, full loss of fluorescent membrane dye was elicited by a single action potential, consistent with classical complete collapse. In most cases, however, action potentials triggered only partial loss of fluorescence, suggesting vesicular retention of membrane marker, consistent with 'kiss-and-run' vesicle cycling. An alternative hypothesis of independent fusion of partially stained vesicles arising from endosomal splitting could be excluded by observations on the size and timing of successive fusion events. Thus, our experimental evidence supports a predominance of kiss-and-run fusion events and rapid vesicular re-use.
Feedforward models of visual cortex appear to be inconsistent with a well-known property of cortical cells: contrast invariance of orientation tuning. The models' fixed threshold broadens orientation tuning as contrast increases, whereas in real cells tuning width is invariant with contrast. We have compared the orientation tuning of spike and membrane potential responses in single cells. Both are contrast invariant, yet a threshold-linear relation applied to the membrane potential accurately predicts the orientation tuning of spike responses. The key to this apparent paradox lies in the noisiness of the membrane potential. Responses that are subthreshold on average are still capable of generating spikes on individual trials. Unlike the iceberg effect, contrast invariance remains intact even as threshold narrows orientation selectivity. Noise may, by extension, smooth the average relation between membrane potential and spike rate throughout the brain.
The anaphase-promoting complex (APC) is highly expressed in postmitotic neurons, but its function in the nervous system was previously unknown. We report that the inhibition of Cdh1-APC in primary neurons specifically enhanced axonal growth. Cdh1 knockdown in cerebellar slice overlay assays and in the developing rat cerebellum in vivo revealed cell-autonomous abnormalities in layer-specific growth of granule neuron axons and parallel fiber patterning. Cdh1 RNA interference in neurons was also found to override the inhibitory influence of myelin on axonal growth. Thus, Cdh1-APC appears to play a role in regulating axonal growth and patterning in the developing brain that may also limit the growth of injured axons in the adult brain.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) produced by telencephalic neurons provides critical trophic support for cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain. In situ hybridization and nuclease protection analyses demonstrate that limbic seizures dramatically increase the amount of messenger RNA for NGF in the neurons of the hippocampal dentate gyrus within 1 hour of seizure onset and in broadly distributed neocortical and olfactory forebrain neurons some hours later. The increased messenger RNA species is indistinguishable from messenger RNA for transcript B of the beta subunit of NGF from mouse submandibular gland. Thus, the expression of a known growth factor is affected by unusual physiological activity, suggesting one route through which trophic interactions between neurons in adult brain can be modified.
Haemodynamic signals underlying functional brain imaging (for example, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)) are assumed to reflect metabolic demand generated by local neuronal activity, with equal increases in haemodynamic signal implying equal increases in the underlying neuronal activity. Few studies have compared neuronal and haemodynamic signals in alert animals to test for this assumed correspondence. Here we present evidence that brings this assumption into question. Using a dual-wavelength optical imaging technique that independently measures cerebral blood volume and oxygenation, continuously, in alert behaving monkeys, we find two distinct components to the haemodynamic signal in the alert animals' primary visual cortex (V1). One component is reliably predictable from neuronal responses generated by visual input. The other component-of almost comparable strength-is a hitherto unknown signal that entrains to task structure independently of visual input or of standard neural predictors of haemodynamics. This latter component shows predictive timing, with increases of cerebral blood volume in anticipation of trial onsets even in darkness. This trial-locked haemodynamic signal could be due to an accompanying V1 arterial pumping mechanism, closely matched in time, with peaks of arterial dilation entrained to predicted trial onsets. These findings (tested in two animals) challenge the current understanding of the link between brain haemodynamics and local neuronal activity. They also suggest the existence of a novel preparatory mechanism in the brain that brings additional arterial blood to cortex in anticipation of expected tasks.
There is growing evidence that the neuropeptides oxytocin and vasopressin modulate complex social behavior and social cognition. These ancient neuropeptides display a marked conservation in gene structure and expression, yet diversity in the genetic regulation of their receptors seems to underlie natural variation in social behavior, both between and within species. Human studies are beginning to explore the roles of these neuropeptides in social cognition and behavior and suggest that variation in the genes encoding their receptors may contribute to variation in human social behavior by altering brain function. Understanding the neurobiology and neurogenetics of social cognition and behavior has important implications, both clinically and for society.
Antibodies to substance P with a high titer have been produced and used in immunohistochemical studies on the peripheral and central nervous system of the rat and the cat. Evidence was obtained for the localization of substance P in a certain population of primary sensory neurons, probably small nerve cells with unmyelinated processes. Substance P or a peptide similar to it was also observed in cell bodies in the medial habenula and in probable nerve terminals in many brain areas. The results give morphological support for a transmitter (or modulator) role of substance P in the nervous system.
Random-bred fetal and 4-week-old American lambs, inoculated intracerebrally with visna virus, developed a persistent infection in the brain and sometimes in the lung. The pathologic changes present in these lambs were similar to the early lesions of visna in Icelandic sheep, thus providing a possible model for the study of virus-induced demyelinating disease.
The studies discussed here have shown a fairly consistent relationship between the effects of drugs on biogenic amines, particularly norepinephrine, and affective or behavioral states. Those drugs which cause depletion and inactivation of norepinephrine centrally produce sedation or depression, while drugs which increase or potentiate brain norepinephrine are associated with behavioral stimulation or excitement and generally have an antidepressant effect in man (Table 1). From these findings, a number of investigators have formulated the concept, designated the catecholamine hypothesis of affective disorders (6), that some, if not all, depressions may be associated with a relative deficiency of norepinephrine at functionally important adrenergic receptor sites in the brain, whereas elations may be associated with an excess of such amines. It is not possible either to confirm or to reject this hypothesis on the basis of currently available clinical data. Although there does appear to be a fairly consistent relationship between the effects of pharmacological agents on norepinephrine metabolism and on affective state, a rigorous extrapolation from pharmacological studies to pathophysiology cannot be made. Confirmation of this hypothesis must ultimately depend upon direct demonstration of the biochemical abnormality in the naturally occurring illness. It should be emphasized, however, that the demonstration of such a biochemical abnormality would not necessarily imply a genetic or constitutional, rather than an environmental or psychological, etiology of depression. Whereas specific genetic factors may be of importance in the etiology of some, and possibly all, depressions, it is equally conceivable that early experiences of the infant or child may cause enduring biochemical changes and that these may predispose some individuals to depressions in adulthood. It is not likely that changes in the metabolism of the biogenic amines alone will account for the complex phenomena of normal or pathological affect. Whereas the effects of these amines at particular sites in the brain may be of crucial importance in the regulation of affect, any comprehensive formulation of the physiology of affective state will have to include many other concomitant biochemical, physiological, and psychological factors. Although in this review of the relationship of biogenic amines to affective state relatively little has been said concerning the intricate set of environmental and psychological determinants of emotion, the importance of these factors must be stressed. The normally occurring alterations in affective state induced by environmental events is well known to all, from personal experience. The interactions between such environmental determinants of affect, various physiological factors, and the complexity of psychological determinants, including cognitive factors derived from the individual's remote and immediate past experiences, have received only limited study under adequately controlled conditions. It may be anticipated, however, that this will prove to be a particularly fruitful area for future research, for only within such a multifactorial framework may one expect to understand fully the relationship of the biogenic amines to emotional state.
The somatosensory cortex of adult mammals has been shown to have a capacity to reorganize when inputs are removed by cutting afferent nerves or amputating a part of the body. The area of cortex that would normally respond to stimulation of the missing input can become responsive to inputs from other parts of the body surface. Although a few animals have been studied with repeat recording, no attempt has been made to follow the time-course of changes at cortical loci and the immediate effects of a small amputation have not been reported. We have followed the changes in response in the primary somatosensory cortex in the flying-fox following amputation of the single exposed digit on the forelimb. Immediately after amputation, neurons in the area of cortex receiving inputs from the missing digit were not silent but responded to stimulation of adjoining regions of the digit, hand, arm and wing. In the week following amputation, the enlarged receptive fields shrank until they covered only the skin around the amputation wound. The immediate response is interpreted as a removal of inhibition and the subsequent shrinking of the field may be due to re-establishment of the inhibitory balance in the affected cortex and its inputs.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases and stroke. However, the mechanism of MMP activation remains unclear. We report that MMP activation involves S-nitrosylation. During cerebral ischemia in vivo, MMP-9 colocalized with neuronal nitric oxide synthase. S-Nitrosylation activated MMP-9 in vitro and induced neuronal apoptosis. Mass spectrometry identified the active derivative of MMP-9, both in vitro and in vivo, as a stable sulfinic or sulfonic acid, whose formation was triggered by S-nitrosylation. These findings suggest a potential extracellular proteolysis pathway to neuronal cell death in which S-nitrosylation activates MMPs, and further oxidation results in a stable posttranslational modification with pathological activity.
When natural scenes are viewed, a multitude of objects that are stable in their environments are brought in and out of view by eye movements. The posterior parietal cortex is crucial for the analysis of space, visual attention and movement. Neurons in one of its subdivisions, the lateral intraparietal area (LIP), have visual responses to stimuli appearing abruptly at particular retinal locations (their receptive fields). We have tested the responses of LIP neurons to stimuli that entered their receptive field by saccades. Neurons had little or no response to stimuli brought into their receptive field by saccades, unless the stimuli were behaviourally significant. We established behavioural significance in two ways: either by making a stable stimulus task-relevant, or by taking advantage of the attentional attraction of an abruptly appearing stimulus. Our results show that under ordinary circumstances the entire visual world is only weakly represented in LIP. The visual representation in LIP is sparse, with only the most salient or behaviourally relevant objects being strongly represented.
Pathological disturbances of mood may follow a 'bipolar' course, in which normal moods alternate with both depression and mania, or a 'unipolar' course, in which only depression occurs. Both bipolar and unipolar disorders can be heritable illnesses associated with neurochemical, neuroendocrine and autonomic abnormalities. The neurobiological basis for these abnormalities has not been established. Using positron emission tomographic (PET) images of cerebral blood flow and rate of glucose metabolism to measure brain activity, we have now localized an area of abnormally decreased activity in the prefrontal cortex ventral to the genu of the corpus callosum in both familial bipolar depressives and familial unipolar depressives. This decrement in activity was at least partly explained by a corresponding reduction in cortical volume, as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated reductions in the mean grey matter volume in the same area of 39 and 48% in the bipolar and unipolar samples, respectively. This region has previously been implicated in the mediation of emotional and autonomic responses to socially significant or provocative stimuli, and in the modulation of the neurotransmitter systems targeted by antidepressant drugs.
Acidic amino acids, such as glutamate and aspartate, are thought to be excitatory transmitters in the cerebral neocortex and hippocampus. Receptors for these amino acids can be classified into at least three types on the basis of their agonists. Quisqualate-preferring receptors and kainate-preferring receptors are implicated in the mediation of synaptic transmission in many regions including the hippocampus and visual cortex, whereas N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-preferring receptors are thought to be involved in modulating synaptic efficacy, for example in longterm potentiation, a form of synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus. In the visual cortex of the cat and monkey, it is well established that synaptic plasticity, estimated by susceptibility of binocular responsiveness of cortical neurons to monocular visual deprivation, disappears after the 'critical' period of postnatal development. Here we report that during the critical period in young kittens, a selective NMDA-receptor antagonist blocks visual responses of cortical neurons much more effectively than it does in the adult cat. This suggests that NMDA receptors may be involved in establishing synaptic plasticity in the kitten visual cortex.
Identification of specific neuronal populations and their projections in the developing hindbrain reveals a segmental organization in which pairs of metameric epithelial units cooperate to generate the repeating sequence of cranial branchiomotor nerves. Neurogenesis also follows a two-segment repeat, suggesting parallels with insect pattern formation.
Altering the balance of activity between the two eyes during the critical period for visual-system development profoundly affects competitive interactions among neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus and primary visual cortex. Neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus that are deprived of activity by closing or silencing one eye atrophy as a result of competition with non-deprived neurons for some critical factor(s) presumed to be present in the cortex. Based on their actions in the developing visual system, neurotrophins are attractive candidates for such factors. We tested whether neurotrophins mediate intracortical competition of afferents from the lateral geniculate nucleus by using monocular deprivation and a new method for highly localized, in vivo delivery of neurotrophins. This method allowed unambiguous identification of neurons that were exposed to neurotrophin. Here we report that only one neurotrophin, the TrkB ligand NT-4, rescued neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus from the dystrophic effects of monocular deprivation.
A much debated question is whether sex differences exist in the functional organization of the brain for language. A long-held hypothesis posits that language functions are more likely to be highly lateralized in males and to be represented in both cerebral hemispheres in females, but attempts to demonstrate this have been inconclusive. Here we use echo-planar functional magnetic resonance imaging to study 38 right-handed subjects (19 males and 19 females) during orthographic (letter recognition), phonological (rhyme) and semantic (semantic category) tasks. During phonological tasks, brain activation in males is lateralized to the left inferior frontal gyrus regions; in females the pattern of activation is very different, engaging more diffuse neural systems that involve both the left and right inferior frontal gyrus. Our data provide clear evidence for a sex difference in the functional organization of the brain for language and indicate that these variations exist at the level of phonological processing.
Corticosterone increased the amount of the neuron-specific phosphoprotein protein 1 in the hippocampus, a brain region rich in corticosterone receptors, but not in several brain regions that contain relatively few corticosterone receptors.
The difficulty of working with the intact brain in vivo has led to the increasing use of nerve cell cultures in neurobiology. However, dissociated cells cannot be unambiguously identified by morphological criteria before the third week in culture, for it is not until then that the basic morphology and size of neurones become stable so that these and other cell types can be easily distinguished. However, cultured neurones can be identified by various cytochemical techniques based on (1) the detection of neurotransmitters or receptors for transmitters, (2) the presence of the Thy 1 antigen and the receptor for tetanus toxin, which are present on the membrane of most neurones, and (3) the presence in neurones of neurone-specific enolase (NSE), a cytoplasmic enzyme, which can only be identified on fixed specimens. Furthermore, other cell types in culture can also be specifically labelled. For instance, antisera to galactocerebroside bind selectively to oligodendrocytes, and antibodies to a neural tumour bind selectively to Schwann cells. We report here the selective interaction of phosphorylcholine-binding myeloma proteins (PC-BMP) with mouse neurones in culture and  in suspension. Phosphorylcholine (PC) is found as part of lecithin and sphingomyelin molecules in variable amounts in eukaryotic and prokaryotic membranes, including plasma membranes.
The fluorescence of the reduced form of the endogenous pyridine nucleotide nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide was used to map regions of ischemia in cat brain. A remarkably microheterogeneous pattern of increased fluorescence resulted from a critical level of incomplete cerebral ischemia. The fluorescence pattern suggests that ischemia occurs initially in microwatershed zones between penetrating cerebral arteries.
Neuronal groups can interact with each other even if they are widely separated. One group might modulate its firing rate or its internal oscillatory synchronization to influence another group. We propose that coherence between two neuronal groups is a mechanism of efficient interaction, because it renders mutual input optimally timed and thereby maximally effective. Modulations of subjects' readiness to respond in a simple reaction-time task were closely correlated with the strength of gamma-band (40 to 70 hertz) coherence between motor cortex and spinal cord neurons. This coherence may contribute to an effective corticospinal interaction and shortened reaction times.
Owl monkeys were inoculated intracerebrally, subcutaneously, and intravenously with JC, BK, or SV40 virus. Two of four adult owl monkeys inoculated with JC virus, a human polyomavirus, developed brain tumors at 16 and 25 months after inoculation, respectively. A grade 3 to grade 4 astrocytoma (resembling a human glioblastoma multiforme) was found in the left cerebral hemisphere and brainstem of one monkey. The second monkey developed a malignant tumor in the left cerebral hemisphere containing both glial and neuronal cell types. Impression smears prepared from unfixed tissue of this tumor showed cells that contained polyomavirus T antigen. Virion antigens were not detected. Tumor cells cultured in vitro also contained T antigen but were negative for virion antigen. Infectious virus was not isolated from extracts of this tumor.
The functions of the low-affinity p75 nerve growth factor receptor (p75(NGFR)) in the central nervous system were explored in vivo. In normal mice, approximately 25 percent of the cholinergic basal forebrain neurons did not express TrkA and died between postnatal day 6 and 15. This loss did not occur in p75(NGFR)-deficient mice or in normal mice systemically injected with a p75(NGFR)-inhibiting peptide. Control, but not p75(NGFR)-deficient, mice also had fewer cholinergic striatal interneurons. Apparently, p75(NGFR) mediates apoptosis of these developing neurons in the absence of TrkA, and modulation of p75(NGFR) can promote neuronal survival. Cholinergic basal forebrain neurons are involved in learning and memory.
To view objects at different distances, humans rely on vergence eye movements to appropriately converge or diverge the eyes and on ocular accommodation to focus the object. Despite the importance of these coordinated eye movements (the 'near response') very little is known about the role of the cerebral cortex in their control. As near-response neurons exist within the nucleus reticularis tegmenti pontis, which receives input from the frontal eye field region of frontal cortex, and this cortical region is known to be involved in saccadic and smooth-pursuit eye movements, we propose that a nearby region might play a role in vergence and ocular accommodation. Here we provide evidence from rhesus monkeys that a region of frontal cortex located immediately anterior to the saccade-related frontal eye field region is involved in vergence and ocular accommodation, and in the sensorimotor transformations required for these eye movements. We conclude that the macaque frontal cortex is involved in the control of all voluntary eye movements, and suggest that the definition of the frontal eye fields should be expanded to include this region.
Alzheimer's disease is a central nervous system disorder characterized by the presence of neurofibrillary tangles, neuritic plaques and dystrophic neurites in susceptible areas of the brain. Investigation of the mechanism and development of the disease has been hampered by the lack of an animal model and the inaccessibility of neural tissue during the illness. Deficits in odour detection and discrimination are among the signs of Alzheimer's and previous anatomical studies suggest that olfactory pathways may be involved early in the illness. Neurons in the olfactory epithelium, which are of central origin, are relatively accessible for biopsy and could be used as a source of living nerve cells for the study of Alzheimer's disease if they can be shown to have characteristics of this disease. As these neurons have the unusual property of arising from stem cells throughout the life of the organism, they are good candidates for the development of cell cultures or cell lines which may express the disorder from living patients. We report here that nasal epithelium tissue taken at autopsy shows unique pathological changes in morphology, distribution and immunoreactivity of neuronal structures in patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Object recognition is challenging because each object produces myriad retinal images. Responses of neurons from the inferior temporal cortex (IT) are selective to different objects, yet tolerant ("invariant") to changes in object position, scale, and pose. How does the brain construct this neuronal tolerance? We report a form of neuronal learning that suggests the underlying solution. Targeted alteration of the natural temporal contiguity of visual experience caused specific changes in IT position tolerance. This unsupervised temporal slowness learning (UTL) was substantial, increased with experience, and was significant in single IT neurons after just 1 hour. Together with previous theoretical work and human object perception experiments, we speculate that UTL may reflect the mechanism by which the visual stream builds and maintains tolerant object representations.
Attention can be focused volitionally by "top-down" signals derived from task demands and automatically by "bottom-up" signals from salient stimuli. The frontal and parietal cortices are involved, but their neural activity has not been directly compared. Therefore, we recorded from them simultaneously in monkeys. Prefrontal neurons reflected the target location first during top-down attention, whereas parietal neurons signaled it earlier during bottom-up attention. Synchrony between frontal and parietal areas was stronger in lower frequencies during top-down attention and in higher frequencies during bottom-up attention. This result indicates that top-down and bottom-up signals arise from the frontal and sensory cortex, respectively, and different modes of attention may emphasize synchrony at different frequencies.
Many amputees have a sense of their missing 'phantom' limb. Amputation can alter the representation of the body's surface in the cerebral cortex and thalamus, but it is unclear how these changes relate to such phantom sensations. One possibility is that, in amputees who experience phantom sensations, the region of the thalamus that originally represented the missing limb remains functional and can give rise to phantom sensations even when some thalamic 'limb' neurons begin to respond to stimulation of other body regions. Here we use microelectrode recording and microstimulation during functional stereotactic mapping of the ventrocaudal thalamus in amputees to determine both the responses of the neurons to stimulation of the skin and the perceptual effects of electrical activation of these neurons. Thalamic mapping revealed an unusually large thalamic stump representation, consistent with the findings from animal experiments. We also found that thalamic stimulation in amputees with a phantom limb could evoke phantom sensations, including pain, even in regions containing neurons responsive to tactile stimulation of the stump. These findings support the hypothesis that the thalamic representation of the amputated limb remains functional in amputees with phantoms.
Mitochondria from the whole brain or cerebellum of newborn guinea pigs with experimental bilirubin encephalopathy failed to exhibit uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation. The pigment concentrations required to initiate uncoupling in vitro are much higher than those found in the brain of neurotoxic animals.
The peptide nociceptin (also named orphanin FQ) acts in the brain to produce various pharmacological effects, including hyperalgesia and hypolocomotion. The nociceptin receptor uses guanine-nucleotide-binding proteins to mediate the inhibition of adenylyl cyclase, the activation of potassium channels and inhibition of calcium channels. It has been shown using knock-out mice that the nociceptin receptor is not required for regulation of nociceptive responses or locomotion activity, but modulates the auditory function. Here we show that mice lacking the nociceptin receptor possess greater learning ability and have better memory than control mice. Histological analysis revealed the expression of both the nociceptin precursor and the nociceptin receptor in the hippocampus, thought to take part in aspects of learning and memory. Moreover, the receptor-deficient mice showed larger long-term potentiation in the hippocampal CA1 region than control mice, without apparent changes in presynaptic or postsynaptic electrophysiological properties. These results show that the loss of the nociceptin receptor results in a gain-of-function mutation in both the memory process and the long-term potentiation mechanism in CA1, perhaps as a result of altered intracellular signal transduction systems in neurons.
Cultured embryonic cortical neurons from rats were used to explore mechanisms of activity-dependent neuronal survival. Cell survival was increased by the activation of voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs) but not by activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. These effects correlated with the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) induced by these two classes of calcium channels. Antibodies to BDNF (which block intracellular signaling by BDNF, but not by nerve growth factor, NT3, or NT4/5) reduced the survival of cortical neurons and reversed the VSCC-mediated increase in survival. Thus, endogenous BDNF is a trophic factor for cortical neurons whose expression is VSCC-regulated and that functions in the VSCC-dependent survival of these neurons.
Catecholaminergic systems in discrete regions of the brain are thought to be important in affective psychoses, learning and memory, reinforcement and sleep-wake cycle regulation. Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) is the first enzyme in the pathway of catecholamine synthesis. Its importance is reflected in the diversity of the mechanisms that have been described which control its activity; TH levels vary both during development and as a function of the activity of the nervous system. Recently, we deduced the complete amino-acid sequence of rat TH from a complementary DNA clone encoding a functional enzyme. Here we demonstrate that, in man, TH molecules are encoded by at least three distinct messenger RNAs. The expression of these mRNAs varies in different parts of the nervous system. The sequence differences observed are confined to the 5' termini of the messengers and involve alternative splicing events. This variation has clear functional consequences for each putative form of the enzyme and could represent a novel means of regulating catecholamine levels in normal and pathological neurons.
Event-related potentials of the brain are enhanced when stimulation is synchronized with diastolic phases of cerebral or cephalic pulse pressure waves. A cerebral vascular event has been found to be temporally consistent with the event-related potential. Averaged evoked vascular responses were measured with bioimpedance techniques from the brain and the arm. Changes in brain blood volume occurred 150 to 250 milliseconds after stimulation synchronized with diastolic but not systolic phases of the cerebral pulse pressure wave. The time course of this phenomenon defies the usually accepted characteristics of metabolic activity. The evoked vascular response may be a neurally mediated event in anticipation of altered metabolic demand, and it offers the possibility of measurement in real time.
The Lewy body, a histological hallmark of Parkinson's disease, is a filamentous inclusion residing most prominently in pigmented neurons of the brainstem. Immunocytochemical reactions of Lewy bodies were examined with antisera to several filamentous proteins of the nervous system and positive reactions were found with those against neurofilaments. An abnormal organization of the neuronal cytoskeleton may be a pathological feature of Parkinson's disease.
Neurons in the brain's suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCNs), which control the timing of daily rhythms, are thought to encode time of day by changing their firing frequency, with high rates during the day and lower rates at night. Some SCN neurons express a key clock gene, period 1 (per1). We found that during the day, neurons containing per1 sustain an electrically excited state and do not fire, whereas non-per1 neurons show the previously reported daily variation in firing activity. Using a combined experimental and theoretical approach, we explain how ionic currents lead to the unusual electrophysiological behaviors of per1 cells, which unlike other mammalian brain cells can survive and function at depolarized states.
Neuronal injury resulting from acute brain insults and some neurodegenerative diseases implicates N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors. The fact that antioxidants reduce some types of brain damage suggests that oxygen radicals may have a role. It has been shown that mutations in Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD), an enzyme catalysing superoxide (O2.-) detoxification in the cell, are linked to a familial form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Here we report that O2.- is produced upon NMDA receptor stimulation in cultured cerebellar granule cells. Electron paramagnetic resonance was used to assess O2.- production that was due in part to the release of arachidonic acid. Activation of kainic acid receptors, or voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels, did not produce detectable O2.-. We also find that the nitrone DMPO (5,5-dimethyl pyrroline 1-oxide), used as a spin trap, is more efficient than the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor, L-NG-nitro-arginine, in reducing NMDA-induced neuronal death in these cultures.
Genomic imprinting results in preferential gene expression from paternally versus maternally inherited chromosomes. We used a genome-wide approach to uncover sex-specific parent-of-origin allelic effects in the adult mouse brain. Our study identified preferential selection of the maternally inherited X chromosome in glutamatergic neurons of the female cortex. Moreover, analysis of the cortex and hypothalamus identified 347 autosomal genes with sex-specific imprinting features. In the hypothalamus, sex-specific imprinted genes were mostly found in females, which suggests parental influence over the hypothalamic function of daughters. We show that interleukin-18, a gene linked to diseases with sex-specific prevalence, is subject to complex, regional, and sex-specific parental effects in the brain. Parent-of-origin effects thus provide new avenues for investigation of sexual dimorphism in brain function and disease.
The psychosis associated with schizophrenia is characterized by alterations in sensory processing and perception. Some antipsychotic drugs were identified by their high affinity for serotonin 5-HT2A receptors (2AR). Drugs that interact with metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR) also have potential for the treatment of schizophrenia. The effects of hallucinogenic drugs, such as psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide, require the 2AR and resemble some of the core symptoms of schizophrenia. Here we show that the mGluR2 interacts through specific transmembrane helix domains with the 2AR, a member of an unrelated G-protein-coupled receptor family, to form functional complexes in brain cortex. The 2AR-mGluR2 complex triggers unique cellular responses when targeted by hallucinogenic drugs, and activation of mGluR2 abolishes hallucinogen-specific signalling and behavioural responses. In post-mortem human brain from untreated schizophrenic subjects, the 2AR is upregulated and the mGluR2 is downregulated, a pattern that could predispose to psychosis. These regulatory changes indicate that the 2AR-mGluR2 complex may be involved in the altered cortical processes of schizophrenia, and this complex is therefore a promising new target for the treatment of psychosis.
Opiates are widely used analgesics in anesthesiology, but they have serious adverse effects such as depression of breathing. This is caused by direct inhibition of rhythm-generating respiratory neurons in the Pre-Boetzinger complex (PBC) of the brainstem. We report that serotonin 4(a) [5-HT4(a)] receptors are strongly expressed in respiratory PBC neurons and that their selective activation protects spontaneous respiratory activity. Treatment of rats with a 5-HT4 receptor-specific agonist overcame fentanyl-induced respiratory depression and reestablished stable respiratory rhythm without loss of fentanyl's analgesic effect. These findings imply the prospect of a fine-tuned recovery from opioid-induced respiratory depression, through adjustment of intracellular adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate levels through the convergent signaling pathways in neurons.
Rasmussen's encephalitis is a progressive childhood disease of unknown cause characterized by severe epilepsy, hemiplegia, dementia, and inflammation of the brain. During efforts to raise antibodies to recombinant glutamate receptors (GluRs), behaviors typical of seizures and histopathologic features mimicking Rasmussen's encephalitis were found in two rabbits immunized with GluR3 protein. A correlation was found between the presence of Rasmussen's encephalitis and serum antibodies to GluR3 detected by protein immunoblot analysis and by immunoreactivity to transfected cells expressing GluR3. Repeated plasma exchanges in one seriously ill child transiently reduced serum titers of GluR3 antibodies, decreased seizure frequency, and improved neurologic function. Thus, GluR3 is an autoantigen in Rasmussen's encephalitis, and an autoimmune process may underlie this disease.
Emotion is central to the quality and range of everyday human experience. The neurobiological substrates of human emotion are now attracting increasing interest within the neurosciences motivated, to a considerable extent, by advances in functional neuroimaging techniques. An emerging theme is the question of how emotion interacts with and influences other domains of cognition, in particular attention, memory, and reasoning. The psychological consequences and mechanisms underlying the emotional modulation of cognition provide the focus of this article.
The lateral habenula is one of the few forebrain areas that project to the midbrain raphe nuclei. Electrical stimulation of the habenula markedly suppressed serotonergic neurons in the midbrain raphe. The suppression was blocked by systemic or microiontophoretic administration of picrotoxin, which suggests that gamma-aminobutyric acid is the inhibitory transmitter in the habenula-raphe pathway. These results support the concept that the habenula may serve a pivotal role in funneling information from the forebrain to the midbrain raphe.
During the initial phase of their development, sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) require target-derived trophic support for their survival, but as they mature they lose this requirement. Because many of these neurons express BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor) messenger RNA, we hypothesized that BDNF might act as an autocrine survival factor in adult DRG neurons, thus explaining their lack of dependence on exogenous growth factors. When cultured adult DRG cells were treated with antisense oligonucleotides to BDNF, expression of BDNF protein was reduced by 80%, and neuronal survival was reduced by 35%. These neurons could be rescued by exogenous BDNF or neurotrophin-3, but not by other growth factors. Similar results were obtained with single-neuron microcultures, whereas microcultures derived from mutant mice lacking BDNF were unaffected by antisense oligonucleotides. Our results strongly support an autocrine role for BDNF in mediating the survival of a subpopulation of adult DRG neurons.
Much of our behavior is guided by rules. Although human prefrontal cortex (PFC) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) are implicated in implementing rule-guided behavior, the crucial contributions made by different regions within these areas are not yet specified. In an attempt to bridge human neuropsychology and nonhuman primate neurophysiology, we report the effects of circumscribed lesions to macaque orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), principal sulcus (PS), superior dorsolateral PFC, ventrolateral PFC, or ACC sulcus, on separable cognitive components of a Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) analog. Only the PS lesions impaired maintenance of abstract rules in working memory; only the OFC lesions impaired rapid reward-based updating of representations of rule value; the ACC sulcus lesions impaired active reference to the value of recent choice-outcomes during rule-based decision-making.
An enduring controversy in neuroscience concerns how the brain "binds" together separately coded stimulus features to form unitary representations of objects. Recent evidence has indicated a close link between this binding process and 40-hertz (gamma-band) oscillations generated by localized neural circuits. In a separate line of research, the ability of young infants to perceive objects as unitary and bounded has become a central focus for debates about the mechanisms of perceptual development. Here we demonstrate that binding-related 40-hertz oscillations are evident in the infant brain around 8 months of age, which is the same age at which behavioral and event-related potential evidence indicates the onset of perceptual binding of spatially separated static visual features.
Epilepsies are a diverse collection of brain disorders that affect 1-2% of the population. Current therapies are unsatisfactory as they provide only symptomatic relief, are effective in only a subset of affected individuals, and are often accompanied by persistent toxic effects. It is hoped that insight into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of epileptogenesis will lead to new therapies, prevention, or even a cure. Emerging insights point to alterations of synaptic function and intrinsic properties of neurons as common mechanisms underlying the hyperexcitability in diverse forms of epilepsy.
The anterior part of the parietal association area in the cerebral cortex of primates has been implicated in the integration of somatosensory signals, which generate neural images of body parts and apposed objects and provide signals for sensorial guidance of movements. Here we show that this area is active in primates performing numerically based behavioural tasks. We required monkeys to select and perform movement A five times, switch to movement B for five repetitions, and return to movement A, in a cyclical fashion. Cellular activity in the superior parietal lobule reflected the number of self-movement executions. For the most part, the number-selective activity was also specific for the type of movement. This type of numerical representation of self-action was seen less often in the inferior parietal lobule, and rarely in the primary somatosensory cortex. Such activity in the superior parietal lobule is useful for processing numerical information, which is necessary to provide a foundation for the forthcoming motor selection.
During development, neurotrophins help shape the nervous system by regulating neuronal survival and differentiation. Neurotrophin-3 (refs 1-5) is the most abundant neurotrophin during early development. Neurons responsive to neurotrophin-3 in vitro include primary sensory, sympathetic, motor, enteric, locus coeruleus, hippocampal and cerebellar neurons (ref. 9 for example). Here we report that mice lacking neurotrophin-3 have severe deficits in sensory and sympathetic populations. These mice lack muscle spindles and show abnormal limb positions. In contrast, motor neurons, the enteric nervous system, and the major anatomical regions of the central nervous system seem to develop normally. Comparisons with mutants deficient in other neurotrophins or their receptors indicate that some neurons require more than one neurotrophin during embryogenesis and suggest that neurotrophin-3 functions by binding receptors in addition to its primary receptor trkC (ref. 16). In particular, neurotrophin-3 is essential for survival of sympathetic and sensory neurons that later become dependent on nerve growth factor or brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
In adult mammals, the adipocyte-derived hormone leptin acts on the brain to reduce food intake by regulating the activity of neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus (ARH). Here, we report that neural projection pathways from the ARH are permanently disrupted in leptin-deficient (Lepob/Lepob) mice and leptin treatment in adulthood does not reverse these neuroanatomical defects. However, treatment of Lepob/Lepob neonates with exogenous leptin rescues the development of ARH projections, and leptin promotes neurite outgrowth from ARH neurons in vitro. These results suggest that leptin plays a neurotrophic role during the development of the hypothalamus and that this activity is restricted to a neonatal critical period that precedes leptin's acute regulation of food intake in adults.
Alternative processing of the RNA transcribed from the calcitonin gene appears to result in the production of a messenger RNA in neural tissue distinct from that in thyroidal 'C' cells. The thyroid mRNA encodes a precursor to the hormone calcitonin whereas that in neural tissues generates a novel neuropeptide, referred to as calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). The distribution of CGRP-producing cells and pathways in the brain and other tissues suggests functions for the peptide in nociception, ingestive behaviour and modulation of the autonomic and endocrine systems. The approach described here permits the application of recombinant DNA technology to analyses of complex neurobiological systems in the absence of prior structural or biological information.
A soluble extract of rat skeletal muscle increased neurite outgrowth and cholinergic activity of dissociated ventral spinal neurons in culture. The effects were concentration-dependent, saturable, and labile in the presence of heat or trypsin. The morphological enhancement was produced only by skeletal muscle extract and decreased with developmental age, whereas the cholinergic enhancement was produced by extracts of cerebral cortex and cardiac and skeletal muscle and did not change with age. These changes were specific for ventral cord neurons, but no species specificity was observed with respect to the muscle source or the neuronal target.
Nicotine addiction begins with high-affinity binding of nicotine to acetylcholine (ACh) receptors in the brain. The end result is over 4,000,000 smoking-related deaths annually worldwide and the largest source of preventable mortality in developed countries. Stress reduction, pleasure, improved cognition and other central nervous system effects are strongly associated with smoking. However, if nicotine activated ACh receptors found in muscle as potently as it does brain ACh receptors, smoking would cause intolerable and perhaps fatal muscle contractions. Despite extensive pharmacological, functional and structural studies of ACh receptors, the basis for the differential action of nicotine on brain compared with muscle ACh receptors has not been determined. Here we show that at the alpha4beta2 brain receptors thought to underlie nicotine addiction, the high affinity for nicotine is the result of a strong cation-pi interaction to a specific aromatic amino acid of the receptor, TrpB. In contrast, the low affinity for nicotine at the muscle-type ACh receptor is largely due to the fact that this key interaction is absent, even though the immediate binding site residues, including the key amino acid TrpB, are identical in the brain and muscle receptors. At the same time a hydrogen bond from nicotine to the backbone carbonyl of TrpB is enhanced in the neuronal receptor relative to the muscle type. A point mutation near TrpB that differentiates alpha4beta2 and muscle-type receptors seems to influence the shape of the binding site, allowing nicotine to interact more strongly with TrpB in the neuronal receptor. ACh receptors are established therapeutic targets for Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease, smoking cessation, pain, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, epilepsy, autism and depression. Along with solving a chemical mystery in nicotine addiction, our results provide guidance for efforts to develop drugs that target specific types of nicotinic receptors.
The prefrontal cortex is important in the organization of goal-directed behaviour. When animals are trained to work for a particular goal or reward, reward 'expectancy' is processed by prefrontal neurons. Recent studies of the prefrontal cortex have concentrated on the role of working memory in the control of behaviour. In spatial delayed-response tasks, neurons in the prefrontal cortex show activity changes during the delay period between presentation of the cue and the reward, with some of the neurons being spatially specific (that is, responses vary with the cue position). Here I report that the delay activity in prefrontal neurons is dependent also on the particular reward received for the behavioural response, and to the way the reward is given. It seems that the prefrontal cortex may monitor the outcome of goal-directed behaviour.
Kinetics of the catecholainine uptake process in brain were altered by fighting. Significant increases in the apparent Michaelis constant (Km) for the uptake of norepinephrine into cerebral cortical homnogenates and significant increases in the inhibition constant (Ki) for d-amphetamnine inhibition of this uptake occurred in group-caged mice living under chronic attack from aggressive cage mates. Also, significant increases in the apparent Km and maximum velocity (Vmax) for norepinephrine uptake were observed 18 to 20 hours after the last of a series of short intense daily fights between male mice previously made aggressive by long-term individual caging. These results suggest that the natural stress of fighting leads to (i) lowered affinity for reuptake of norepinephrine into nerve endings of the cerebral cortex, (ii) an increase in the number of uptake sites, and (iii) lowered affinity for d-amphetamine.
Available evidence suggests that the propensity of digitalis glycosides to produce cardiac arrhythmias is due in part to their neuroexictatory effects. We have performed experiments in cats which support the existence of a neurogenic component in the etiology of digitalis-induced ventricular arrhythmias. Our data further indicate that the locus of this neural effect lies within an area of the medulla 2 millimeters above to 2 millimeters below the obex. These findings, when considered with the effects of polar cardiac glycosides that do not cross the blood-brain barrier, suggest that the area postrema may be the site of neural activation.
Several aspects of cortical organization are thought to remain plastic into adulthood, allowing cortical sensorimotor maps to be modified continuously by experience. This dynamic nature of cortical circuitry is important for learning, as well as for repair after injury to the nervous system. Electrophysiology studies suggest that adult macaque primary visual cortex (V1) undergoes large-scale reorganization within a few months after retinal lesioning, but this issue has not been conclusively settled. Here we applied the technique of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to detect changes in the cortical topography of macaque area V1 after binocular retinal lesions. fMRI allows non-invasive, in vivo, long-term monitoring of cortical activity with a wide field of view, sampling signals from multiple neurons per unit cortical area. We show that, in contrast with previous studies, adult macaque V1 does not approach normal responsivity during 7.5 months of follow-up after retinal lesions, and its topography does not change. Electrophysiology experiments corroborated the fMRI results. This indicates that adult macaque V1 has limited potential for reorganization in the months following retinal injury.
Neurotransmission at most excitatory synapses in the brain operates through two types of glutamate receptor termed alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate (AMPA) and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors; these mediate the fast and slow components of excitatory postsynaptic potentials respectively. Activation of NMDA receptors can also lead to a long-lasting modification in synaptic efficiency at glutamatergic synapses; this is exemplified in the CA1 region of the hippocampus, where NMDA receptors mediate the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP). It is believed that in this region LTP is maintained by a specific increase in the AMPA receptor-mediated component of synaptic transmission. We now report, however, that a pharmacologically isolated NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic response can undergo robust, synapse-specific LTP. This finding has implications for neuropathologies such as epilepsy and neurodegeneration, in which excessive NMDA receptor activation has been implicated. It adds fundamentally to theories of synaptic plasticity because NMDA receptor activation may, in addition to causing increased synaptic efficiency, directly alter the plasticity of synapses.
Sensory information is transmitted to the brain where it must be processed to translate stimulus features into appropriate behavioural output. In the olfactory system, distributed neural activity in the nose is converted into a segregated map in the olfactory bulb. Here we investigate how this ordered representation is transformed in higher olfactory centres in mice. We have developed a tracing strategy to define the neural circuits that convey information from individual glomeruli in the olfactory bulb to the piriform cortex and the cortical amygdala. The spatial order in the bulb is discarded in the piriform cortex; axons from individual glomeruli project diffusely to the piriform without apparent spatial preference. In the cortical amygdala, we observe broad patches of projections that are spatially stereotyped for individual glomeruli. These projections to the amygdala are overlapping and afford the opportunity for spatially localized integration of information from multiple glomeruli. The identification of a distributive pattern of projections to the piriform and stereotyped projections to the amygdala provides an anatomical context for the generation of learned and innate behaviours.
A sex-linked familial neurological disease consisting of cerebral palsy, mental retardation, choreoathetosis, and compulsive aggressive behavior is associated with a loss of an enzyme that participates in purine metabolism, namely, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase. The production of excessive uric acid in this disorder implies that the enzyme is involved in the normal regulation of purine biosynthesis. This is the first example of a relation between a specific enzyme defect and abnormal compulsive behavior. It is also the first enzyme defect in purine metabolism demonstrated in a neurological disease.
Unexpected, biologically salient stimuli elicit a short-latency, phasic response in midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons. Although this signal is important for reinforcement learning, the information it conveys to forebrain target structures remains uncertain. One way to decode the phasic DA signal would be to determine the perceptual properties of sensory inputs to DA neurons. After local disinhibition of the superior colliculus in anesthetized rats, DA neurons became visually responsive, whereas disinhibition of the visual cortex was ineffective. As the primary source of visual afferents, the limited processing capacities of the colliculus may constrain the visual information content of phasic DA responses.
Stimulus features such as edge orientation, motion direction and spatial frequency are thought to be encoded in the primary visual cortex by overlapping feature maps arranged so that the location of neurons activated by a particular combination of stimulus features can be predicted from the intersections of these maps. This view is based on the use of grating stimuli, which limit the range of stimulus combinations that can be examined. We used optical imaging of intrinsic signals in ferrets to assess patterns of population activity evoked by the motion of a texture (a field of iso-oriented bars). Here we show that the same neural population can be activated by multiple combinations of orientation, length, motion axis and speed. Rather than reflecting the intersection of multiple maps, our results indicate that population activity in primary visual cortex is better described as a single map of spatiotemporal energy.
Focal electroencephalographic discharges in lesions of cortex induced by freezing are associated with prolonged membrane depolarizations and hyperpolarizations in neurons located at various depths in the lesion sites. Transmembrane potential changes have properties similar to those of postsynaptic potentials. The temporal relationship between intracellular potentials and paroxysmal discharges indicates that the latter are extracellularly recorded summations of synchronously developing depolarizations and hyperpolarizations in complex synaptic organizations of neurons.
Functional and structural brain imaging has identified neural and neurotransmitter systems involved in schizophrenia and their link to cognitive and behavioural disturbances such as psychosis. Mapping such abnormalities in patients, however, cannot fully capture the strong neurodevelopmental component of schizophrenia that pre-dates manifest illness. A recent strategy to address this issue has been to focus on mechanisms of disease risk. Imaging genetics techniques have made it possible to define neural systems that mediate heritable risk linked to candidate and genome-wide-supported common variants, and mechanisms for environmental risk and gene-environment interactions are emerging. Characterizing the neural risk architecture of schizophrenia provides a translational research strategy for future treatments.
An electrophysiological stimulation paradigm similar to one that produces Pavlovian conditioning was applied to synaptic inputs to pyramidal neurons of hippocampal brain slices. Persistent synaptic enhancement was induced in one of two weak synaptic inputs by pairing high-frequency electrical stimulation of the weak input with stimulation of a third, stronger input to the same region. Forward (temporally overlapping) but not backward (temporally separate) pairings caused this enhancement. Thus hippocampal synapses in vitro can undergo the conditional and selective type of associative modification that could provide the substrate for some of the mnemonic functions in which the hippocampus is thought to participate.
Alzheimer's disease is characterized by a widespread functional disturbance of the human brain. Fibrillar amyloid proteins are deposited inside neurons as neurofibrillary tangles and extracellularly as amyloid plaque cores and in blood vessels. The major protein subunit (A4) of the amyloid fibril of tangles, plaques and blood vessel deposits is an insoluble, highly aggregating small polypeptide of relative molecular mass 4,500. The same polypeptide is also deposited in the brains of aged individuals with trisomy 21 (Down's syndrome). We have argued previously that the A4 protein is of neuronal origin and is the cleavage product of a larger precursor protein. To identify this precursor, we have now isolated and sequenced an apparently full-length complementary DNA clone coding for the A4 polypeptide. The predicted precursor consists of 695 residues and contains features characteristic of glycosylated cell-surface receptors. This sequence, together with the localization of its gene on chromosome 21, suggests that the cerebral amyloid deposited in Alzheimer's disease and aged Down's syndrome is caused by aberrant catabolism of a cell-surface receptor.
In presenting the neuropathology of asphyxia neonatorum and some related conditions, as illustrated in experiments with monkeys (12), I have tried to make six principal points. (i) Newborn monkeys need not be asphyxiated to the point of terminal apnea to suffer structural brain damage. Mental retardation has not been proved, but neither has it been excluded, in these monkeys. (ii) Asphyxia neonatorum requiring resuscitation of the offspring, which otherwise would die, is associated with a remarkably constant syndrome of bilaterally symmetrical, nonhemorrhagic lesions in thalamic and brain-stem nuclei, mainly those of afferent systems. The individuals in this category clearly are retarded. (iii) Asphyxia neonatorum of this second degree may be associated with postpartum complications leading to neocortical atrophy, often of considerable magnitude. The individuals are markedly retarded, often palsied, epileptic, and in a few instances even comatose. (iv) Increased intrauterine pressure in the monkey during prolonged labor leads to fetal and postpartum depression, in connection with which cerebral cortical injury occurs in the absence of typical asphyxial lesions. (v) The relationship of cerebral hemorrhages to mental retardation is not clear, but their presence at autopsy probably signifies trauma during birth, or is an agonal artifact associated with death after postpartum depression. (vi) Finally, kernicterus, a condition in which bile pigment escapes into the brain tissues from the blood when the bilirubin level is high and when there is, in combination with it, some depressing factor such as asphyxia, has been produced in the newborn monkey. It, too, is associated with mental retardation.
After long-term denervation of an upper limb in macaque monkeys, the representation of the face in somatosensory cortex expands over many millimeters into the silenced representation of the hand. Various brainstem and cortical mechanisms have been proposed to explain this phenomenon. Reorganization in the thalamus has been largely ignored. In monkeys with deafferented upper limbs for 12 to 20 years, it was found that the brainstem cuneate and the thalamic ventral posterior nuclei had undergone severe transneuronal atrophy, and physiological mapping in the thalamus revealed that the face and trunk representations were adjoined while the normally small representation of the lower face had expanded comparable to the expansion in cortex. Reorganization of brainstem and thalamic nuclei associated with slow transneuronal atrophy is likely to be a progressive process. When coupled with divergence of ascending connections, it is likely to make a substantial contribution to representational changes in cortex.
The responses of neurons in the visual cortex to stimuli presented within their receptive fields can be markedly modulated by stimuli presented in surrounding regions that do not themselves evoke responses. This modulation depends on the relative orientation and direction of motion of the centre and surround stimuli, and it has been suggested that local cortical circuits linking cells with similar stimulus selectivities underlie these phenomena. However, the functional relevance and nature of these integrative processes remain unclear. Here we investigate how such integration depends on the relative activity levels of neurons at different points across the cortex by varying the relative contrast of stimuli over the receptive field and surrounding regions. We show that simply altering the balance of the excitation driving centre and surround regions can dramatically change the sign and stimulus selectivity of these contextual effects. Thus, the way that single neurons integrate information across the visual field depends not only on the precise form of stimuli at different locations, but also crucially on their relative contrasts. We suggest that these effects reflect a complex gain-control mechanism that regulates cortical neuron responsiveness, which permits dynamic modification of response properties of cortical neurons.
Conventional antibodies have long been used in an attempt to produce specific neural markers. Such markers would be invaluable for studying the structural organization and development of the nervous system. Unfortunately, they have not been found to discriminate satisfactorily between neuronal subpopulations. Recent developments of the hybridoma technique, however, promise to provide monoclonal antibodies of adequate specificity. Such antibodies have already generated and shown to be capable of distinguishing between individual neurones of the leech nervous system. We report here two monoclonal antibodies which, although generated against human T cells, react exclusively with Purkinje cells in the vertebrate central nervous system (CNS). This new specificity arose out of a fortuitous observation made during examination of the lymphocyte infiltration of human cerebellar tumours with the monoclonal antibody, UCHT1. Although widely used as a T-cell marker, its reaction with neural tissue has not hitherto been described. To our knowledge, this is the first description of a monoclonal antibody which recognises discrete neuronal population in the vertebrate brain.
Pacemaker activity of spontaneously active neurons and heart cells is controlled by a depolarizing, mixed Na+/K+ current, named Ih (or I(f) in the sinoatrial node of the heart). This current is activated on hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane. In addition to depolarizing pacemaker cells, Ih is involved in determining the resting membrane potential of neurons and provides a mechanism to limit hyperpolarizing currents in these cells. Hormones and neurotransmitters that induce a rise in cyclic AMP levels increase Ih by a mechanism that is independent of protein phosphorylation, and which involves direct binding of the cyclic nucleotide to the channel that mediates Ih. Here we report the molecular cloning and functional expression of the gene encoding a hyperpolarization-activated cation channel (HAC1) that is present in brain and heart. This channel exhibits the general properties of Ih channels. We have also identified full-length sequences of two related channels, HAC2 and HAC3, that are specifically expressed in the brain, indicating the existence of a family of hyperpolarization-activated cation channels.
Visually guided reaching requires complex neural transformations to link visual and proprioceptive inputs with appropriate motor outputs. Despite the complexity of these transformations, hand-eye coordination in humans is remarkably flexible, as demonstrated by the ease with which reaching can be adapted to distortions in visual feedback. If subjects attempt to reach to visual targets while wearing displacing prisms, they initially misreach in the direction of visual displacement. Given feedback about their reaching errors, however, they quickly adapt to the visual distortion. This is shown by the gradual resumption of accurate reaching while the prisms remain in place, and by the immediate onset of reaching errors in the opposite direction after the prisms have been removed. Despite an abundance of psychophysical data on adaptation to prisms, the functional localization of this form of sensorimotor adaptation is uncertain. Here we use positron emission tomography (PET) to localize changes in regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in subjects who performed a prism-adaptation task as well as a task that controlled for the sensory, motor and cognitive conditions of the adaptation experiment. Difference images that reflected the net effects of the adaptation process showed selective activation of posterior parietal cortex contralateral to the reaching limb.
In the visual cortex of higher mammals, neurons are arranged across the cortical surface in an orderly map of preferred stimulus orientations. This map contains 'orientation pinwheels', structures that are arranged like the spokes of a wheel such that orientation changes continuously around a centre. Conventional optical imaging first demonstrated these pinwheels, but the technique lacked the spatial resolution to determine the response properties and arrangement of cells near pinwheel centres. Electrophysiological recordings later demonstrated sharply selective neurons near pinwheel centres, but it remained unclear whether they were arranged randomly or in an orderly fashion. Here we use two-photon calcium imaging in vivo to determine the microstructure of pinwheel centres in cat visual cortex with single-cell resolution. We find that pinwheel centres are highly ordered: neurons selective to different orientations are clearly segregated even in the very centre. Thus, pinwheel centres truly represent singularities in the cortical map. This highly ordered arrangement at the level of single cells suggests great precision in the development of cortical circuits underlying orientation selectivity.
There are two major angiotensin II receptor isoforms, AT1 and AT2. AT1 mediates the well-known pressor and mitogenic effects of angiotensin II, but the signalling mechanism and physiological role of AT2 has not been established. Its abundant expression in fetal tissues and certain brain nuclei suggest possible roles in growth, development and neuronal functions. Here we report the unexpected finding that the targeted disruption of the mouse AT2 gene resulted in a significant increase in blood pressure and increased sensitivity to the pressor action of angiotensin II. Thus AT2 mediates a depressor effect and antagonizes the AT1-mediated pressor action of angiotensin II. In addition, disruption of the AT2 gene attenuated exploratory behaviour and lowered body temperature. Our results show that angiotensin II activates AT1 and AT2, which have mutually counteracting haemodynamic effects, and that AT2 regulates central nervous system functions, including behaviour.
The extrinsic connections of the telencephalon of the nurse shark are very largely crossed and in this respect differ from those identified in all other vertebrate species so far examined. Studies with Nauta and Fink-Heimer methods have revealed telencephalic projections to the contralateral thalamus and optic tectum as well as to ipsilateral brainstem and rostral spinal cord.
Prion diseases can be infectious, sporadic and genetic. The infectious forms of these diseases, including bovine spongiform encephalopathy and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, are usually characterized by the accumulation in the brain of the transmissible pathogen, an abnormally folded isoform of the prion protein (PrP) termed PrPSc. However, certain inherited PrP mutations appear to cause neurodegeneration in the absence of PrPSc, working instead by favoured synthesis of CtmPrP, a transmembrane form of PrP. The relationship between the neurodegeneration seen in transmissible prion diseases involving PrPSc and that associated with ctmPrP has remained unclear. Here we find that the effectiveness of accumulated PrPSc in causing neurodegenerative disease depends upon the predilection of host-encoded PrP to be made in the ctmPrP form. Furthermore, the time course of PrPSc accumulation in transmissible prion disease is followed closely by increased generation of CtmPrP. Thus, the accumulation of PrPSc appears to modulate in trans the events involved in generating or metabolising CtmPrP. Together, these data suggest that the events of CtmPrP-mediated neurodegeneration may represent a common step in the pathogenesis of genetic and infectious prion diseases.
Although the sentences that we hear or read have meaning, this does not necessarily mean that they are also true. Relatively little is known about the critical brain structures for, and the relative time course of, establishing the meaning and truth of linguistic expressions. We present electroencephalogram data that show the rapid parallel integration of both semantic and world knowledge during the interpretation of a sentence. Data from functional magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the left inferior prefrontal cortex is involved in the integration of both meaning and world knowledge. Finally, oscillatory brain responses indicate that the brain keeps a record of what makes a sentence hard to interpret.
Sleep has been implicated in the plastic cerebral changes that underlie learning and memory. Indications that sleep participates in the consolidation of fresh memory traces come from a wide range of experimental observations. At the network level, reactivations during sleep of neuronal assemblies recently challenged by new environmental circumstances have been reported in different experimental designs. These neuronal assemblies are proposed to be involved in the processing of memory traces during sleep. However, despite this rapidly growing body of experimental data, evidence for the influence of sleep discharge patterns on memory traces remains fragmentary. The underlying role of sleep in learning and memory has yet to be precisely characterized.
Metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) found on synaptic terminals throughout the brain are thought to be important in modulating neurotransmission. Activation of mGluRs by synaptically released glutamate depresses glutamate release from excitatory terminals but the physiological role of mGluRs on inhibitory terminals is unclear. We have investigated activation of mGluRs on inhibitory terminals within the cerebellar glomerulus, a structure in which GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-releasing inhibitory terminals and glutamatergic excitatory terminals are in close apposition and make axo-dendritic synapses onto granule cells. Here we show that 'spillover' of glutamate, which is released from excitatory mossy fibres, inhibits GABA release from Golgi cell terminals by activating presynaptic mGluRs under physiological conditions. The magnitude of the depression of the inhibitory postsynaptic current is dependent on the frequency of mossy fibre stimulation, reaching 50% at 100 Hz. Furthermore, the duration of inhibitory postsynaptic current depression mirrors the time course of mossy fibre activity. Our results establish that mGluRs on inhibitory interneuron axons sense the activity of neighbouring excitatory synapses. This heterosynaptic mechanism is likely to boost the efficacy of active excitatory fibres by locally reducing the level of inhibition.
Over a century ago, Freud proposed that unwanted memories can be excluded from awareness, a process called repression. It is unknown, however, how repression occurs in the brain. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to identify the neural systems involved in keeping unwanted memories out of awareness. Controlling unwanted memories was associated with increased dorsolateral prefrontal activation, reduced hippocampal activation, and impaired retention of those memories. Both prefrontal cortical and right hippocampal activations predicted the magnitude of forgetting. These results confirm the existence of an active forgetting process and establish a neurobiological model for guiding inquiry into motivated forgetting.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a common, highly heritable neurodevelopmental condition characterized by marked genetic heterogeneity. Thus, a fundamental question is whether autism represents an aetiologically heterogeneous disorder in which the myriad genetic or environmental risk factors perturb common underlying molecular pathways in the brain. Here, we demonstrate consistent differences in transcriptome organization between autistic and normal brain by gene co-expression network analysis. Remarkably, regional patterns of gene expression that typically distinguish frontal and temporal cortex are significantly attenuated in the ASD brain, suggesting abnormalities in cortical patterning. We further identify discrete modules of co-expressed genes associated with autism: a neuronal module enriched for known autism susceptibility genes, including the neuronal specific splicing factor A2BP1 (also known as FOX1), and a module enriched for immune genes and glial markers. Using high-throughput RNA sequencing we demonstrate dysregulated splicing of A2BP1-dependent alternative exons in the ASD brain. Moreover, using a published autism genome-wide association study (GWAS) data set, we show that the neuronal module is enriched for genetically associated variants, providing independent support for the causal involvement of these genes in autism. In contrast, the immune-glial module showed no enrichment for autism GWAS signals, indicating a non-genetic aetiology for this process. Collectively, our results provide strong evidence for convergent molecular abnormalities in ASD, and implicate transcriptional and splicing dysregulation as underlying mechanisms of neuronal dysfunction in this disorder.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) affects more than 30% of people over 80 years of age. The aetiology and pathogenesis of this progressive dementia is poorly understood, but symptomatic disease is associated histopathologically with amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and neuronal loss primarily in the temporal lobe and neocortex of the brain. The core of the extracellular plaque is a derivative of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), referred to as beta/A4, and contains the amino-acid residues 29-42 that are normally embedded in the membrane-spanning region of the precursor. The cellular source of APP and the relationship of its deposition to the neuropathology of AD is unknown. To investigate the relationship between APP overexpression and amyloidogenesis, we have developed a vector to drive expression specifically in neurons of a C-terminal fragment of APP that contains the beta/A4 region, and have used a transgenic mouse system to insert and express this construct. We report here that overexpression of this APP transgene in neurons is sufficient to produce extracellular dense-core amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and neuronal degeneration similar to that in the AD brain.
Theta-phase precession in hippocampal place cells is one of the best-studied experimental models of temporal coding in the brain. Theta-phase precession is a change in spike timing in which the place cell fires at progressively earlier phases of the extracellular theta rhythm as the animal crosses the spatially restricted firing field of the neuron. Within individual theta cycles, this phase advance results in a compressed replication of the firing sequence of consecutively activated place cells along the animal's trajectory, at a timescale short enough to enable spike-time-dependent plasticity between neurons in different parts of the sequence. The neuronal circuitry required for phase precession has not yet been established. The fact that phase precession can be seen in hippocampal output stuctures such as the prefrontal cortex suggests either that efferent structures inherit the precession from the hippocampus or that it is generated locally in those structures. Here we show that phase precession is expressed independently of the hippocampus in spatially modulated grid cells in layer II of medial entorhinal cortex, one synapse upstream of the hippocampus. Phase precession is apparent in nearly all principal cells in layer II but only sparsely in layer III. The precession in layer II is not blocked by inactivation of the hippocampus, suggesting that the phase advance is generated in the grid cell network. The results point to possible mechanisms for grid formation and raise the possibility that hippocampal phase precession is inherited from entorhinal cortex.
Stroke is the third leading cause of death, and vascular dementia the second cause of dementia after Alzheimer's disease. CADASIL (for cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) causes a type of stroke and dementia whose key features include recurrent subcortical ischaemic events and vascular dementia and which is associated with diffuse white-matter abnormalities on neuroimaging. Pathological examination reveals multiple small, deep cerebral infarcts, a leukoencephalopathy, and a non-atherosclerotic, non-amyloid angiopathy involving mainly the small cerebral arteries. Severe alterations of vascular smooth-muscle cells are evident on ultrastructural analysis. We have previously mapped the mutant gene to chromosome 19. Here we report the characterization of the human Notch3 gene which we mapped to the CADASIL critical region. We have identified mutations in CADASIL patients that cause serious disruption of this gene, indicating that Notch3 could be the defective protein in CADASIL patients.
Although objects that have just been seen may persist in memory automatically for a time and interact passively with incoming stimulation, some tasks require that the memory be actively maintained and used. To test for the existence of separate automatic and volitional mechanisms of short-term memory, recordings were made from neurons in the inferior temporal cortex of monkeys while the monkeys held a sample picture "in mind" and signaled when it was repeated in a sequence of pictures, ignoring other stimulus repetitions. Some neurons were suppressed by any picture repetition, regardless of relevance, whereas others were enhanced, but only when a picture matched the sample. Short-term memory appears to reflect the parallel operation of these two mechanisms--one being automatic and the other active.
Neuroleukin is a neurotrophic factor of relative molecular mass (Mr) 56,000 (56K) found in skeletal muscle, brain, heart and kidneys which supports the survival of embryonic spinal neurones, skeletal motor neurones and sensory neurones. Neuroleukin is also a lymphokine product of lectin-stimulated T cells and induces immunoglobulin secretion by cultured human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Mouse neuroleukin has been cloned, the complete nucleotide sequence has been determined and its complementary DNA has been transiently expressed in monkey COS-1 cells. The serum-free supernatant of the transfected, but not of control mock-transfected, cells was shown to mimic the properties of neuroleukin isolated from mouse salivary glands. In our work on the molecular genetics of carbohydrate metabolism we have recently isolated a mouse glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (or phosphoglucose isomerase, PGI) cDNA clone using the yeast PGI gene (PGI 1) as a probe. We report here that there is complete sequence identity between the 759 nucleotides at the 3' end of this clone (coding and non-coding) and the sequence of mouse neuroleukin.
Averaged evoked responses of somatosensory cortex, recorded subdurally, appeared with stimuli (skin, ventral posterolateral nucleus, cortex) which were subthreshold for sensation. Such responses were deficient in late components. Subthreshold stimuli could elicit sensation with suitable repetition. The primary evoked response was not sufficient for sensation. These facts bear on the problems of neurophysiological correlates of conscious and unconscious experience, and of "subliminal perception."
The hypothesis that the action of hallucinogenic drugs is mediated by a depression of the activity of brain serotonergic (raphe) neurons was tested by examining the behavioral effects of d-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) while studying the activity of raphe neurons in freely moving cats. Although the results provide general support for the hypothesis, there were several important dissociations. (i) Low doses of LSD produced only small decreases in raphe unit activity but significant behavoiral changes; (ii) LSD-induced behavioral changes outlasted the depression of raphe unit activity; and (iii) raphe neurons were at least as responsive to LSD during tolerance as they were in the nontolerant condition.
Functional circuits in the adult neocortex adjust to novel sensory experience, but the underlying synaptic mechanisms remain unknown. Growth and retraction of dendritic spines with synapse formation and elimination could change brain circuits. In the apical tufts of layer 5B (L5B) pyramidal neurons in the mouse barrel cortex, a subset of dendritic spines appear and disappear over days, whereas most spines are persistent for months. Under baseline conditions, new spines are mostly transient and rarely survive for more than a week. Transient spines tend to be small, whereas persistent spines are usually large. Because most excitatory synapses in the cortex occur on spines, and because synapse size and the number of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptors are proportional to spine volume, the excitation of pyramidal neurons is probably driven through synapses on persistent spines. Here we test whether the generation and loss of persistent spines are enhanced by novel sensory experience. We repeatedly imaged dendritic spines for one month after trimming alternate whiskers, a paradigm that induces adaptive functional changes in neocortical circuits. Whisker trimming stabilized new spines and destabilized previously persistent spines. New-persistent spines always formed synapses. They were preferentially added on L5B neurons with complex apical tufts rather than simple tufts. Our data indicate that novel sensory experience drives the stabilization of new spines on subclasses of cortical neurons. These synaptic changes probably underlie experience-dependent remodelling of specific neocortical circuits.
A noninvasive technique has been developed to measure and display local cerebral blood flow (LCBF) in vivo. In this procedure, nonradioactive xenon gas is inhaled and the temporal changes in radiographic enhancement produced by the inhalation are measured by sequential computerized tomography. The time-dependent xenon concentrations in various anatomical units in the brain are used to derive both the local partition coefficient and the LCBF. Functional mapping of blood flow with excellent anatomical specificity has been obtained in the baboon brain. The response of LCBF to stimuli such as changes in carbon dioxide concentrations as well as the variability in LCBF in normal and diseased tissue can be easily demonstrated. This method is applicable to the study of human physiology and pathologic blood flow alterations.
During the past two years, more than 1,000 cases of a neurological disorder of cattle, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), have been confirmed from farms throughout Great Britain. The neurological signs and brain pathology of BSE resemble those produced in other species by the pathogens of scrapie and related disorders. The discovery of fibrils similar to scrapie-associated fibrils in detergent extracts o BSE-affected brain supported the clinical and pathological diagnosis of the disease, but has been controversial. Scrapie-associated fibrils are found in brain extracts of all species affected by scrapie and diseases caused by related pathogens. They are pathological aggregates of a neuronal membrane protein termed PrP and a protease-resistant form of PrP is a molecular marker of scrapie-associated fibrils. In this report, we show the major protein of BSE fibrils is the bovine homologue of PrP as judged by its size, protease resistance, immunoreactivity, lectin binding and partial N-terminal protein sequence. This confirms that BSE is a scrapie-like disease.
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) opens the blood-brain barrier of mice to the enzymatic tracer horseradish peroxidase. A single injection of horseradish peroxidase in 10 to 15 percent DMSO into the tail vein along with 10 to 15 percent DMSO delivered intraperitoneally allowed horseradish peroxidase to fill the extracellular clefts throughout the brain within 2 hours. In the absence of DMSO, peroxidase failed to enter brain parenchyma except through the circumventricular organs. Opening of the blood-brain barrier by DMSO is reversible. Dimethyl sulfoxide stimulated the pinocytosis of horseradish peroxidase by the cerebral endothelium; the peroxidase was then directed to lysosomal dense bodies for degradation. Vesicular transport of horseradish peroxidase from the luminal to the abluminal wall of the endothelial cell was not observed. Dimethyl sulfoxide did not alter the morphology of endothelial cells or brain parenchyma.
Puromycin, in dosages that inhibit cerebral protein synthesis and expression of memory in mice, produces swelling of neuronal mitochondria. Acetoxycycloheximide, which inhibits cerebral protein synthesis to the same extent as puromycin, fails to produce swelling of neuronal mitochondria. Puromycin and heximide mixtures produce severe inhibition of protein synthesis, but result in a minimal swelling of neuronal mitochondria and in a decrease of peptidylpuromycin complexes to a level of 30 percent of that following the injection of puromycin alone. It is concluded that swelling of neuronal mitochondria in the presence of puromycin is not due to inhibition of cerebral protein synthesis per se, but is related to a specific action of puromycin on ribosomal protein synthesis. The findings are consistent with the hypothesis that peptidyl-puromycin complexes are responsible for mitochondrial swelling.
Infusions of monosodium-L-glutamate into the rostral hypothalamus, believed to contain neurons mediating satiety, produced persistent hyperphagia and obesity, thus suggesting that a brain lesion had been produced. Similar infusions into the caudal hypothalamus, believed to contain unmyelinated axons of passage that mediate satiety, failed to alter food intake or body weight. Histological examination of the affected tissue confirmed the behavioral evidence that suggests that this technique spares axons but destroys cell bodies. Infusion of several other amino acids also damaged neurons while sparing axons of passage.
Bidirectional changes in the efficacy of neuronal synaptic transmission, such as hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), are thought to be mechanisms for information storage in the brain. LTP and LTD may be mediated by the modulation of AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazloe proprionic acid) receptor phosphorylation. Here we show that LTP and LTD reversibly modify the phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor GluR1 subunit. However, contrary to the hypothesis that LTP and LTD are the functional inverse of each other, we find that they are associated with phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, respectively, of distinct GluR1 phosphorylation sites. Moreover, the site modulated depends on the stimulation history of the synapse. LTD induction in naive synapses dephosphorylates the major cyclic-AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) site, whereas in potentiated synapses the major calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) site is dephosphorylated. Conversely, LTP induction in naive synapses and depressed synapses increases phosphorylation of the CaMKII site and the PKA site, respectively. LTP is differentially sensitive to CaMKII and PKA inhibitors depending on the history of the synapse. These results indicate that AMPA receptor phosphorylation is critical for synaptic plasticity, and that identical stimulation conditions recruit different signal-transduction pathways depending on synaptic history.
Experience-dependent plasticity in the brain requires balanced excitation-inhibition. How individual circuit elements contribute to plasticity outcome in complex neocortical networks remains unknown. Here we report an intracellular analysis of ocular dominance plasticity-the loss of acuity and cortical responsiveness for an eye deprived of vision in early life. Unlike the typical progressive loss of pyramidal-cell bias, direct recording from fast-spiking cells in vivo reveals a counterintuitive initial shift towards the occluded eye followed by a late preference for the open eye, consistent with a spike-timing-dependent plasticity rule for these inhibitory neurons. Intracellular pharmacology confirms a dynamic switch of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) impact to pyramidal cells following deprivation in juvenile mice only. Together these results suggest that the bidirectional recruitment of an initially binocular GABA circuit may contribute to experience-dependent plasticity in the developing visual cortex.
After injection of [3H]dihydrotestosterone, a major testosterone metabolite, radioactivity is concentrated in nuclei of certain cells in the midbrain, pons, medulla oblongata, cerebellum, and spinal cord. While there is some overlap between androgen and estrogen target neuron distribution, certain motor neurons appear to be selectively labeled by androgen; in contrast, estrogen localization prevails in sensory neurons. These results may help to explain why male sexual behavior in some rodents is not fully activated with dihydrotestosterone alone but in addition requires estradiol, a testosterone metabolite.
The visual environment is perceived as an organized whole of objects and their surroundings. In many visual cortical areas, however, neurons are typically activated when a stimulus is presented over a very limited portion of the visual field, the receptive field of that neuron. To bridge the gap between this piecewise neuronal analysis and our global visual percepts, it has been postulated that neurons representing elements of the same object fire in synchrony to represent the perceptual organization of a scene. Experiments with stimuli such as moving bars or gratings have provided evidence for this hypothesis. We have further tested this by presenting monkeys with various textured scenes consisting of a figure on a background, and recorded neuronal activity in the primary visual cortex (area V1). Our results show no systematic relationship between the synchrony of firing of pairs of neurons and the perceptual organization of the scene. Instead, pairs of recording sites representing elements of the same figure most commonly showed equal amounts of synchrony between them as did pairs of which one site represented the figure and the other the background. We conclude that synchrony in V1 does not reflect the binding of features that leads to texture segregation.
Carbon monoxide, an activator of guanylyl cyclase, is formed by the action of the enzyme heme oxygenase. By in situ hybridization in brain slices, discrete neuronal localization of messenger RNA for the constitutive form of heme oxygenase throughout the brain has been demonstrated. This localization is essentially the same as that for soluble guanylyl cyclase messenger RNA. In primary cultures of olfactory neurons, zinc protoporphyrin-9, a potent selective inhibitor of heme oxygenase, depletes endogenous guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP). Thus, carbon monoxide, like nitric oxide, may be a physiologic regulator of cGMP. These findings, together with the neuronal localizations of heme oxygenase, suggest that carbon monoxide may function as a neurotransmitter.
Pathfinding by growing axons in the developing nervous system may be guided by gradients of extracellular guidance factors. Analogous to the process of chemotaxis in microorganisms, we found that axonal growth cones of cultured Xenopus spinal neurons exhibit adaptation during chemotactic migration, undergoing consecutive phases of desensitization and resensitization in the presence of increasing basal concentrations of the guidance factor netrin-1 or brain-derived neurotrophic factor. The desensitization is specific to the guidance factor and is accompanied by a reduction of Ca2+ signalling, whereas resensitization requires activation of mitogen-associated protein kinase and local protein synthesis. Such adaptive behaviour allows the growth cone to re-adjust its sensitivity over a wide range of concentrations of the guidance factor, an essential feature for long-range chemotaxis.
Both subjective and electroencephalographic arousal diminish as a function of the duration of prior wakefulness. Data reported here suggest that the major criteria for a neural sleep factor mediating the somnogenic effects of prolonged wakefulness are satisfied by adenosine, a neuromodulator whose extracellular concentration increases with brain metabolism and which, in vitro, inhibits basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. In vivo microdialysis measurements in freely behaving cats showed that adenosine extracellular concentrations in the basal forebrain cholinergic region increased during spontaneous wakefulness as contrasted with slow wave sleep; exhibited progressive increases during sustained, prolonged wakefulness; and declined slowly during recovery sleep. Furthermore, the sleep-wakefulness profile occurring after prolonged wakefulness was mimicked by increased extracellular adenosine induced by microdialysis perfusion of an adenosine transport inhibitor in the cholinergic basal forebrain but not by perfusion in a control noncholinergic region.
The receptive field of a visual neuron is classically defined as the region of space (or retina) where a visual stimulus evokes a change in its firing activity. At the cortical level, a challenging issue concerns the roles of feedforward, local recurrent, intracortical, and cortico-cortical feedback connectivity in receptive field properties. Intracellular recordings in cat area 17 showed that the visually evoked synaptic integration field extends over a much larger area than that established on the basis of spike activity. Synaptic depolarizing responses to stimuli flashed at increasing distances from the center of the receptive field decreased in strength, whereas their onset latency increased. These findings suggest that subthreshold responses in the unresponsive region surrounding the classical discharge field result from the integration of visual activation waves spread by slowly conducting horizontal axons within primary visual cortex.
Rats given intraventricular injections of 6-hydroxydopamine after pretreatment with pargyline become aphagic and adipsic, and show severe loss of brain catecholamines. Like rats with lateral hypothalamic lesions, these animals gradually recover ingestive behaviors, although catecholamine depletions are permanent. Both groups decrease food and water intakes markedly after the administration of alpha-methyltyrosine, at doses that do not affect the ingestive behaviors of control rats. Thus, both the loss and recovery of feeding and drinking behaviors may involve central catecholamine-containing neurons.
Cytochrome oxidase (cytochrome c oxidase; ferrocytochrome c: oxygen oxidoreductase, EC 1.9.2.1) has been introduced as an oxidative metabolic marker for neurones in the central nervous system. Previous studies have shown that mature neurones remained sensitive to altered functional demands, and that both developing and adult neurones responded to sensory deprivation or deafferentation by reducing their cytochrome oxidase (Cyt. Ox.) activity. More recently, we showed that the blockage of retinal impulse transmission with tetrodotoxin led to a reversible reduction in Cyt. Ox. staining of affected lateral geniculate (LGN) and striate neurones in adult cats. The present study sought to extend these findings to adult monkeys, where Cyt. Ox. 'puffs' or 'blobs' are uniquely present in the visual cortex. We found that, while the retina remained histologically intact, with only moderate decreases in Cyt. Ox. staining of large ganglion cells and the two plexiform layers, subtle changes occurred in the LGN as early as 1 day post-tetrodotoxin injection, and clear reduction in enzyme levels was evident in both the LGN and the visual cortex by 3 days. Changes became progressively more severe up to 4 weeks post-injection. Within area 17, alternating bands of high and low Cyt. Ox. staining occurred in lamina IV, with alternating rows of dark and lightly reactive puffs superimposed in exact register. Thus, the mature visual neurones in the primate remain extremely sensitive to the cessation of retinal impulse transmission, and plastic metabolic changes occur through several synapses along the sensory pathway.
The production of specialized differentiated neurons derived from stem cells has been proposed as a revolutionary technology for regenerative medicine. However, few examples of specific neuronal cell differentiation have been described so far. Although stem-cell tissue replacement might be seemingly straightforward in other cases, the high degree of complexity of the nervous system raises the challenge of tissue replacement substantially. Understanding mechanisms of neuronal diversification will not only be relevant for therapeutic purposes but might also shed light on the differences in cognitive abilities, personality traits and psychiatric conditions observed in humans.
By using the (14C)2-deoxyglucose method, inhibition has been shown to be a metabolically active process at the level of the synapse. This is supported by recent results from magnetic resonance spectroscopy that related the changes in neuroenergetics occurring with functional activation to neurotransmitter cycling. However, inhibitory synapses are less numerous and strategically better located than excitatory synapses, indicating that inhibition may be more efficient, and therefore less energy-consuming, than excitation. Here we test this hypothesis using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging in volunteers whose motor cortex was inhibited during the no-go condition of a go/no-go task, as demonstrated by transcranial magnetic stimulation. Unlike excitation, inhibition evoked no measurable change in the blood-oxygenation-level-dependent signal in the motor cortex, indicating that inhibition is less metabolically demanding. Therefore, the 'activation' seen in functional imaging studies probably results from excitation rather than inhibition.
In the brain, fast oscillations of local field potentials, which are thought to arise from the coherent and rhythmic activity of large numbers of neurons, were observed first in the olfactory system and have since been described in many neocortical areas. The importance of these oscillations in information coding, however, is controversial. Here, local field potential and intracellular recordings were obtained from the antennal lobe and mushroom body of the locust Schistocerca americana. Different odors evoked coherent oscillations in different, but usually overlapping, ensembles of neurons. The phase of firing of individual neurons relative to the population was not dependent on the odor. The components of a coherently oscillating ensemble of neurons changed over the duration of a single exposure to an odor. It is thus proposed that odors are encoded by specific but dynamic assemblies of coherently oscillating neurons. Such distributed and temporal representation of complex sensory signals may facilitate combinatorial coding and associative learning in these, and possibly other, sensory networks.
Potassium channels in neurons are linked by guanine nucleotide binding (G) proteins to numerous neurotransmitter receptors. The ability of Go, the predominant G protein in the brain, to stimulate potassium channels was tested in cell-free membrane patches of hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Four distinct types of potassium channels, which were otherwise quiescent, were activated by both isolated brain G0 and recombinant Go alpha. Hence brain Go can couple diverse brain potassium channels to neurotransmitter receptors.
A 3-micromolar concentration of tetrodotoxin completely inhibits the stimulation of respiration of rat brain cortex that takes place upon application of electrical impulses. It also inhibits increase in the rate of the respiration that occurs when calcium ions are omitted from the incubation medium. No effect of tetrodotoxin on brain respiration takes place when stimulation is brought about by the addition of 100 millimolar potassium chloride. Tetrodotoxin prevents the fall in the rate of oxidation of cerebral acetate that occurs during electrical stimulation but does not affect the increased rate of the oxidation that occurs in the presence of an increased concentration of potassium chloride. The data indicate that oxidation of cerebral acetate is diminished by influx of sodium ions, which is prevented by tetrodotoxin, and is increased by influx of potassium ions, which is unaffected by tetrodotoxin.
Neurons are born in the ventricular walls of the vertebrate central nervous system. From there, the young neurons migrate to their final destinations, where differentiation occurs. Neuronal migration has been described during the ontogeny of the avian and mammalian brain. Whereas in mammals most neurogenesis occurs during early development, in the adult avian forebrain wide-spread neurogenesis continues to occur. How do neurons born in adulthood reach their final destination? We report here that small elongated cells, born in the ventricular zone adjacent to the lateral ventricle, differentiate into mature neurons 20-40 days later, after migrating over distances of up to 5 mm. Migration rates are highest (28 micron h-1) when young neurons migrate through regions which are rich in radial glia. The adult vertebrate brain offers unique opportunities for studying factors that regulate neuronal migration, pathfinding and differentiation.
Categorization is a process by which the brain assigns meaning to sensory stimuli. Through experience, we learn to group stimuli into categories, such as 'chair', 'table' and 'vehicle', which are critical for rapidly and appropriately selecting behavioural responses. Although much is known about the neural representation of simple visual stimulus features (for example, orientation, direction and colour), relatively little is known about how the brain learns and encodes the meaning of stimuli. We trained monkeys to classify 360 degrees of visual motion directions into two discrete categories, and compared neuronal activity in the lateral intraparietal (LIP) and middle temporal (MT) areas, two interconnected brain regions known to be involved in visual motion processing. Here we show that neurons in LIP--an area known to be centrally involved in visuo-spatial attention, motor planning and decision-making-robustly reflect the category of motion direction as a result of learning. The activity of LIP neurons encoded directions of motion according to their category membership, and that encoding shifted after the monkeys were retrained to group the same stimuli into two new categories. In contrast, neurons in area MT were strongly direction selective but carried little, if any, explicit category information. This indicates that LIP might be an important nexus for the transformation of visual direction selectivity to more abstract representations that encode the behavioural relevance, or meaning, of stimuli.
The neurotrophin receptor TrkB is essential for normal function of the mammalian brain. It is expressed in three splice variants. Full-length receptors (TrkB(FL)) possess an intracellular tyrosine kinase domain and are considered as those TrkB receptors that mediate the crucial effects of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) or neurotrophin 4/5 (NT-4/5). By contrast, truncated receptors (TrkB-T1 and TrkB-T2) lack tyrosine kinase activity and have not been reported to elicit rapid intracellular signalling. Here we show that astrocytes predominately express TrkB-T1 and respond to brief application of BDNF by releasing calcium from intracellular stores. The calcium transients are insensitive to the tyrosine kinase blocker K-252a and persist in mutant mice lacking TrkB(FL). By contrast, neurons produce rapid BDNF-evoked signals through TrkB(FL) and the Na(v)1.9 channel. Expression of antisense TrkB messenger RNA strongly reduces BDNF-evoked calcium signals in glia. Thus, our results show that, unexpectedly, TrkB-T1 has a direct signalling role in mediating inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate-dependent calcium release; in addition, they identify a previously unknown mechanism of neurotrophin action in the brain.
Recent studies of animals with complex nervous systems, including humans and other primates, have improved our understanding of how the brain accomplishes learning and memory. Major themes of recent work include the locus of memory storage, the taxonomy of memory, the distinction between declarative and procedural knowledge, and the question of how memory changes with time, that is, the concepts of forgetting and consolidation. An important recent advance is the development of an animal model of human amnesia in the monkey. The animal model, together with newly available neuropathological information from a well-studied human patient, has permitted the identification of brain structures and connections involved in memory functions.
Brain function requires precisely orchestrated connectivity between neurons. Establishment of these connections is believed to require signals secreted from outgrowing axons, followed by synapse formation between selected neurons. Deletion of a single protein, Munc18-1, in mice leads to a complete loss of neurotransmitter secretion from synaptic vesicles throughout development. However, this does not prevent normal brain assembly, including formation of layered structures, fiber pathways, and morphologically defined synapses. After assembly is completed, neurons undergo apoptosis, leading to widespread neurodegeneration. Thus, synaptic connectivity does not depend on neurotransmitter secretion, but its maintenance does. Neurotransmitter secretion probably functions to validate already established synaptic connections.
The mammalian cerebral cortex consists of many structurally and functionally specialized areas, with characteristic input from particular nuclei of the thalamus. Some localized external influence, such as the arrival of fibres from the appropriate thalamic nucleus before or around the time of birth, could trigger the emergence of committed cortical fields from an undifferentiated 'protocortex. The guidance of axons from each thalamic nucleus to its appropriate target area in the cortex could, then, be crucial in the regulation of cortical differentiation. Recently, Yamamoto et al. and Bolz et al. have demonstrated that cocultured explants of rat lateral geniculate nucleus and visual cortex can form layer-specific interconnections. We have now tested the possibility that each cortical area exerts a selective trophic influence on axons from its appropriate thalamic nucleus, and vice versa, by coculturing explants of different regions of the thalamus and cortex taken at various stages of development. Although thalamo-cortical and cortico-thalamic connections formed in vitro can be remarkably normal in many respects, they lack regional specificity.
During a critical restricted period of postnatal development, the visual cortical circuitry is susceptible to modifications that are dependent on experience. If vision is restricted to only one eye during this period, the territories innervated by the deprived eye shrink considerably, whereas those innervated by the non-deprived eye expand, and the deprived eye loses the ability to influence almost all of the cells in the cortex. Thus, changes in ocular dominance are paralleled and possibly mediated by synapse elimination and axonal sprouting. Hypotheses about the mechanisms underlying ocular-dominance plasticity assume the activation of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors and subsequent calcium influx as a trigger of synaptic modifications. In addition, plasticity relies on functional neuromodulatory afferents. On the basis of immunocytochemical studies, it was recently proposed that the presence of immature astrocytes is a prerequisite for visual cortical plasticity, and that the end of the critical period is causally linked to the maturation of astrocytes. Here we report, in support of this hypothesis, that resupplementation of the visual cortex of adult cats with astrocytes cultured from the visual cortex of newborn kittens reinduces ocular-dominance plasticity in adult animals.
Echolocating bats determine distance to targets by the time delay between their emitted biosonar pulses and the returning echoes. By varying the delay between synthetic pulses and echoes in stimulus pairs at various repetition rates and durations, neurons have been found in the auditory cortex of the mustache bat (Pteronotus parnellii rubiginosus) which are sensitive to target range during the search, approach, and terminal phases of prey capture or landing. Two classes of range-sensitive neurons were found: (i) tracking neurons, whose best delay for response to an echo following the emitted pulse becomes shorter and narrower as the bat closes in on the target, and (ii) range-tuned neurons, whose best delay is constant, and which respond to the target only when it is within a certain narrow fixed range. Range-tuned neurons are specialized for processing echoes only during a particular period of the search, approach, or terminal phases of echolocation, and they provide support for a theory of ranging in bats that incorporates groups of neurons with a spectrum of preferred echo delays to detect target distance.
Songbirds are capable of vocal learning and communication and are ideally suited to the study of neural mechanisms of complex sensory and motor processing. Vocal communication in a noisy bird colony and vocal learning of a specific song template both require the ability to monitor auditory feedback to distinguish self-generated vocalizations from external sounds and to identify mismatches between the developing song and a memorized template acquired from a tutor. However, neurons that respond to auditory feedback from vocal output have not been found in song-control areas despite intensive searching. Here we investigate feedback processing outside the traditional song system, in single auditory forebrain neurons of juvenile zebra finches that were in a late developmental stage of song learning. Overall, we found similarity of spike responses during singing and during playback of the bird's own song, with song responses commonly leading by a few milliseconds. However, brief time-locked acoustic perturbations of auditory feedback revealed complex sensitivity that could not be predicted from passive playback responses. Some neurons that responded to playback perturbations did not respond to song perturbations, which is reminiscent of sensory-motor mirror neurons. By contrast, some neurons were highly feedback sensitive in that they responded vigorously to song perturbations, but not to unperturbed songs or perturbed playback. These findings suggest that a computational function of forebrain auditory areas may be to detect errors between actual feedback and mirrored feedback deriving from an internal model of the bird's own song or that of its tutor. Such feedback-sensitive spikes could constitute the key signals that trigger adaptive motor responses to song disruptions or reinforce exploratory motor gestures for vocal learning.
More than half of the world's population now lives in cities, making the creation of a healthy urban environment a major policy priority. Cities have both health risks and benefits, but mental health is negatively affected: mood and anxiety disorders are more prevalent in city dwellers and the incidence of schizophrenia is strongly increased in people born and raised in cities. Although these findings have been widely attributed to the urban social environment, the neural processes that could mediate such associations are unknown. Here we show, using functional magnetic resonance imaging in three independent experiments, that urban upbringing and city living have dissociable impacts on social evaluative stress processing in humans. Current city living was associated with increased amygdala activity, whereas urban upbringing affected the perigenual anterior cingulate cortex, a key region for regulation of amygdala activity, negative affect and stress. These findings were regionally and behaviourally specific, as no other brain structures were affected and no urbanicity effect was seen during control experiments invoking cognitive processing without stress. Our results identify distinct neural mechanisms for an established environmental risk factor, link the urban environment for the first time to social stress processing, suggest that brain regions differ in vulnerability to this risk factor across the lifespan, and indicate that experimental interrogation of epidemiological associations is a promising strategy in social neuroscience.
Senile plaques accumulate over the course of decades in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease. A fundamental tenet of the amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease is that the deposition of amyloid-beta precedes and induces the neuronal abnormalities that underlie dementia. This idea has been challenged, however, by the suggestion that alterations in axonal trafficking and morphological abnormalities precede and lead to senile plaques. The role of microglia in accelerating or retarding these processes has been uncertain. To investigate the temporal relation between plaque formation and the changes in local neuritic architecture, we used longitudinal in vivo multiphoton microscopy to sequentially image young APPswe/PS1d9xYFP (B6C3-YFP) transgenic mice. Here we show that plaques form extraordinarily quickly, over 24 h. Within 1-2 days of a new plaque's appearance, microglia are activated and recruited to the site. Progressive neuritic changes ensue, leading to increasingly dysmorphic neurites over the next days to weeks. These data establish plaques as a critical mediator of neuritic pathology.
A distinct subpopulation of striatal aspiny neurons, containing the enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase, is preserved in the caudate nucleus in Huntington's disease. Biochemical assays confirmed a significant increase in the activity of this enzyme in both the caudate nucleus and putamen in postmortem brain tissue from patients with this disease. The resistance of these neurons suggests that the gene defect in Huntington's disease may be modifiable by the local biochemical environment. This finding may provide insight into the nature of the genetically programmed cell death that is a characteristic of the disease.
The dendrites of mammalian pyramidal neurons contain a rich collection of active conductances that can support Na+ and Ca2+ action potentials (for a review see ref. 1). The presence, site of initiation, and direction of propagation of Na+ and Ca2+ action potentials are, however, controversial, and seem to be sensitive to resting membrane potential, ionic composition, and degree of channel inactivation, and depend on the intensity and pattern of synaptic stimulation. This makes it difficult to extrapolate from in vitro experiments to the situation in the intact brain. Here we show that two-photon excitation laser scanning microscopy can penetrate the highly scattering tissue of the intact brain. We used this property to measure sensory stimulus-induced dendritic [Ca2+] dynamics of layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons of the rat primary vibrissa (Sm1) cortex in vivo. Simultaneous recordings of intracellular voltage and dendritic [Ca2+] dynamics during whisker stimulation or current injection showed increases in [Ca2+] only in coincidence with Na+ action potentials. The amplitude of these [Ca2+] transients at a given location was approximately proportional to the number of Na+ action potentials in a short burst. The amplitude for a given number of action potentials was greatest in the proximal apical dendrite and declined steeply with increasing distance from the soma, with little Ca2+ accumulation in the most distal branches, in layer 1. This suggests that widespread Ca2+ action potentials were not generated, and any significant [Ca2+] increase depends on somatically triggered Na+ action potentials.
Databases for neuroscience must handle large volumes of image and graphical data as well as domain knowledge. Several software development efforts are addressing these issues in an attempt to aid the acquisition, analysis and exchange of complex data sets.
Neural ensemble processing of sensorimotor information during behavior was investigated by simultaneously recording up to 48 single neurons at multiple relays of the rat trigeminal somatosensory system. Cortical, thalamic, and brainstem neurons exhibited widespread 7- to 12-hertz synchronous oscillations, which began during attentive immobility and reliably predicted the imminent onset of rhythmic whisker twitching. Each oscillatory cycle began as a traveling wave of neural activity in the cortex that then spread to the thalamus. Just before the onset of rhythmic whisker twitching, the oscillations spread to the spinal trigeminal brainstem complex. Thereafter, the oscillations at all levels were synchronous with whisker protraction. Neural structures manifesting these rhythms also exhibited distributed spatiotemporal patterns of neuronal ensemble activity in response to tactile stimulation. Thus, multilevel synchronous activity in this system may encode not only sensory information but also the onset and temporal domain of tactile exploratory movements.
Neurogenesis persists in the adult brain and can be regulated by a plethora of external stimuli, such as learning, memory, exercise, environment and stress. Although newly generated neurons are able to migrate and preferentially incorporate into the neural network, how these cells are molecularly regulated and whether they are required for any normal brain function are unresolved questions. The adult neural stem cell pool is composed of orphan nuclear receptor TLX-positive cells. Here, using genetic approaches in mice, we demonstrate that TLX (also called NR2E1) regulates adult neural stem cell proliferation in a cell-autonomous manner by controlling a defined genetic network implicated in cell proliferation and growth. Consequently, specific removal of TLX from the adult mouse brain through inducible recombination results in a significant reduction of stem cell proliferation and a marked decrement in spatial learning. In contrast, the resulting suppression of adult neurogenesis does not affect contextual fear conditioning, locomotion or diurnal rhythmic activities, indicating a more selective contribution of newly generated neurons to specific cognitive functions.
GABA(B) receptors are the G-protein-coupled receptors for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. They are expressed in almost all neurons of the brain, where they regulate synaptic transmission and signal propagation by controlling the activity of voltage-gated calcium (Ca(v)) and inward-rectifier potassium (K(ir)) channels. Molecular cloning revealed that functional GABA(B) receptors are formed by the heteromeric assembly of GABA(B1) with GABA(B2) subunits. However, cloned GABA(B(1,2)) receptors failed to reproduce the functional diversity observed with native GABA(B) receptors. Here we show by functional proteomics that GABA(B) receptors in the brain are high-molecular-mass complexes of GABA(B1), GABA(B2) and members of a subfamily of the KCTD (potassium channel tetramerization domain-containing) proteins. KCTD proteins 8, 12, 12b and 16 show distinct expression profiles in the brain and associate tightly with the carboxy terminus of GABA(B2) as tetramers. This co-assembly changes the properties of the GABA(B(1,2)) core receptor: the KCTD proteins increase agonist potency and markedly alter the G-protein signalling of the receptors by accelerating onset and promoting desensitization in a KCTD-subtype-specific manner. Taken together, our results establish the KCTD proteins as auxiliary subunits of GABA(B) receptors that determine the pharmacology and kinetics of the receptor response.
In monkeys, corticospinal fibers terminate on motoneurons and interneurons. Brainstem fibers, which may be grouped into medial and lateral pathways, terminate on the same interneurons. Observations following bilateral pyramidotomy indicate that motility can be adequately directed by the brainstem systems while cortical connections add speed and the capacity for further fractionating movements. Further experiments suggest that the medial and lateral brainstem pathways primarily direct proximal and distal movements, respectively.
Analgesia resulting from focal electrical stimulation of the brain of the rat shows tolerance with repeated exposures; this tolerance dissipates after a period of nonstimulation. Addiction to morphine reduces greatly the analgesia produced by electrical stimulation of the brain, which demonstrates cross-tolerance between morphine analgesia and stimulation-produced analgesia. Recovery of the stimulation-produced analgesia is seen after discontinuing administration of morphine. These results suggest that morphine and electrical stimulation produce analgesia by common mechanisms. The fact that tolerance occurs to the analgesic effect of electrical stimulation indicates that tolerance may be an alteration of an endogenous neuronal process.
The migration of postmitotic neurons away from compact, germinal zones is a critical step in neuronal differentiation in the developing brain. To study the molecular signals necessary for cerebellar granule cell migration in situ, precursor cells from the neurological mutant mouse weaver, an animal with phenotypic defects in migration, were implanted into the external germinal layer (EGL) of wild-type cerebellar cortex. In this region, labeled weaver precursor cells of the EGL progressed through all stages of granule neuron differentiation, including the extension of parallel fibers, migration through the molecular and Purkinje cell layers, positioning in the internal granule cell layer, and extension of dendrites. Thus, the weaver gene acts nonautonomously in vivo, and local cell interactions may induce early steps in neuronal differentiation that are required for granule cell migration.
The mammalian eye is a remarkable optical device, but its design is not perfect. The blood vessels that supply the inner retina are located in front of the photoreceptor layer, blocking access to light. Their shadows create a pattern of blindness in the field of vision that corresponds precisely to the location of the largest vessels in the eye. We show here that in squirrel monkeys, focal deprivation by blood vessels leads to rewiring of the eye's geniculocortical projections, imprinting an image of the retinal vascular tree onto the primary visual cortex. This process illustrates vividly that local imbalances in neuronal activity can influence column formation during normal development.
Much interest has recently centred on the properties of peptides that modulate the excitability of nerve cells. Such compounds include the undecapeptide substance P, which is particularly well established as an excitatory neurotransmitter, and we examine here its effects on magnocellular cholinergic neurones taken from the medial and ventral aspects of the globus pallidus of newborn rats and grown in dissociated culture. These neurones have previously been shown to respond to substance P3 and are analogous to the nucleus basalis of Meynert in man, which gives a diffuse projection to the cerebral cortex and whose degeneration is the likely cause of Alzheimer's disease. Substance P depolarizes these cultured neurones by reducing an inwardly rectifying potassium conductances; this conductance has been found in several neuronal types and has similar properties to those of certain other cells. As discussed below, modulation of inward (or anomalous) rectification by substance P implies a self-reinforcing element to the depolarization caused by the peptide.
The regional distribution of opioid receptors in the mammalian central nervous system has been extensively studied by light microscopic autoradiography. Little is known, however, about the fine structural localization of these receptor sites apart from the fact that they are present in both synaptosomal and smooth microsomal subcellular fractions of whole brain homogenates. Previously, using the Met-enkephalin analogue FK 33-824 (Sandoz), we determined that brain opioid binding sites could be visualized by electron microscopic autoradiography. We now report on the ultrastructural distribution of these sites in the caudate-putamen of the rat. The vast majority of specifically labelled opioid binding sites were found to be associated with axo-dendritic (53%), axoaxonic (18%) or axo-somatic (3%) neuronal membrane interfaces. Only 7%, however, were associated with synaptic junctions. These results suggest that opioids act primarily at non-junctional interfaces on the dendrites, axons and soma of neurones in the neostriatum.
Cells in the brain express unusually low levels of antigens encoded by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). This is somewhat surprising as class I (H-2) and class II (Ia) MHC antigens have critical roles in immune responses. The activation of T lymphocytes is associated with the enhanced expression of these antigens and this effect is mediated by a specific T-cell lymphokine, gamma-interferon (IFN-gamma). Here we show that IFN-gamma induces a dramatic increase in the expression of H-2 antigens on the cells of the brain. After exposure to IFN-gamma in vitro, all surviving cells, including most astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia and at least some neurones, express H-2 antigens. Direct injection of IFN-gamma into the brains of mice indicated that H-2 antigens were also induced in vivo. Furthermore, IFN-gamma induced Ia antigens on a subpopulation of astrocytes. The induction of H-2 antigens by IFN-gamma may render brain cells competent to initiate and participate in immune reactions and may therefore contribute to both immunoprotective and immunopathological responses in the brain.
There is considerable debate about whether the early processing of sounds depends on whether they form part of speech. Proponents of such speech specificity postulate the existence of language-dependent memory traces, which are activated in the processing of speech but not when equally complex, acoustic non-speech stimuli are processed. Here we report the existence of these traces in the human brain. We presented to Finnish subjects the Finnish phoneme prototype /e/ as the frequent stimulus, and other Finnish phoneme prototypes or a non-prototype (the Estonian prototype /o/) as the infrequent stimulus. We found that the brain's automatic change-detection response, reflected electrically as the mismatch negativity (MMN), was enhanced when the infrequent, deviant stimulus was a prototype (the Finnish /o/) relative to when it was a non-prototype (the Estonian /o/). These phonemic traces, revealed by MMN, are language-specific, as /o/ caused enhancement of MMN in Estonians. Whole-head magnetic recordings located the source of this native-language, phoneme-related response enhancement, and thus the language-specific memory traces, in the auditory cortex of the left hemisphere.
Neural processes from mammalian pinealocytes have been discovered in several brain areas. These processes were visualized immunocytochemically in the Djungarian hamster, Phodopus sungorus, with an antiserum against bovine retinal S-antigen and traced as far as the region of the posterior commissure and habenular nuclei. This result indicates that pineal-to-brain connections exist in the mammal, and that the mammalian pineal gland, currently thought of only as a neuroendocrine organ, may communicate directly with select brain regions by way of these projections. The existence of mammalian pinealocyte projections is consistent with the view that these cells are not of glial origin but are derivatives of photoreceptor cells of the pineal complex of lower vertebrates that transmit signals to the brain by neural projections.
A new technique has been developed for identifying, in humans, dynamic spatiotemporal electrical patterns of the brain during purposive behaviors. In this method, single-trial time-series correlations between brain macropotentials recorded from different scalp sites are analyzed by distribution-independent mathematical pattern recognition. Dynamic patterns of correlation clearly distinguished two brief visuomotor tasks differing only in type of mental judgement required (spatial or numeric). These complex patterns shifted in the anterior-posterior and left-right axes between successive 175-millisecond intervals, indicating that many areas in both cerebral hemispheres were involved even in these simple judgements. These patterns were not obtainable by conventional analysis of averaged evoked potentials or by linear analysis of correlations, suggesting that the new technique will advance the study of human brain activity related to cognition and goal-directed behaviors.
Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is involved in a variety of biological and pathological processes and PAF acetylhydrolase, which inactivates PAF by removing the acetyl group at the sn-2 position, is widely distributed in plasma and tissue cytosols. One isoform of PAF acetylhydrolase present in bovine brain cortex is a heterotrimer comprising subunits with relative molecular masses of 45K, 30K and 29K (ref. 4). We have now isolated the complementary DNA for the 45K subunit. Sequence analysis revealed a striking identity (99%) of the subunit with a protein encoded by the causative gene (LIS-1) for Miller-Dieker lissencephaly, a human brain malformation manifested by a smooth cerebral surface and abnormal neuronal migration. This indicates that the LIS-1 gene product is a human homologue of the 45K subunit of intracellular PAF acetylhydrolase. Our results raise the possibility that PAF and PAF acetylhydrolase are important in the formation of the brain cortex during differentiation and development.
Buschman and Miller (Reports, 30 March 2007, p. 1860) described the activity of ensembles of neurons in parietal and frontal cortex of monkeys performing visual search for targets that were easy or hard to distinguish from distractors. However, their conclusions are called into question by discrepancies between their results and publications from other laboratories measuring the same neural process.
Autoradiography combined with image analysis permitted quantitative visualization of dopamine (D2) and serotonin (S2) binding sites in rat brain. Forebrain sections were incubated with tritiated spiroperidol alone or with tritiated spiroperidol plus unlabeled compounds that saturated the D2 or S2 sites. By subtracting the digitized image of an autoradiograph derived from the latter sections from that of the former, the D2 or S2 sites were specifically revealed. The resulting quantitative images demonstrate the differing anatomical distributions of these sites. The D2 site is largely restricted to the striatal complex (caudate-putamen, nucleus accumbens septi, and olfactory tubercle), whereas the S2 site is enriched in layer 5 of motor cortex, the perirhinal and cingulate cortices, and the claustrum.
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, strain E-350, when inoculated intracerebrally in rats 1 to 7 days old, produces an acute destructive infection of the cerebellar cortex resulting in permanent cerebellar hypoplasia and ataxia. Several other arenoviruses may produce a similar lesion in neonatal rodents.
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) is present in high concentrations in the cerebral cortex, where it is the putative neurotransmitter of a major intracortical neuronal system. Homogenates of cortical tissue contain high-affinity, specific binding sites for VIP as well as an adenylate cyclase system which is sensitive to this peptide. As with many of the other peptidergic systems which have been identified in the central nervous system (CNS), it has proved extremely difficult to elucidate the nature and extent of the functional role of VIP in specific brain areas. Here, using the quantitative autoradiographic 14C-deoxyglucose technique in rats to provide insight into functional processes, we describe the increases in glucose utilization which occur locally in anterior cingulate cortex following the unilateral injection of VIP (20 pmol) into this key brain area and, additionally, the focal alterations in glucose use in CNS regions having known neuronal connections with the injected region (for example, ipsilateral mediodorsal thalamus, ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens, caudate nucleus and contralateral cingulate cortex). These data provide evidence that VIP may modify the processing of afferent and efferent information within the anterior cingulate cortex in the conscious rat.
Neural assemblies in a number of animal species display self-organized, synchronized oscillations in response to sensory stimuli in a variety of brain areas. In the olfactory system of insects, odour-evoked oscillatory synchronization of antennal lobe projection neurons (PNs) is superimposed on slower and stimulus-specific temporal activity patterns. Hence, each odour activates a specific and dynamic projection neuron assembly whose evolution during a stimulus is locked to the oscillation clock. Here we examine, using locusts, the changes in population dynamics of projection-neuron assemblies over repeated odour stimulations, as would occur when an animal first encounters and then repeatedly samples an odour for identification or localization. We find that the responses of these assemblies rapidly decrease in intensity, while they show a marked increase in spike time precision and inter-neuronal oscillatory coherence. Once established, this enhanced precision in the representation endures for several minutes. This change is stimulus-specific, and depends on events within the antennal lobe circuits, independent of olfactory receptor adaptation: it may thus constitute a form of sensory memory. Our results suggest that this progressive change in olfactory network dynamics serves to converge, over repeated odour samplings, on a more precise and readily classifiable odour representation, using relational information contained across neural assemblies.
Cerebral microvascular occlusion is a common phenomenon throughout life that might require greater recognition as a mechanism of brain pathology. Failure to recanalize microvessels promptly may lead to the disruption of brain circuits and significant functional deficits. Haemodynamic forces and the fibrinolytic system are considered to be the principal mechanisms responsible for recanalization of occluded cerebral capillaries and terminal arterioles. Here we identify a previously unrecognized cellular mechanism that may also be critical for this recanalization. By using high-resolution fixed-tissue microscopy and two-photon imaging in living mice we observed that a large fraction of microemboli infused through the internal carotid artery failed to be lysed or washed out within 48 h. Instead, emboli were found to translocate outside the vessel lumen within 2-7 days, leading to complete re-establishment of blood flow and sparing of the vessel. Recanalization occurred by a previously unknown mechanism of microvascular plasticity involving the rapid envelopment of emboli by endothelial membrane projections that subsequently form a new vessel wall. This was followed by the formation of an endothelial opening through which emboli translocated into the perivascular parenchyma. The rate of embolus extravasation was significantly decreased by pharmacological inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase 2/9 activity. In aged mice, extravasation was markedly delayed, resulting in persistent tissue hypoxia, synaptic damage and cell death. Alterations in the efficiency of the protective mechanism that we have identified may have important implications in microvascular pathology, stroke recovery and age-related cognitive decline.
In the kindling model of temporal lobe epilepsy, several physiological indicators of inhibition by gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the hippocampal dentate gyrus are consistent with an augmented, rather than a diminished, inhibition. In brain slices obtained from epileptic (kindled) rats, the excitatory drive onto inhibitory interneurons was increased and was paralleled by a reduction in the presynaptic autoinhibition of GABA release. This augmented inhibition was sensitive to zinc most likely after a molecular reorganization of GABAA receptor subunits. Consequently, during seizures, inhibition by GABA may be diminished by the zinc released from aberrantly sprouted mossy fiber terminals of granule cells, which are found in many experimental models of epilepsy and in human temporal lobe epilepsy.
Glutamate receptors mediate excitatory neurotransmission in the brain and are important in the formation of memory and in some neurodegenerative disorders. A complementary DNA clone that encoded a 33-kilodalton protein (GR33) was obtained by screening a library with an antibody generated against glutamate binding proteins. The sequence of GR33 is identical to that of the recently reported presynaptic protein syntaxin. When GR33 was expressed in Xenopus oocytes, it formed glutamate-activated ion channels that are pharmacologically similar to those of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors but with different electrophysiological properties. Mutation of the leucine 278 residue in the single putative transmembrane segment of GR33 affects the properties of the channel. Thus, in vivo GR33 may be a presynaptic glutamate receptor.
Parkinson's disease results from the progressive degeneration of dopamine neurons that innervate the striatum. In rodents, glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) stimulates an increase in midbrain dopamine levels, protects dopamine neurons from some neurotoxins, and maintains injured dopamine neurons. Here we extend the rodent studies to an animal closer to the human in brain organization and function, by evaluating the effects of GDNF injected intracerebrally in rhesus monkeys that have had the symptomatology and pathophysiological features of Parkinson's disease induced by the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). The recipients of GDNF displayed significant improvements in three of the cardinal symptoms of parkinsonism: bradykinesia, rigidity and postural instability. GDNF administered every four weeks maintained functional recovery. On the lesioned side of GDNF-treated animals, dopamine levels in the midbrain and globus pallidus were twice as high, and nigral dopamine neurons were, on average, 20% larger, with an increased fibre density. The results indicate that GDNF may be of benefit in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
The perceptual world is organized hierarchically: the forest consists of trees, which in turn have leaves. Visual attention can emphasize the overall picture (global form) or the focal details of a scene (local components). Neuropsychological studies have indicated that the left hemisphere is biased towards local and the right towards global processing. The underlying attentional and perceptual mechanisms are maximally impaired by unilateral lesions to the temporal and parietal cortex. We measured brain activity of normal subjects during two experiments using 'hierarchically' organized figures. In a directed attention task, early visual processing (prestriate) areas were activated: attention to the global aspect of the figures activated the right lingual gyrus whereas locally directed attention activated the left inferior occipital cortex. In a subsequent divided attention task, the number of target switches from local to global (and vice versa) covaried with temporal-parietal activation. The findings provide direct evidence for hemispheric specialization in global and local perception; furthermore, they indicate that temporal-parietal areas exert attentional control over the neural transformations occurring in prestriate cortex.
Excitatory amino acids (EAAs) are important neurotransmitters in the vertebrate central nervous system. Electrophysiological and ligand-binding studies indicate that at least three different receptor subtypes for EAAs exist--N-methyl-D-aspartate, kainate and quisqualate receptor subtypes--on the basis of the preferred agonist of the receptors. We recently purified a kainate-binding protein (KBP) from frog (Rana pipiens berlandieri) brain by domoic acid (a high-affinity kainate analogue) affinity chromatography, and showed that the kainate-binding activity was associated with a protein of relative molecular mass 48,000 (Mr 48 K). The pharmacological properties and the anatomical distribution of KBP were consistent with those of a kainate receptor-ionophore complex. We have now isolated a complementary DNA encoding KBP of Mr 48 K. The deduced amino-acid sequence of the KBP has similar hydrophobic profiles to those found in other ligand-gated ion channel subunits, and shows some amino-acid sequence similarities to the corresponding regions of brain nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits. Localization of the KBP messenger RNAs by in situ hybridization histochemistry is compatible with the results of immunohistochemistry and receptor autoradiography studies. COS-7 cells transfected with the cDNA encoding the KBP show high-affinity kainate-binding activity with pharmacological properties similar to those of the biochemically purified KBP. These results provide the first molecular characterization of an EAA-binding site and raise the possibility that the KBP cDNA encodes a ligand-binding subunit of a kainate receptor-ionophore complex.
Recurrent seizures, commonly known as epilepsies, occur in 1.7% of the general population by age 40. The factors that initiate or underlie seizures are not well understood, but trauma, infectious disease and genetics have been implicated. An understanding of the molecular basis of seizures would shed light on the basic mechanisms of neuronal homeostasis and allow new therapeutic strategies to be explored. Here, we report the mapping of an epilepsy gene to a specific chromosomal region, on the basis of cosegregation of two closely-linked DNA markers with a form of epilepsy known as benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC2, 12120 in ref. 3). The linked markers confirm the genetic basis and autosomal dominant inheritance of this trait, and localize the gene causing BFNC in this family to the long arm of chromosome 20. This regional placement is the first step towards the isolation of a gene involved in neuronal activity in the human brain.
Neurotrophins are growth factors that promote cell survival, differentiation, and cell death. They are synthesized as proforms that can be cleaved intracellularly to release mature, secreted ligands. Although proneurotrophins have been considered inactive precursors, we show here that the proforms of nerve growth factor (NGF) and the proforms of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) are secreted and cleaved extracellularly by the serine protease plasmin and by selective matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). ProNGF is a high-affinity ligand for p75(NTR) with high affinity and induced p75NTR-dependent apoptosis in cultured neurons with minimal activation of TrkA-mediated differentiation or survival. The biological action of neurotrophins is thus regulated by proteolytic cleavage, with proforms preferentially activating p75NTR to mediate apoptosis and mature forms activating Trk receptors to promote survival.
Anandamide (N-arachidonoyl-ethanolamine) was recently identified as a brain arachidonate derivative that binds to and activates cannabinoid receptors, yet the mechanisms underlying formation, release and inactivation of this putative messenger molecule are still unclear. Here we report that anandamide is produced in and released from cultured brain neurons in a calcium ion-dependent manner when the neurons are stimulated with membrane-depolarizing agents. Anandamide formation occurs through phosphodiesterase-mediated cleavage of a novel phospholipid precursor, N-arachidonoyl-phosphatidylethanolamine. A similar mechanism also governs the formation of a family of anandamide congeners, whose possible roles in neuronal signalling remain unknown. Our results and those of others indicate therefore that multiple biochemical pathways may participate in anandamide formation in brain tissue. The life span of extracellular anandamide is limited by a rapid and selective process of cellular uptake, which is accompanied by hydrolytic degradation to ethanolamine and arachidonate. Our results thus strongly support the proposed role of anandamide as an endogenous neuronal messenger.
Wet weight of rat cerebral cortex was increased by exposure to an enriched environment, as compared with standard colony or impoverished conditions. Dry weights and wet weights were compared and both yielded identical percentage differences between brains of animals experiencing enrichment and those experiencing impoverishment.
Calcium channels mediate the generation of action potentials, pacemaking, excitation-contraction coupling, and secretion and signal integration in muscle, secretory, and neuronal cells. The physiological regulation of the L-type calcium channel is thought to be mediated primarily by guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins). A low molecular weight endogenous peptide has been isolated and purified from rat brain. This peptide regulates up and down the cardiac and neuronal calcium channels, respectively. In cardiac myocytes, the peptide-induced enhancement of the L-type calcium current had a slow onset (half-time approximately 75 seconds), occurred via a G protein-independent mechanism, and could not be inhibited by alpha 1-adrenergic, beta-adrenergic, or angiotensin II blockers. In neuronal cells, on the other hand, the negative effect had a rapid onset (half-time less than 500 milliseconds) and was observed on both T-type and L-type calcium channels.
Prion diseases are transmissible neurodegenerative conditions characterized by the accumulation of protease-resistant forms of the prion protein (PrP), termed PrPres, in the brain. Insoluble PrPres tends to aggregate into amyloid fibrils. The anthracycline 4'-iodo-4'-deoxy-doxorubicin (IDX) binds to amyloid fibrils and induces amyloid resorption in patients with systemic amyloidosis. To test IDX in an experimental model of prion disease, Syrian hamsters were inoculated intracerebrally either with scrapie-infected brain homogenate or with infected homogenate coincubated with IDX. In IDX-treated hamsters, clinical signs of disease were delayed and survival time was prolonged. Neuropathological examination showed a parallel delay in the appearance of brain changes and in the accumulation of PrPres and PrP amyloid.
The prion hypothesis posits that a misfolded form of prion protein (PrP) is responsible for the infectivity of prion disease. Using recombinant murine PrP purified from Escherichia coli, we created a recombinant prion with the attributes of the pathogenic PrP isoform: aggregated, protease-resistant, and self-perpetuating. After intracerebral injection of the recombinant prion, wild-type mice developed neurological signs in approximately 130 days and reached the terminal stage of disease in approximately 150 days. Characterization of diseased mice revealed classic neuropathology of prion disease, the presence of protease-resistant PrP, and the capability of serially transmitting the disease; these findings confirmed that the mice succumbed to prion disease. Thus, as postulated by the prion hypothesis, the infectivity in mammalian prion disease results from an altered conformation of PrP.
Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain into rhombomeres is important for the anterior-posterior arrangement of cranial motor nuclei and efferent nerves. Underlying this reiterated organization, Hox genes display segmentally restricted domains of expression, such as expression of Hoxb-1 (refs 5, 6) in rhombomere 4 (r4). Here we report that absence of Hoxb-1 leads to changes in r4 identity. In mutant mouse embryos, molecular markers indicate that patterning of r4 is initiated properly but not maintained. Cellular analysis by DiI tracing reveals that the r4-specific facial branchiomotor (FBM) and contralateral vestibuloacoustic efferent (CVA) neurons are incorrectly specified. In wild-type mice CVA neurons migrate from r4 into the contralateral side, and we found in lineage analysis that FBM neurons migrate from r4 into r5. In mutants, motor neurons differentiate but the CVA and FBM neurons fail to migrate into their proper positions. Instead, they form a motor nucleus which migrates atypically, and there is a subsequent loss of the facial motor nerve. These results demonstrate that, as a part of its role in maintaining rhombomere identity, Hoxb-1 is involved in controlling migratory properties of motor neurons in the hindbrain.
In crowded visual scenes, attention is needed to select relevant stimuli. To study the underlying mechanisms, we recorded neurons in cortical area V4 while macaque monkeys attended to behaviorally relevant stimuli and ignored distracters. Neurons activated by the attended stimulus showed increased gamma-frequency (35 to 90 hertz) synchronization but reduced low-frequency (<17 hertz) synchronization compared with neurons at nearby V4 sites activated by distracters. Because postsynaptic integration times are short, these localized changes in synchronization may serve to amplify behaviorally relevant signals in the cortex.
The structure of a precursor protein for gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) of relative molecular mass 10,000 has recently been deduced from cloned complementary DNA sequences derived from human placental messenger RNA. The 56-amino-acid peptide representing residues 14-69 of this prohormone exhibits potent inhibition of prolactin secretion. To investigate whether the same prohormone is synthesized in mammalian brain and describe the anatomical distribution of the prolactin-inhibiting region of this molecule, we have generated antiserum to a synthetic peptide containing residues 40-53 of the human placental precursor. We report here that a substance recognized by this antibody is present in GnRH-containing neurones of the rat brain and appears to coexist with GnRH in secretory granules of nerve terminals in the median eminence. These results indicate homology between hypothalamic and placental prohormones for GnRH and are consistent with the suggestion elsewhere in this issue that a prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF) is generated from this prohormone and cosecreted with GnRH by nerve terminals in the median eminence.
Neuronal activity regulates the development and maturation of excitatory and inhibitory synapses in the mammalian brain. Several recent studies have identified signalling networks within neurons that control excitatory synapse development. However, less is known about the molecular mechanisms that regulate the activity-dependent development of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-releasing inhibitory synapses. Here we report the identification of a transcription factor, Npas4, that plays a role in the development of inhibitory synapses by regulating the expression of activity-dependent genes, which in turn control the number of GABA-releasing synapses that form on excitatory neurons. These findings demonstrate that the activity-dependent gene program regulates inhibitory synapse development, and suggest a new role for this program in controlling the homeostatic balance between synaptic excitation and inhibition.
Infant rats were "handled" by removing them periodically from their home cages. "Non-handled" rats were left undisturbed. Half of the animals were killed at weaning, and weights and cholinesterase activity were determined on four different sections of the brain. The remaining animals were conditioned to avoid an administered shock. Handling increased ventral-cortex and subcortical weights and decreased subcortical cholinesterase. No differences in avoidance conditioning were observed.
Psychologists and economists have long appreciated the contribution of reward history and expectation to decision-making. Yet we know little about how specific histories of choice and reward lead to an internal representation of the "value" of possible actions. We approached this problem through an integrated application of behavioral, computational, and physiological techniques. Monkeys were placed in a dynamic foraging environment in which they had to track the changing values of alternative choices through time. In this context, the monkeys' foraging behavior provided a window into their subjective valuation. We found that a simple model based on reward history can duplicate this behavior and that neurons in the parietal cortex represent the relative value of competing actions predicted by this model.
A substantial decrease in the number of synapses occurs in the mammalian brain from the late postnatal period until the end of life. Although experience plays an important role in modifying synaptic connectivity, its effect on this nearly lifelong synapse loss remains unknown. Here we used transcranial two-photon microscopy to visualize postsynaptic dendritic spines in layer I of the barrel cortex in transgenic mice expressing yellow fluorescent protein. We show that in young adolescent mice, long-term sensory deprivation through whisker trimming prevents net spine loss by preferentially reducing the rate of ongoing spine elimination, not by increasing the rate of spine formation. This effect of deprivation diminishes as animals mature but still persists in adulthood. Restoring sensory experience after adolescent deprivation accelerates spine elimination. Similar to sensory manipulation, the rate of spine elimination decreases after chronic blockade of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors with the antagonist MK801, and accelerates after drug withdrawal. These studies of spine dynamics in the primary somatosensory cortex suggest that experience plays an important role in the net loss of synapses over most of an animal's lifespan, particularly during adolescence.
The hippocampus, in particular the neocortex-hippocampus-neocortex circuit, is widely believed to be crucial in memory. Information flow in this circuit is strongly influenced by relatively sparse afferents derived from subcortical centres, such as the septum, involved in arousal, emotions and autonomic control. A powerful mechanism, by which numerically small inputs can produce profound effects, is feed-forward inhibition, that is, the activation of local inhibitory interneurons, which, in turn, control the activity of large populations of principal cells in the hippocampus. An example is the cholinergic input to the hippocampus from the septum, which is likely to be involved in feed-forward operations. Here, we demonstrate the existence of a circuit underlying another powerful mechanism of subcortical control of hippocampal information processing. We show that GABA-containing afferents originating in the septum innervate most of the GABA-containing interneurons in the hippocampus, making many synaptic contacts with each of them. Activation of the GABA-containing neurons in the septum is likely to lead to disinhibition of the principal neurons in the hippocampal formation and so this pathway is probably crucial in the induction of hippocampal electrical activity patterns, and may be involved in NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor-mediated functions, such as memory, in a permissive manner.
Activity shapes the structure of neurons and their circuits. Two-photon imaging of CA1 neurons expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein in developing hippocampal slices from rat brains was used to characterize dendritic morphogenesis in response to synaptic activity. High-frequency focal synaptic stimulation induced a period (longer than 30 minutes) of enhanced growth of small filopodia-like protrusions (typically less than 5 micrometers long). Synaptically evoked growth was long-lasting and localized to dendritic regions close (less than 50 micrometers) to the stimulating electrode and was prevented by blockade of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. Thus, synaptic activation can produce rapid input-specific changes in dendritic structure. Such persistent structural changes could contribute to the development of neural circuitry.
Spinal cord damage in neonatal cats has different effects on different spinal pathways. Corticospinal projections exhibit anatomical plasticity, forming an aberrant pathway that bypasses the lesion. In contrast, brainstem-spinal pathways undergo massive retrograde degeneration. Neither of these responses occurs in adult cats. Sparing of motor function is found in cats operated on as neonates but not in cats operated on as adults, and appears to depend on the plasticity of the corticospinal tract.
The principles underlying human hemispheric specialization are poorly understood. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging of letter and visuospatial decision tasks with identical word stimuli to address two unresolved problems. First, hemispheric specialization depended on the nature of the task rather than on the nature of the stimulus. Second, analysis of frontal candidate regions for cognitive control showed increased coupling between left anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and left inferior frontal gyrus during letter decisions, whereas right ACC showed enhanced coupling with right parietal areas during visuospatial decisions. Cognitive control is thus localized in the same hemisphere as task execution.
Vivid visual images can be voluntarily generated in our minds in the absence of simultaneous visual input. While trying to count the number of flowers in Van Gogh's Sunflowers, understanding a description or recalling a path, subjects report forming an image in their "mind's eye". Whether this process is accomplished by the same neuronal mechanisms as visual perception has long been a matter of debate. Evidence from functional imaging, psychophysics, neurological studies and monkey electrophysiology suggests a common process, yet there are patients with deficits in one but not the other. Here we directly investigated the neuronal substrates of visual recall by recording from single neurons in the human medial temporal lobe while the subjects were asked to imagine previously viewed images. We found single neurons in the hippocampus, amygdala, entorhinal cortex and parahippocampal gyrus that selectively altered their firing rates depending on the stimulus the subjects were imagining. Of the neurons that fired selectively during both vision and imagery, the majority (88%) had identical selectivity. Our study reveals single neuron correlates of volitional visual imagery in humans and suggests a common substrate for the processing of incoming visual information and visual recall.
A cavity was made in the brain (entorhinal cortex) of developing or adult rats, and a small piece of Gelfoam was emplaced to collect fluid secreted into the wound. The neuronotrophic activity of the fluid was assayed with sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons in culture. The results show that wounds in the brain of developing or adult rats stimulate the accumulation of neuronotrophic factors and that the activity of these factors increases over the first few days after infliction of the damage.
Recent work has identified a neuron with widespread projections to odour processing regions of the honeybee brain whose activity represents the reward value of gustatory stimuli. We have constructed a model of bee foraging in uncertain environments based on this type of neuron and a predictive form of hebbian synaptic plasticity. The model uses visual input from a simulated three-dimensional world and accounts for a wide range of experiments on bee learning during foraging, including risk aversion. The predictive model shows how neuromodulatory influences can be used to bias actions and control synaptic plasticity in a way that goes beyond standard correlational mechanisms. Although several behavioural models of conditioning in bees have been proposed, this model is based on the neural substrate and was tested in a simulation of bee flight.
Radioactivity was found in cell bodies of neurons and glial cells throughout brains of male and female rats that had been injected with either testosterone-H(3) or estradiol-H(3). Uptake by limbic and hypothalamic structures was higher and longer lasting than that in nonlimbic structures. In all brains, the preoptic area, prepiriform cortex, olfactory tubercle, and septum had particularly high, long-lasting uptake of both hormones.
The striatum is a major forebrain nucleus that integrates cortical and thalamic afferents and forms the input nucleus of the basal ganglia. Striatal projection neurons target the substantia nigra pars reticulata (direct pathway) or the lateral globus pallidus (indirect pathway). Imbalances between neural activity in these two pathways have been proposed to underlie the profound motor deficits observed in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. However, little is known about differences in cellular and synaptic properties in these circuits. Indeed, current hypotheses suggest that these cells express similar forms of synaptic plasticity. Here we show that excitatory synapses onto indirect-pathway medium spiny neurons (MSNs) exhibit higher release probability and larger N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor currents than direct-pathway synapses. Moreover, indirect-pathway MSNs selectively express endocannabinoid-mediated long-term depression (eCB-LTD), which requires dopamine D2 receptor activation. In models of Parkinson's disease, indirect-pathway eCB-LTD is absent but is rescued by a D2 receptor agonist or inhibitors of endocannabinoid degradation. Administration of these drugs together in vivo reduces parkinsonian motor deficits, suggesting that endocannabinoid-mediated depression of indirect-pathway synapses has a critical role in the control of movement. These findings have implications for understanding the normal functions of the basal ganglia, and also suggest approaches for the development of therapeutic drugs for the treatment of striatal-based brain disorders.
In a recent Letter to Nature, Lee and colleagues combined optogenetic stimulation with functional magnetic resonance imaging (ofMRI) to examine the relationship between pyramidal-cell spiking and the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal. To do so, they injected an adeno-associated viral vector into the primary motor cortex (M1) of adult rats to drive the expression of channelrhodopsin (ChR2) in cortical projection neurons, thus making them sensitive to light. The authors then used combined light stimulation and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the effects of selective activation of the light-sensitive pyramidal cells on the BOLD signal, as well as to probe the value of this methodology for mapping brain connectivity. They found that excitation of these neurons induced positive BOLD signals both in the injected M1 region and in remote target thalamic nuclei receiving direct projections from that region, and concluded that ofMRI reliably links positive BOLD signals with increased local neuronal excitation. However, their analysis neglects the almost immediate activation of other circuits that could lead to the generation of BOLD signals through local perisynaptic rather than spiking activity. Their experiments therefore do not pin down the identity of the specific neuronal signals that give rise to the BOLD signal.
Olfactory systems encode odours by which neurons respond and by when they respond. In mammals, every sniff evokes a precise, odour-specific sequence of activity across olfactory neurons. Likewise, in a variety of neural systems, ranging from sensory periphery to cognitive centres, neuronal activity is timed relative to sampling behaviour and/or internally generated oscillations. As in these neural systems, relative timing of activity may represent information in the olfactory system. However, there is no evidence that mammalian olfactory systems read such cues. To test whether mice perceive the timing of olfactory activation relative to the sniff cycle ('sniff phase'), we used optogenetics in gene-targeted mice to generate spatially constant, temporally controllable olfactory input. Here we show that mice can behaviourally report the sniff phase of optogenetically driven activation of olfactory sensory neurons. Furthermore, mice can discriminate between light-evoked inputs that are shifted in the sniff cycle by as little as 10 milliseconds, which is similar to the temporal precision of olfactory bulb odour responses. Electrophysiological recordings in the olfactory bulb of awake mice show that individual cells encode the timing of photoactivation in relation to the sniff in both the timing and the amplitude of their responses. Our work provides evidence that the mammalian olfactory system can read temporal patterns, and suggests that timing of activity relative to sampling behaviour is a potent cue that may enable accurate olfactory percepts to form quickly.
The new benzamide derivative [125I]iodosulpride is a highly sensitive and selective ligand for D-2 dopamine receptors and displays a very low nonspecific binding to membrane or autoradiographic sections. On autoradiographic images, D-2 receptors are present not only in well-established dopaminergic areas but also, in a discrete manner, in a number of catecholaminergic regions in which the dopaminergic innervation is still unknown, imprecise, or controversial, as in the sensorimotor cerebral cortex or cerebellum. This widespread distribution suggests larger physiological and pathophysiological roles for cerebral dopamine receptors than was previously thought.
In primary visual cortex of higher mammals neurons are grouped according to their orientation preference, forming "pinwheels" around "orientation centers." Although the general structure of orientation maps is largely resolved, the microscopic arrangement of neuronal response properties in the orientation centers has remained elusive. The tetrode technique, enabling multiple single-unit recordings, in combination with intrinsic signal imaging was used to reveal the fine-grain structure of orientation maps in these locations. The results show that orientation centers represent locations where orientation columns converge containing normal, sharply tuned neurons of different orientation preference lying in close proximity.
Reelin is an extracellular protein that is crucial for layer formation in the embryonic brain. Here, we demonstrate that Reelin functions postnatally to regulate the development of the neuromuscular junction. Reelin is required for motor end-plate maturation and proper nerve-muscle connectivity, and it directly promotes synapse elimination. Unlike layer formation, neuromuscular junction development requires a function of Reelin that is not mediated by Disabled1 or very-low-density lipoprotein receptors and apolipoprotein E receptor 2 receptors but by a distinct mechanism involving its protease activity.
In several species, the peripheral input from the eyes partly determines the pattern of interconnections between the visual areas of the two cerebral hemispheres through the fibre tract termed the corpus callosum. In the macaque monkey, the neurons projecting through the callosum are largely restricted to area 18 throughout ontogeny, whereas area 17 is characterized by few or no callosal projections. Here, we show that suppressing the peripheral input by prenatal removal of the eyes leads to a marked reduction in the extent of area 17, resulting in a large shift in the position of the histologically identifiable boundary between the two areas. Even so, the boundary continues to separate an area rich with callosal connections (area 18) from one poor in such projections (area 17), indicating there is no effect on the callosal connectivity of area 17. In contrast, in area 18, eye removal results in many more neurons with callosal projections than in normal animals. The results suggest that the factors that determine the parcellation of cortical areas also specify their connectivity.
The Rab family of low-molecular-mass GTP-binding proteins are thought to guide membrane fusion between a transport vesicle and the target membrane, and to determine the specificity of docking. The docking and fusion of vesicles is, however, a complex multistep reaction, and the precise point at which Rab proteins act in these sequential processes is unknown. In brain, the Rab protein Rab3A is specific to synaptic vesicles, whose exocytosis can be monitored with submillisecond resolution by following synaptic transmission. We have now determined the precise point at which Rab3A acts in the sequence of synaptic vesicle docking and fusion by using electrophysiological analysis of neurotransmitter release in Rab3A-deficient mice. Unexpectedly, the size of the readily releasable pool of vesicles is normal, whereas Ca2+-triggered fusion is altered in the absence of Rab3A in that a more-than-usual number of exocytic events occur within a brief time after arrival of the nerve impulse.
It has been proposed that visual-memory traces are located in the temporal lobes of the cerebral cortex, as electric stimulation of this area in humans results in recall of imagery. Lesions in this area also affect recognition of an object after a delay in both humans and monkeys, indicating a role in short-term memory of images. Single-unit recordings from the temporal cortex have shown that some neurons continue to fire when one of two or four colours are to be remembered temporarily. But neuronal responses selective to specific complex objects, including hands and faces, cease soon after the offset of stimulus presentation. These results led to the question of whether any of these neurons could serve the memory of complex objects. We report here a group of shape-selective neurons in an anterior ventral part of the temporal cortex of monkeys that exhibited sustained activity during the delay period of a visual short-term memory task. The activity was highly selective for the pictorial information to be memorized and was independent of the physical attributes such as size, orientation, colour or position of the object. These observations show that the delay activity represents the short-term memory of the categorized percept of a picture.
Purified preparations of microvessels from bovine cerebral cortex contain substantial levels of alpha-adrenergic, beta-adrenergic, and histamine 1 receptor binding sites but only negligible serotonin, muscarinic cholinergic, opiate, and benzodiazepine receptor binding. Norepinephrine and histamine may be endogenous regulators of the cerebral microcirculation at the observed receptors.
A type of excitatory synaptic transmission which is novel for the vertebrate brain has been found in the ner neuron (M-cell) by means of the passive spread of their action currents across the synaptic membrane. After stimulating the ipsilateral eighth cranial nerve, an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) appears in the M-cell with a latency which is very brief ( about 0.1 msec) and which proba; bly represents a negligible synaptic delay. This response is attributed to the club endings: there were steep gradients of potential along the lateral dendrite of the M-cell during activity and the early EPSP was maximal in the distal part of the dendrite where the club endings predominate. Potential changes in the M-cell spread (passively) backwards into certain eighth-nerve fibers (probably club endings) indicating the presence of special low-resistance connections between them and the M-cell.
The ability to distinguish colour from intensity variations is a difficult computational problem for the visual system because each of the three cone photoreceptor types absorb all wavelengths of light, although their peak sensitivities are at relatively short (S cones), medium (M cones), or long (L cones) wavelengths. The first stage in colour processing is the comparison of the outputs of different cone types by spectrally opponent neurons in the retina and upstream in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Some neurons receive opponent inputs from L and M cones, whereas others receive input from S cones opposed by combined signals from L and M cones. Here we report how the outputs of the L/M- and S-opponent geniculate cell types are combined in time at the next stage of colour processing, in the macaque primary visual cortex (V1). Some V1 neurons respond to a single chromatic region, with either a short (68-95 ms) or a longer (96-135 ms) latency, whereas others respond to two chromatic regions with a difference in latency of 20-30 ms. Across all types, short latency responses are mostly evoked by L/M-opponent inputs whereas longer latency responses are evoked mostly by S-opponent inputs. Furthermore, neurons with late S-cone inputs exhibit dynamic changes in the sharpness of their chromatic tuning over time. We propose that the sparse, S-opponent signal in the lateral geniculate nucleus is amplified in area V1, possibly through recurrent excitatory networks. This results in a delayed, sluggish cortical S-cone signal which is then integrated with L/M-opponent signals to rotate the lateral geniculate nucleus chromatic axes.
The majority of excitatory synapses in the mammalian CNS (central nervous system) are formed on dendritic spines, and spine morphology and distribution are critical for synaptic transmission, synaptic integration and plasticity. Here, we show that a secreted semaphorin, Sema3F, is a negative regulator of spine development and synaptic structure. Mice with null mutations in genes encoding Sema3F, and its holoreceptor components neuropilin-2 (Npn-2, also known as Nrp2) and plexin A3 (PlexA3, also known as Plxna3), exhibit increased dentate gyrus (DG) granule cell (GC) and cortical layer V pyramidal neuron spine number and size, and also aberrant spine distribution. Moreover, Sema3F promotes loss of spines and excitatory synapses in dissociated neurons in vitro, and in Npn-2(-/-) brain slices cortical layer V and DG GCs exhibit increased mEPSC (miniature excitatory postsynaptic current) frequency. In contrast, a distinct Sema3A-Npn-1/PlexA4 signalling cascade controls basal dendritic arborization in layer V cortical neurons, but does not influence spine morphogenesis or distribution. These disparate effects of secreted semaphorins are reflected in the restricted dendritic localization of Npn-2 to apical dendrites and of Npn-1 (also known as Nrp1) to all dendrites of cortical pyramidal neurons. Therefore, Sema3F signalling controls spine distribution along select dendritic processes, and distinct secreted semaphorin signalling events orchestrate CNS connectivity through the differential control of spine morphogenesis, synapse formation, and the elaboration of dendritic morphology.
Anatomical and physiological investigations in monkeys indicate that olfaction is subserved by several cortical regions. But the areas implicated in the human olfactory system have not been definitively identified by functional criteria. Behavioural evidence has suggested that laterally specialized mechanisms for odour processing may exist, but the neuroanatomical substrate remains unknown. We used positron emission tomography to study the cortical representation of human olfactory processing by comparing cerebral blood flow changes evoked during olfactory stimulation with those of a control task. We report here significant cerebral blood flow increases at the junction of the inferior frontal and temporal lobes bilaterally, corresponding to the piriform cortex, and unilaterally, in the right orbitofrontal cortex. The results complement and extend previous data implicating these regions in olfactory processing, and indicate that a functional asymmetry exists in the human brain favouring the right orbitofrontal area in olfaction.
The characteristics of epigenetic control, including the potential for long-lasting, stable effects on gene expression that outlive an initial transient signal, could be of singular importance for post-mitotic neurons, which are subject to changes with short- to long-lasting influence on their activity and connectivity. Persistent changes in chromatin structure are thought to contribute to mechanisms of epigenetic inheritance. Recent advances in chromatin biology offer new avenues to investigate regulatory mechanisms underlying long-lasting changes in neurons, with direct implications for the study of brain function, behaviour and diseases.
The external nucleus of the inferior colliculus in the barn owl contains an auditory map of space that is based on the tuning of neurons for interaural differences in the timing of sound. In juvenile owls, this region of the brain can acquire alternative maps of interaural time difference as a result of abnormal experience. It has been found that, in an external nucleus that is expressing a learned, abnormal map, the circuitry underlying the normal map still exists but is functionally inactivated by inhibition mediated by gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors. This inactivation results from disproportionately strong inhibition of specific input channels to the network. Thus, experience-driven changes in patterns of inhibition, as well as adjustments in patterns of excitation, can contribute critically to adaptive plasticity in the central nervous system.
Errors in the identification of objects have been made frequently because of faulty interpretation of their flat images or sections. Such errors are perpetuated through a strange psychological chain reaction. 1) The first author who observes sections of an object, although presenting faithful pictures of sections of it, identifies its shape incorrectly. Such an initial mistake may be due to identification of the flat image with the object itself or to failure to consider the shape of the image as a function of the shape of the real object and the angle and level of cutting. 2) The first author describes verbally his personal concept of the object. 3) The reader reads the text of a publication before or without examining the pictorial evidence. 4) The reader's belief in the authority of the printed word immunizes him against critical evaluation of the evidence. 5) The reader regards a published opinion as a "fact." 6) A mechanism of suppression of new evidence is set up in the brain of the reader in favor of previously published, verbalized concepts. His brain unconsciously rejects new concepts that might arise intracerebrally. The printed word supersedes visual evidence. 7) A secondary mechanism parallels steps 3 to 6. An observer notices an unfamiliar figure in the microscope. Following established procedures for scientific investigations, he refrains from forming an opinion about his observation. Instead he rushes to the library searching for similar, published observations. If he finds a previous report about a similar shape, he accepts it as a "fact" and he "confirms" the previously printed viewpoint. Let me interject a personal experience concerning this mechanism. I investigated the arrangement of blood vessels in the human liver by means of corrosion preparations. The work was divided between an assistant and me. He was assigned the task of preparing drawings of two specimens. In his drawings he showed a structure which was absent from the specimens but had been described in a previous publication. This article shows simple ways for correct initial identification of shape and structure and for the breaking of the reverberating circuit of erroneous thinking.
Positron-emission tomography (PET) can localize functions of the human brain by imaging regional cerebral blood flow (CBF) during voluntary behaviour. Functional brain mapping with PET, however, has been hindered by PET's poor spatial resolution (typically greater than 1 cm). We have developed an image-analysis strategy that can map functional zones not resolved by conventional PET images. Brain areas selectively activated by a behavioural task can be isolated by subtracting a paired control-state image from the task-state image, thereby removing areas not recruited by the task. When imaged in isolation the centre of an activated area can be located very precisely. This allows subtle shifts in response locale due to changes in task to be detected readily despite poor spatial resolution. As an initial application of this strategy we mapped the retinal projection topography of human primary visual cortex. Functional zones separated by less than 3 mm (centre-to-centre) were differentiated using PET CBF images with a spatial resolution of 18 mm. This technique is not limited to a particular brain area or type of behaviour but does require that the increase in CBF produced by the task be both intense and focal.
Bovine brain gangliosides were applied to primary and established neuronal cultures to examine the role of gangliosides in neuronal development. Media containing gangliosides enhanced the degree of axonal elongation exhibited by sensory ganglia neurons and increased the length and number of Neuro-2a neuroblastoma cell processes. Ganglioside-supplemented media caused a twofold increase in ornithine decarboxylase activity in both culture systems. These experiments suggest that gangliosides function as acceptor molecules for growth-promoting substances in embryonic and tumor-derived neurons.
Visual stimuli can acquire positive or negative value through their association with rewards and punishments, a process called reinforcement learning. Although we now know a great deal about how the brain analyses visual information, we know little about how visual representations become linked with values. To study this process, we turned to the amygdala, a brain structure implicated in reinforcement learning. We recorded the activity of individual amygdala neurons in monkeys while abstract images acquired either positive or negative value through conditioning. After monkeys had learned the initial associations, we reversed image value assignments. We examined neural responses in relation to these reversals in order to estimate the relative contribution to neural activity of the sensory properties of images and their conditioned values. Here we show that changes in the values of images modulate neural activity, and that this modulation occurs rapidly enough to account for, and correlates with, monkeys' learning. Furthermore, distinct populations of neurons encode the positive and negative values of visual stimuli. Behavioural and physiological responses to visual stimuli may therefore be based in part on the plastic representation of value provided by the amygdala.
To navigate our complex world, our brains have evolved a sophisticated ability to quickly learn arbitrary rules such as 'stop at red'. Studies in monkeys using a laboratory test of this capacity--conditional association learning--have revealed that frontal lobe structures (including the prefrontal cortex) as well as subcortical nuclei of the basal ganglia are involved in such learning. Neural correlates of associative learning have been observed in both brain regions, but whether or not these regions have unique functions is unclear, as they have typically been studied separately using different tasks. Here we show that during associative learning in monkeys, neural activity in these areas changes at different rates: the striatum (an input structure of the basal ganglia) showed rapid, almost bistable, changes compared with a slower trend in the prefrontal cortex that was more in accordance with slow improvements in behavioural performance. Also, pre-saccadic activity began progressively earlier in the striatum but not in the prefrontal cortex as learning took place. These results support the hypothesis that rewarded associations are first identified by the basal ganglia, the output of which 'trains' slower learning mechanisms in the frontal cortex.
Correlated firing among neurons is widespread in the visual system. Neighbouring neurons, in areas from retina to cortex, tend to fire together more often than would be expected by chance. The importance of this correlated firing for encoding visual information is unclear and controversial. Here we examine its importance in the retina. We present the retina with natural stimuli and record the responses of its output cells, the ganglion cells. We then use information theoretic techniques to measure the amount of information about the stimuli that can be obtained from the cells under two conditions: when their correlated firing is taken into account, and when their correlated firing is ignored. We find that more than 90% of the information about the stimuli can be obtained from the cells when their correlated firing is ignored. This indicates that ganglion cells act largely independently to encode information, which greatly simplifies the problem of decoding their activity.
Neuronal cells express a pp60c-src variant that displays an altered electrophoretic mobility and a different V8 peptide pattern relative to pp60c-src expressed in tissues of non-neuronal origin. To determine whether the neuronal form of pp60c-src is encoded by a brain-specific messenger RNA, a mouse brain complementary DNA (cDNA) library was screened with a chicken c-src probe and a 3.8-kilobase c-src cDNA clone was isolated. This clone encodes a 60-kilodalton protein that differs from chicken or human pp60c-src primarily in having six extra amino acids (Arg-Lys-Val-Asp-Val-Arg) within the NH2-terminal 16 kilodaltons of the molecule. S1 nuclease protection analysis confirmed that brain c-src RNA contains an 18-nucleotide insertion at the position of the extra six amino acids. This insertion occurs at a position that corresponds to a splice junction in the chicken and human c-src genes. The isolated c-src cDNA clone encodes a protein that displays an identical V8 peptide pattern to that observed in pp60c-src isolated from tissues of neuronal origin.
Common copy number variations (CNVs) represent a significant source of genetic diversity, yet their influence on phenotypic variability, including disease susceptibility, remains poorly understood. To address this problem in human cancer, we performed a genome-wide association study of CNVs in the childhood cancer neuroblastoma, a disease in which single nucleotide polymorphism variations are known to influence susceptibility. We first genotyped 846 Caucasian neuroblastoma patients and 803 healthy Caucasian controls at approximately 550,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms, and performed a CNV-based test for association. We then replicated significant observations in two independent sample sets comprised of a total of 595 cases and 3,357 controls. Here we describe the identification of a common CNV at chromosome 1q21.1 associated with neuroblastoma in the discovery set, which was confirmed in both replication sets. This CNV was validated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction, fluorescent in situ hybridization and analysis of matched tumour specimens, and was shown to be heritable in an independent set of 713 cancer-free parent-offspring trios. We identified a previously unknown transcript within the CNV that showed high sequence similarity to several neuroblastoma breakpoint family (NBPF) genes and represents a new member of this gene family (NBPF23). This transcript was preferentially expressed in fetal brain and fetal sympathetic nervous tissues, and the expression level was strictly correlated with CNV state in neuroblastoma cells. These data demonstrate that inherited copy number variation at 1q21.1 is associated with neuroblastoma and implicate a previously unknown neuroblastoma breakpoint family gene in early tumorigenesis of this childhood cancer.
Abstract. Mice were injected in the temporal region of the brain with cycloheximide or puromycin; both agents markedly inhibit protein synthesis in the brain. Recordings of electrical activity were made in the hippocampal region 5 hours after injection of these drugs. The amplitude and frequency observed in records from mice injected with cycloheximide were indistinguishable from those injected with saline alone. Records from puromycin-injected mice were strikingly abnormal. This finding may contribute to the differences in behavioral effects of intracerebral injections of the two inhibitors of protein synthesis studied.
How neurons make specific synaptic connections is a central question in neurobiology. The targeting of the Drosophila R7 and R8 photoreceptor axons to different synaptic layers in the brain provides a model with which to explore the genetic programs regulating target specificity. In principle this can be accomplished by cell-type-specific molecules mediating the recognition between synaptic partners. Alternatively, specificity could also be achieved through cell-type-specific repression of particular targeting molecules. Here we show that a key step in the targeting of the R7 neuron is the active repression of the R8 targeting program. Repression is dependent on NF-YC, a subunit of the NF-Y (nuclear factor Y) transcription factor. In the absence of NF-YC, R7 axons terminate in the same layer as R8 axons. Genetic experiments indicate that this is due solely to the derepression of the R8-specific transcription factor Senseless (Sens) late in R7 differentiation. Sens is sufficient to control R8 targeting specificity and we demonstrate that Sens directly binds to an evolutionarily conserved DNA sequence upstream of the start of transcription of an R8-specific cell-surface protein, Capricious (Caps) that regulates R8 target specificity. We show that R7 targeting requires the R7-specific transcription factor Prospero (Pros) in parallel to repression of the R8 targeting pathway by NF-YC. Previous studies demonstrated that Sens and Pros directly regulate the expression of specific rhodopsins in R8 and R7. We propose that the use of the same transcription factors to promote the cell-type-specific expression of sensory receptors and cell-surface proteins regulating synaptic target specificity provides a simple and general mechanism for ensuring that transmission of sensory information is processed by the appropriate specialized neural circuits.
The anterior part of the macaque inferior temporal cortex, area TE, occupies a large portion of the temporal lobe and is critical for object recognition. Thus far, no relation between anatomical subdivisions of TE and neuronal selectivity has been described. Here, we present evidence that neurons selective for three-dimensional (3D) shape are concentrated in the lower bank of the superior temporal sulcus, whereas neurons in lateral TE are generally unselective for 3D shape, though equally selective for 2D shape. These findings reveal that TE consists of at least two distinct areas, one of which processes a specific object property.
Two distinct physiological mechanisms underlying loudness sensation were inferred from electric stimulation of the human auditory nerve and brainstem. In contrast to a power function relating loudness and stimulus intensity in acoustic hearing, loudness in electric stimulation of the auditory nerve depends on stimulus frequency. Loudness is an exponential function of electric amplitude for high frequencies and is a power function for low frequencies. A frequency-dependent, two-stage model is suggested to explain the loudness function, in which the first stage of processing is performed by a mechanical mechanism in the cochlea for high-frequency stimuli and by a neural mechanism in the cochlear nucleus for low-frequency stimuli.
The survival and functional maintenance of vertebrate neurons critically depends on the availability of specific neurotrophic factors. So far, only two such factors, nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) have been characterized and shown to have the typical features of secretory proteins. This characterization has been possible because of the extraordinarily large quantities of NGF in some adult tissues, and the virtually unlimited availability of brain tissue from which BDNF was isolated. Both NGF and BDNF promote the survival of distinct neuronal populations in vivo and are related in their primary structure, suggesting that they are members of a gene family. Although there is little doubt about the existence of other such proteins, their low abundance has rendered their identification and characterization difficult. Taking advantage of sequence identities between NGF and BDNF, we have now identified a third member of this family, which we name neurotrophin-3. Both the tissue distribution of the messenger RNA and the neuronal specificity of this secretory protein differ from those of NGF and BDNF. Alignment of the sequences of the three proteins reveals a remarkable number of amino acid identities, including all cysteine residues. This alignment also delineates four variable domains, each of 7-11 amino acids, indicating structural elements presumably involved in the neuronal specificity of these proteins.
Indirect mechanisms are implicated in the pathogenesis of the dementia associated with human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) infection. Proinflammatory molecules such as tumor necrosis factor alpha and eicosanoids are elevated in the central nervous system of patients with HIV-1-related dementia. Nitric oxide (NO) is a potential mediator of neuronal injury, because cytokines may activate the immunologic (type II) isoform of NO synthase (iNOS). The levels of iNOS in severe HIV-1-associated dementia coincided with increased expression of the HIV-1 coat protein gp41. Furthermore, gp41 induced iNOS in primary cultures of mixed rat neuronal and glial cells and killed neurons through a NO-dependent mechanism. Thus, gp41-induced NO formation may contribute to the severe cognitive dysfunction associated with HIV-1 infection.
Neurons in the visual cortex of monkeys and cats have been characterized as either (i) bar and edge detectors or (ii) cells selective for certain spatial frequencies. To assess which of these functional descriptions is more accurate, we measured (i) the selectivity and (ii) the responsivity-sensitivity of these neurons to bars of various widths and gratings of various spatial frequencies. All of the cells recorded from were considerably more selective along the dimension of spatial frequency than along the dimension of bar width. Further, most were more responsive and sensitive to the grating of optimal frequency than to the bar of optimal width.
The human brain has anatomically distinct areas in which processing is laid out in space at the millimetre level with substantial variation across individuals. Activity occurs along a cortical ribbon 1.5-3 mm thick in response to specific stimuli. Here we report the first use of cortical ribbon analysis on humans using non-invasive functional magnetic resonance imaging techniques performed with a conventional 1.5 T MRI scanner. Changes in activation were detected using T2*-weighted, gradient echo imaging sequences. Subjects observed partial field, flashing checkerboard patterns (left-right, top-bottom, half rings, and wedges). Stimuli produced magnetic resonance signal changes in the 1-8% range, varying at the millimetre scale, which showed contralateral vertically reflected patterns of activation in the visual cortex. To compare the spatial topographies across subjects, computer algorithms were used to control for the subject-unique folding of cortex, providing a flattened cortical ribbon identifying four topographically distinct areas.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is essential for the survival of both peripheral ganglion cells and central cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain. The accelerated loss of central cholinergic neurons during Alzheimer's disease may be a determinant of dementia in these patients and may therefore suggest a therapeutic role for NGF. However, NGF does not significantly penetrate the blood-brain barrier, which makes its clinical utility dependent on invasive neurosurgical procedures. When conjugated to an antibody to the transferrin receptor, however, NGF crossed the blood-brain barrier after peripheral injection. This conjugated NGF increased the survival of both cholinergic and noncholinergic neurons of the medial septal nucleus that had been transplanted into the anterior chamber of the rat eye. This approach may prove useful for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease and other neurological disorders that are amenable to treatment by proteins that do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier.
Different global patterns of brain activity are associated with distinct arousal and behavioral states of an animal, but how the brain rapidly switches between different states remains unclear. We here report that repetitive high-frequency burst spiking of a single rat cortical neuron could trigger a switch between the cortical states resembling slow-wave and rapid-eye-movement sleep. This is reflected in the switching of the membrane potential of the stimulated neuron from slow UP/DOWN oscillations to a persistent-UP state or vice versa, with concurrent changes in the temporal pattern of cortical local field potential (LFP) recorded several millimeters away. These results point to the power of single cortical neurons in modulating the behavioral state of an animal.
Bovine brain-derived acidic fibroblast growth factor (aFGF) is a protein mitogen originally identified in partially purified preparations of whole brain. The protein was purified to homogeneity and shown to be a potent vascular endothelial cell mitogen in culture and angiogenic substance in vivo. The homology of aFGF to human interleukin-1 beta was inferred from partial sequence data. The complete amino acid sequence of aFGF has now been determined and observed to be similar to both basic FGF and interleukin-1's. A neuropeptide-like sequence, flanked by basic dipeptides, was observed within the aFGF sequence.
The cerebral representation of language, deduced from observing patients with brain lesions and from stimulations and recordings performed during brain surgery, has been further clarified by recent positron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging measurements. We now expand this static view into the dynamics of cortical activation using the accurate spatiotemporal resolution of whole-head magnetoencephalography. During picture naming, the conversion from visual to symbolic representation progressed bilaterally from the occipital visual cortex towards temporal and frontal lobes. Overt naming elicited the most widespread cortical activation. Some language-related sites also reacted, though more weakly or after a longer delay, during covert naming and even passive viewing.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a paralytic and usually fatal disorder caused by motor-neuron degeneration in the brain and spinal cord. Most cases of ALS are sporadic but about 5-10% are familial. Mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), TAR DNA-binding protein (TARDBP, also known as TDP43) and fused in sarcoma (FUS, also known as translocated in liposarcoma (TLS)) account for approximately 30% of classic familial ALS. Mutations in several other genes have also been reported as rare causes of ALS or ALS-like syndromes. The causes of the remaining cases of familial ALS and of the vast majority of sporadic ALS are unknown. Despite extensive studies of previously identified ALS-causing genes, the pathogenic mechanism underlying motor-neuron degeneration in ALS remains largely obscure. Dementia, usually of the frontotemporal lobar type, may occur in some ALS cases. It is unclear whether ALS and dementia share common aetiology and pathogenesis in ALS/dementia. Here we show that mutations in UBQLN2, which encodes the ubiquitin-like protein ubiquilin 2, cause dominantly inherited, chromosome-X-linked ALS and ALS/dementia. We describe novel ubiquilin 2 pathology in the spinal cords of ALS cases and in the brains of ALS/dementia cases with or without UBQLN2 mutations. Ubiquilin 2 is a member of the ubiquilin family, which regulates the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins. Functional analysis showed that mutations in UBQLN2 lead to an impairment of protein degradation. Therefore, our findings link abnormalities in ubiquilin 2 to defects in the protein degradation pathway, abnormal protein aggregation and neurodegeneration, indicating a common pathogenic mechanism that can be exploited for therapeutic intervention.
Recognition of objects from their visual images is a key function of the primate brain. This recognition is not a template matching between the input image and stored images like the vision in lower animals but is a flexible process in which considerable change in images, resulting from different illumination, viewing angle, and articulation of the object, can be tolerated. Recent experimental findings about the representation of object images in the inferotemporal cortex, a brain structure that is thought to be essential for object vision, are summarized and discussed in relation to the computational frames proposed for object recognition.
Recent studies have uncovered a synaptic process with properties required for an intermediate step in memory storage. Calcium rapidly and irreversibly increases the number of receptors for glutamate (a probable neurotransmitter) in forebrain synaptic membranes by activating a proteinase (calpain) that degrades fodrin, a spectrin-like protein. This process provides a means through which physiological activity could produce long-lasting changes in synaptic chemistry and ultrastructure. Since the process is only poorly represented in the brain stem, it is hypothesized to be responsible for those forms of memory localized in the telencephalon.
The mechanism by which sex steroids rapidly modulate the excitability of neurons was investigated by intracellular recording of neurons in rat medial amygdala brain slices. Brief hyperpolarization and increased potassium conductance were produced by 17 beta-estradiol. This effect persisted after elimination of synaptic input and after suppression of protein synthesis. Thus, 17 beta-estradiol directly changes the ionic conductance of the postsynaptic membrane of medial amygdala neurons. In addition, a greater proportion of the neurons from females than from males responded to 17 beta-estradiol.
The mouse pink-eyed cleft-palate (p(cp)) mutation is characterized by hypopigmentation associated with cleft palate, neurological disorders and runting. Most p(cp) homozygotes are born with cleft palate and die shortly after birth, presumably as a result of feeding problems. A few exceptional p(cp) mutants live beyond this stage but display tremor and jerky gait. We report here that the genes encoding the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor subunits alpha 5 (originally described as alpha 4; ref. 4), beta 3 and gamma 3 are disrupted by a deletion in p(cp) mice. We also show that the alpha 5 and gamma 3 genes are located between the p and beta 3 genes on mouse chromosome 7. The p(cp) deletion leads to alterations of binding properties of the GABAA receptors in the brain, providing an in vivo model system for studying GABAA receptor function. The human homologue of the region deleted in p(cp) mice is associated with Angelman syndrome. Thus, p(cp) mice may be useful in defining the region containing the gene(s) for this syndrome.
Empathizing is the capacity to predict and to respond to the behavior of agents (usually people) by inferring their mental states and responding to these with an appropriate emotion. Systemizing is the capacity to predict and to respond to the behavior of nonagentive deterministic systems by analyzing input-operation-output relations and inferring the rules that govern such systems. At a population level, females are stronger empathizers and males are stronger systemizers. The "extreme male brain" theory posits that autism represents an extreme of the male pattern (impaired empathizing and enhanced systemizing). Here we suggest that specific aspects of autistic neuroanatomy may also be extremes of typical male neuroanatomy.
Visual words that are masked and presented so briefly that they cannot be seen may nevertheless facilitate the subsequent processing of related words, a phenomenon called masked priming. It has been debated whether masked primes can activate cognitive processes without gaining access to consciousness. Here we use a combination of behavioural and brain-imaging techniques to estimate the depth of processing of masked numerical primes. Our results indicate that masked stimuli have a measurable influence on electrical and haemodynamic measures of brain activity. When subjects engage in an overt semantic comparison task with a clearly visible target numeral, measures of covert motor activity indicate that they also unconsciously apply the task instructions to an unseen masked numeral. A stream of perceptual, semantic and motor processes can therefore occur without awareness.
When a kitten is subjected to monocular lid suture early in life, cells in laminae of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) connected to the sutured eye grow less than normal and cells in those laminae connected to the non-sutured eye grow more than normal. These changes are seen primarily in the binocular segment of the LGN, which corresponds to the central visual field, and are due to competition either between intracortical afferents originating from the different LGN laminae, or directly among cells within the LGN. The afferent deprivation induced by lid suture, however, is not complete, as retinal ganglion cells fire tonically both in darkness and in light. It is generally thought that this tonic retinal activity is necessary to maintain neuronal excitability at normal threshold in the central visual pathway. In the visual cortex of developing kittens, we previously showed a long-lasting change in ocular dominance of binocular cells by a brief blockade of retinal activity in one optic nerve. We report here that a complete blockade of retinal activity in one eye causes major changes in LGN cell size within 1 week. These changes occur throughout the LGN, including the monocular segment where binocular competition does not occur. The results indicate that tonic retinal activity may have an important role in the control of geniculate cell size.
Neuronal activity plays an important role in the development of the visual pathway. The modulation of synaptic transmission by temporal correlation between pre- and postsynaptic activity is one mechanism which could underly visual cortical plasticity. We report here that functional changes in single neurons of area 17, analogous to those known to take place during epigenesis of visual cortex, can be induced experimentally during the time of recording. This was done by a differential pairing procedure, during which iontophoresis was used to artificially increase the visual response for a given stimulus, and to decrease (or block) the response for a second stimulus which differed in ocularity or orientation. Long-term modifications in ocular dominance and orientation selectivity were produced in 33% and 43% of recorded cells respectively. Neuronal selectivity was nearly always displaced towards the stimulus paired with the reinforced visual response. The largest changes were obtained at the peak of the critical period in normally reared and visually deprived kittens, but changes were also observed in adults. Our findings support the role of temporal correlation between pre- and postsynaptic activity in the induction of long-lasting modifications of synaptic transmission during development, and in associative learning.
The anatomy of 61 of the smallest interneurons in the brain of the locust shows the same tendency toward uniqueness, contancy of neuropil abortizations, and frequency of occurrence of supernumerary cells as does that of 17 large interneurons; the size and number of neurons thus have no obligatory relation to the concept of the unique identifiable neuron.
In contrast to well-studied through-protection neurons that propagate information from one region to another in the central nervous system, short-axon or axonless neurons form local circuits, transmitting signals through synapses and electrical junctions between their dendrites. Interaction in this dendritic network proceeds without spike action potentials. Interaction is mediated by graded electrotonic changes of potential and is transmitted through high sensitivity (submillivolt threshold) synapses rather than by lower sensitivity (20 to 100-mv threshold) synapses typical of projection neurons. A crucial feature of local circuits is their high degree of interaction both through specialized junctional structures and through the extracellular fields generated by local and more distant brain regions. The anatomical evidence for the nature and distribution of neuronal local circuits in the nervous system is surveyed. Bioelectric mechanisms are discussed in relation to the special properties of local circuits, including dendrodendritic synapses, synaptic sensitivity, electrotonic coupling, and field effects. Intraneuronal and interneuronal transport of various types of substances suggests that the biochemical and the bioelectrical parameters are functionally interwoven. Through such interactions neuronal local circuits, with their distinctive properties, may play an essential role in higher brain function.
Norepinephrine increases the concentration of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP) in an incubated suspension of brain microvessels. This response can be matched by other drugs that stimulate the beta receptors, but the alpha-adrenergic agonist phenylephrine is without effect; beta-adrenergic blockade abolishes the response while alpha-adrenergic blockade produces no change. The data support the contention that cerebral capillary function is subject to adrenergic neural control.
Estimates of IQ heritability are subject to a variety of systematic errors. The IQ scores themselves contain uncontrollable, systematic errors of unknown magnitude. These arise because IQ scores, unlike conventional physical and biological measurements, have a purely instrumental definition. The effects of these errors are apparent in the very large discrepancies among IQ correlations measured by different investigators. Genotype-environment correlations, whose effects can sometimes be minimized, if not wholly eliminated, in experiments with plants and animals, are nearly always important in human populations. The absence of significant effects arising from genotype-environment correlations is a necessary condition for the applicability of conventional heritability analysis to phenotypically plastic traits. When this condition fails, no quantitative inferences about heritability can be drawn from measured phenotypic variances and covariances, except under special conditions that are unlikely to be satisfied by phenotypically plastic traits in human populations. Inadequate understanding of the precise environmental factors relevant to the development of specific behavioral traits is an important source of systematic errors, as is the inability to allow adequately for the effects of assortative mating and gene-gene interaction. Systematic cultural differences and differences in psychological environment among races and among sociocco-nomic groups vitiate any attempt to draw from IQ data meaningful inferences about genetic differences. Estimates based on phenotypic correlations between separated monozygotic twins-usually considered to be the most reliable kind of estimates-are vitiated by systematic errors inherent in IQ tests, by the presence of genotype-environment correlation, and by the lack of detailed understanding of environmental factors relevant to the development of behavioral traits. Other kinds of estimates are beset, in addition, by systematic errors arising from incomplete allowance for the effects of assortative mating and from gene-gene interactions. The only potentially useful data are phenotypic correlations between unrelated foster children reared together, which could, in principle, yield lower limits for e(2). Available data indicate that, for unrelated foster children reared together, the broad heritability (h(2)) may lie between 0.0 and 0.5. This estimate does not apply to populations composed of children reared by their biological parents or by near relatives. For such populations the heritability of IQ remains undefined. The only data that might yield meaningful estimates ot narrow heritability are phenotypic correlations between half-sibs reared in statistically independent environments. No useful data of this kind are available. Intervention studies like Heber's Milwaukee Project afford an alternative and comparatively direct way of studying the plasticity of cognitive and other behavioral traits in human populations. Results obtained so far strongly suggest that the development of cognitive skills is highly sensitive to variations in environmental factors. These conclusions have three obvious implications for the broader issues mentioned at the beginning of this article. 1) Published analyses of IQ data provide no support whatever for Jensen's thesis that inequalities in cognitive performance are due largely to genetic differences. As Lewontin (8) has clearly shown, the value of the broad heritability of IQ is in any case only marginally relevant to this question. I have argued that conventional estimates of the broad heritability of IQ are invalid and that the only data on which potentially valid estimates might be based are consistent with a broad heritability of less than 0.5. On the other hand, intervention studies, if their findings prove to be replicable, would directly establish that, under suitable conditions, the offspring of parents whose cognitive skills are so poorly developed as to exclude them from all but the most menial occupations can achieve what are regarded as distinctly high levels of cognitive performance. Thus, despite the fact that children differ suibstantially in cognitive aptitudes and appetites, and despite the very high probability that these differences have a substantial genetic component, available scientific evidence strongly suggests that environmental factors are responsible for the failure of children not suffering from specific neurological disorders to achieve adequate levels of cognitive performance. 2) Under prevailing social conditions, no valid inferences can be drawn from IQ data concerning systematic genetic differences among races or socioeconomic groups. Research along present lines directed toward this end-whatever its ethical status-is scientifically worthless. 3) Since there are no suitable data for estimating the narrow heritability of IQ, it seems pointless to speculate about the prospects for a hereditary meritocracy based on IQ.
The spatial differences between the images seen by the two eyes, called binocular disparities, can be used to recover the volumetric (three-dimensional) aspects of a scene. The computation of disparity depends upon the correct identification of corresponding features in the two images. Understanding what image features are used by the brain to solve this matching problem is one of the main issues in stereoscopic vision. Many cortical neurons in visual areas V1 (ref. 2), MT (refs 3, 4) and MST (refs 5, 6) that are tuned to binocular disparity are also tuned to orientation, motion direction and speed. Although psychophysical work has shown that motion direction can facilitate binocular matching, the psychophysical literature on the role of orientation is mixed, and it has been argued that speed differences are ineffective in aiding correspondence. Here we use a different psychophysical paradigm to show that the visual system uses similarities in orientation, motion direction and speed to achieve binocular correspondence. These results indicate that cells that multiplex orientation, motion direction, speed and binocular disparity may help to solve the binocular matching problem.
Electrical stimulation of area 18 of the cat visual cortex produces intense excitation of neurons in the superior colliculus. Excitation is followed by a period of decreased collicular responsiveness to light stimulation. These effects are seen in both directionally selective and nonselective units. The corticocollicular projection is retinotopically organized.
On the basis of a description of an endocast from Hadar early hominid AL 162-28, it has been suggested that cerebral organization towards a human pattern occurred as early as 3-4 Myr ago. I have studied a cast of the AL 162-28 calvaria and a copy of an endocast prepared from the original fossil, and report here observations regarding cranial capacity, the relationship between endocast and skull, sulcal pattern, brain shape and cranial venous sinuses. Contrary to the earlier report, all of these features appear to be consistent with an ape-like external cortical morphology in Hadar early hominids and in my view there is no evidence for expansion or reorganization of parietal/occipital regions. Cranial capacity of AL 162-28 is at least 10% and 29% smaller than respective mean capacities of subsequently living gracile and robust australopithecines, who also exhibit ape-like cortical patterns. Thus palaeoneurological evidence from the entire early hominid record suggests that the trend towards brain enlargement preceded cortical reorganization.
On pages 1775 and 1779, independent research teams describe experiments in which bone marrow cells became neuronlike cells in the brain, providing new evidence for the versatility of adult stem cells. But ample uncertainties must be resolved before such results can be translated into therapeutics. The most important next step, say several stem cell researchers, is to identify the molecular processes that underlie the impressive feats of stem cells, as many of the purported breakthroughs are simply observations.
Songbirds are capable of vocal learning and communication and are ideally suited to the study of neural mechanisms of complex sensory and motor processing. Vocal communication in a noisy bird colony and vocal learning of a specific song template both require the ability to monitor auditory feedback to distinguish self-generated vocalizations from external sounds and to identify mismatches between the developing song and a memorized template acquired from a tutor. However, neurons that respond to auditory feedback from vocal output have not been found in song-control areas despite intensive searching. Here we investigate feedback processing outside the traditional song system, in single auditory forebrain neurons of juvenile zebra finches that were in a late developmental stage of song learning. Overall, we found similarity of spike responses during singing and during playback of the bird's own song, with song responses commonly leading by a few milliseconds. However, brief time-locked acoustic perturbations of auditory feedback revealed complex sensitivity that could not be predicted from passive playback responses. Some neurons that responded to playback perturbations did not respond to song perturbations, which is reminiscent of sensory-motor mirror neurons. By contrast, some neurons were highly feedback sensitive in that they responded vigorously to song perturbations, but not to unperturbed songs or perturbed playback. These findings suggest that a computational function of forebrain auditory areas may be to detect errors between actual feedback and mirrored feedback deriving from an internal model of the bird's own song or that of its tutor. Such feedback-sensitive spikes could constitute the key signals that trigger adaptive motor responses to song disruptions or reinforce exploratory motor gestures for vocal learning.
The hormone progesterone is readily converted to 3alpha-OH-5alpha-pregnan-20-one (3alpha,5alpha-THP) in the brains of males and females. In the brain, 3alpha,5alpha-THP acts like a sedative, decreasing anxiety and reducing seizure activity, by enhancing the function of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), the brain's major inhibitory neurotransmitter. Symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (PMS), such as anxiety and seizure susceptibility, are associated with sharp declines in circulating levels of progesterone and, consequently, of levels of 3alpha,5alpha-THP in the brain. Abrupt discontinuation of use of sedatives such as benzodiazepines and ethanol can also produce PMS-like withdrawal symptoms. Here we report a progesterone-withdrawal paradigm, designed to mimic PMS and post-partum syndrome in a rat model. In this model, withdrawal of progesterone leads to increased seizure susceptibility and insensitivity to benzodiazepine sedatives through an effect on gene transcription. Specifically, this effect was due to reduced levels of 3alpha,5alpha-THP which enhance transcription of the gene encoding the alpha4 subunit of the GABA(A) receptor. We also find that increased susceptibility to seizure after progesferone withdrawal is due to a sixfold decrease in the decay time for GABA currents and consequent decreased inhibitory function. Blockade of the alpha4 gene transcript prevents these withdrawal properties. PMS symptoms may therefore be attributable, in part, to alterations in expression of GABA(A) receptor subunits as a result of progesterone withdrawal.
Intravenous administration of [(3)H]lysergic acid diethylamide(LSD) to rats resulted in accumulation of the drug in the brain within 15 minutes. Autoradiographic methods were used to differentiate free and bound [(3)H]LSD in brain tissue. Free [(3)H]LSD was generally distributed in the pituitary and pineal glands, cerebellum, hippocampus,and choroid plexus. Bound [(3)H]LSD was localized in neurons of the cortex, caudate nucleus, midbrain, and medulla,as well as in choroid plexus epithelium.
In newborn kittens, neurones in area 17 of the visual cortex projecting to area 18 are distributed in bands of uniform density across the superficial layers (laminae II, III and the upper part of IV) and the deep layers (V and VI). During weeks 2 and 3 postnatal, the cells of origin of this association pathway become mainly restricted to discrete, dense clusters, approximately 600 microns from centre to centre, in the upper layers, with intervening zones free of association cells, as in the adult cat. We have used retrogradely transported, long-lasting neuronal markers to investigate this developmental refinement of the pattern of cortico-cortical connections. The results, reported here, indicate that axonal retraction plays a significant part in the maturation of the clustered organization of superficial layer neurones projecting to area 18, but that cell death may also be a factor in the elimination of the inappropriate projection from the deep laminae.
Rapid information transfer within the brain depends on chemical signalling between neurons that is mediated primarily by glutamate and GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), acting at ionotropic receptors to cause excitatory or inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs or IPSPs), respectively. In addition, synaptically released glutamate acts on metabotropic receptors to excite neurons on a slower timescale through second-messenger cascades, including phosphoinositide hydrolysisl. We now report a unique IPSP mediated by the activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors. In ventral midbrain dopamine neurons, activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR1) mobilized calcium from caffeine/ryanodine-sensitive stores and increased an apamin-sensitive potassium conductance. The underlying potassium conductance and dependence on calcium stores set this IPSP apart from the slow IPSPs described so far. The mGluR-induced hyperpolarization was dependent on brief exposure to agonist, because prolonged application of exogenous agonist desensitized the hyperpolarization and caused the more commonly reported depolarization. The rapid rise and brief duration of synaptically released glutamate in the extracellular space can therefore mediate a rapid excitation through activation of ionotropic receptors, followed by inhibition through the mGluR1 receptor. Thus the idea that glutamate is solely an excitatory neurotransmitter must be replaced with a more complex view of its dual function in synaptic transmission.
Auditory brainstem potentials were recorded from abstinent chronic alcoholics and control subjects. The latencies of peaks II, III, IV, and V were significantly delayed in the alcoholic patients compared to control subjects. Brainstem transmission time was longer in alcoholics than in controls. This study provides systematic evidence that chronic alcohol abuse results in brainstem deficits suggesting possible demyelination of auditory tracts.
The teleost fish, Heterotis niloticus, has elaborate paired, spiraled pharyngeal structures that aid in concentrating and swallowing food. These epibranchial organs are lined by an epithelium rich in taste buds. Both the taste buds and the muscles of the epibranchial organs are innervated by components of the vagal nerve. Horseradish peroxidase neuronal tracing experiments show that these nerve fibers are connected centrally to an enormous epibranchial portion of the vagal lobes-a special visceral sensory and motor region of the medulla. The epibranchial portion of the vagal lobe is among the most remarkable structures found in the brains of vertebrates, for it is itself a spiral.
Focal electrical stimulation of the brain of Periplaneta americana evokes the release of a factor with high cardioaccelerator activity. Results of extirpation of components of the retrocerebral complex from an isolated head preparation imply that the corpus cardiacum is the critical component of this system. The cardioaccelerator is a heat-stable proteinaceous compound.
A high spatial resolution optical imaging system was developed to visualize cerebral cortical activity in vivo. This method is based on activity-dependent intrinsic signals and does not use voltage-sensitive dyes. Images of the living monkey striate (VI) and extrastriate (V2) visual cortex, taken during visual stimulation, were analyzed to yield maps of the distribution of cells with various functional properties. The cytochrome oxidase--rich blobs of V1 and the stripes of V2 were imaged in the living brain. In V2, no ocular dominance organization was seen, while regions of poor orientation tuning colocalized to every other cytochrome oxidase stripe. The orientation tuning of other regions of V2 appeared organized as modules that are larger and more uniform than those in V1.
Bone marrow stem cells give rise to a variety of hematopoietic lineages and repopulate the blood throughout adult life. We show that, in a strain of mice incapable of developing cells of the myeloid and lymphoid lineages, transplanted adult bone marrow cells migrated into the brain and differentiated into cells that expressed neuron-specific antigens. These findings raise the possibility that bone marrow-derived cells may provide an alternative source of neurons in patients with neurodegenerative diseases or central nervous system injury.
Determination of the dynamical structure of neural circuits--the general principles of how neural activity varies with time and manipulates information--is a prerequisite to understanding their computational function. Rhythmically active or oscillating neural circuits are particularly interesting dynamical structures, as rhythms and oscillations are a prominent feature of mammalian central nervous system electrophysiology. Coherent oscillations by networks of interneurons are observed in the vertebrate olfactory system and have recently been described in mammalian visual cortex. These interneuronal networks display oscillations in local field potential (LFP) and probability of producing action potentials that are highly correlated between subcircuits sharing the same stimulus features. Much less is known about the existence and importance of network oscillations in the higher centres of invertebrates. Here we report that a network of olfactory interneurons in the cerebral ganglion of the terrestrial mollusc Limax maximus also displays coherent oscillations in LFP which are modified by odour input. This dynamical structure could be central to the odour recognition and odour learning ability of Limax.
Acute traumatic stress may lead to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which is characterized by delayed neuropsychiatric symptoms including depression, irritability, and impaired cognitive performance. Curiously, inhibitors of the acetylcholine-hydrolysing enzyme acetylcholinesterase may induce psychopathologies that are reminiscent of PTSD. It is unknown how a single stressful event mediates long-term neuronal plasticity. Moreover, no mechanism has been proposed to explain the convergent neuropsychological outcomes of stress and of acetylcholinesterase inhibition. However, acute stress elicits a transient increase in the amounts released of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine and a phase of enhanced neuronal excitability. Inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase also promote enhanced electrical brain activity, presumably by increasing the survival of acetylcholine at the synapse. Here we report that there is similar bidirectional modulation of genes that regulate acetylcholine availability after stress and blockade of acetylcholinesterase. These calcium-dependent changes in gene expression coincide with phases of rapid enhancement and delayed depression of neuronal excitability. Both of these phases are mediated by muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Our results suggest a model in which robust cholinergic stimulation triggers rapid induction of the gene encoding the transcription factor c-Fos. This protein then mediates selective regulatory effects on the long-lasting activities of genes involved in acetylcholine metabolism.
Tritiated acetylcholine was used to measure binding sites with characteristics of nicotinic cholinergic receptors in rat brain. Regulation of the binding sites in vivo was examined by administering two drugs that stimulate nicotinic receptors directly or indirectly. After 10 days of exposure to the cholinesterase inhibitor diisopropyl fluorophosphate, binding of tritiated acetylcholine in the cerebral cortex was decreased. However, after repeated administration of nicotine for 10 days, binding of tritiated acetylcholine in the cortex was increased. Saturation analysis of tritiated acetylcholine binding in the cortices of rats treated with diisopropyl fluorophosphate or nicotine indicated that the number of binding sites decreased and increased, respectively, while the affinity of the sites was unaltered.
Serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] neurotransmission in the central nervous system modulates depression and anxiety-related behaviors in humans and rodents, but the responsible downstream receptors remain poorly understood. We demonstrate that global disruption of 5-HT2A receptor (5HT2AR) signaling in mice reduces inhibition in conflict anxiety paradigms without affecting fear-conditioned and depression-related behaviors. Selective restoration of 5HT2AR signaling to the cortex normalized conflict anxiety behaviors. These findings indicate a specific role for cortical 5HT2AR function in the modulation of conflict anxiety, consistent with models of cortical, "top-down" influences on risk assessment.
In the adult cerebral cortex, many retrovirally labelled clones are widely dispersed, though the mechanisms of this dispersion are not well understood. Here we investigate the temporal sequence of clonal dispersion after labelling progenitors of rat cortical cells with replication-incompetent retroviruses at early stages of cortical neurogenesis, 14-15 days after conception (E14/15). The location of labelled daughter cells was determined 3, 6 or 10 days later. Labelled sibling cells were radially arrayed three days after infection (E18). In contrast, by six days after infection (E20/21), 43% of cortical clones were dispersed non-radially by at least 500 microns. Four of these widespread clones were dispersed longitudinally by > or = 2 mm, implying sustained rates of dispersion of > 15 microns per hour. Dispersed sibling cells occurred within proliferative zones of the forebrain in 35% of widely dispersed clones, suggesting that some dispersion reflects movement of dividing cells. Some clones dispersed beyond the neocortex into the olfactory bulb. Progenitor cell dispersion represents a previously unrecognized mode of migration by which sibling cells become widely dispersed in the developing forebrain.
L-glutamate, the neurotransmitter of the majority of excitatory synapses in the brain, acts on three classes of ionotropic receptors: NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate), AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid) and kainate receptors. Little is known about the physiological role of kainate receptors because in many experimental situations it is not possible to distinguish them from AMPA receptors. Mice with disrupted kainate receptor genes enable the study of the specific role of kainate receptors in synaptic transmission as well as in the neurotoxic effects of kainate. We have now generated mutant mice lacking the kainate-receptor subunit GluR6. The hippocampal neurons in the CA3 region of these mutant mice are much less sensitive to kainate. In addition, a postsynaptic kainate current evoked in CA3 neurons by a train of stimulation of the mossy fibre system is absent in the mutant. We find that GluR6-deficient mice are less susceptible to systemic administration of kainate, as judged by onset of seizures and by the activation of immediate early genes in the hippocampus. Our results indicate that kainate receptors containing the GluR6 subunit are important in synaptic transmission as well as in the epileptogenic effects of kainate.
Alzheimer's disease is a progressive degenerative disease of the nervous system characterized neuropathologically by the presence of senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in amygdala, hippocampus and neocortex. Dysfunction and death of basal forebrain cholinergic neurones projecting to forebrain targets are associated with marked decreases in cholinergic markers, including the activity of choline acetyltransferase (ChAT). Although cortical levels of somatostatin and somatostatin receptors are reduced in Alzheimer's, no consistent changes have been reported in other neuropeptide systems. We have now examined in control and Alzheimer's brain tissues pre- and postsynaptic markers of corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), a hypothalamic peptide regulating pituitary-adrenocortical secretion which also seems to act as a neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS). We have found that in Alzheimer's, the concentrations of CRF-like immunoreactivity (CRF-IR) are reduced and that there are reciprocal increases in CRF receptor binding in affected cortical areas. These changes are significantly correlated with decrements in ChAT activity. Our results strongly support a neurotransmitter role for CRF in brain and demonstrate, for the first time, a modulation of CNS CRF receptors associated with altered CRF content. These observations further suggest a possible role for CRF in the pathophysiology of the dementia. Future therapies directed at increasing CRF levels in brain may prove useful for treatment.
In learning a black-white discrimination response, the efficiency of rhesus monkeys with lesions of the anterior frontal cortex varies inversely with the spatial separation of the discriminative stimuli from the places of response and reward. Though there is a similar relationship in intact animals, impairment of learning due to discontiguity is greater in the animals with brain lesions.
The existence of low-level filtering of sensory input is a point of debate among cognitive theorists. This present study suggests that filtering by modality exists at levels low enough to modulate the brainstem blink reflex and that it is evident as early as the 16th week of life. During foreground listening or looking conditions, blinks elicited by acoustic or visual probes were larger when probe and foreground modality matched than when they mismatched. "Interesting" foregrounds, by comparison with "dull" ones, intensified the modality-selective effect.
Prefrontal neurons engaged by working memory tasks express a sequence of phasic and tonic activations linked to a train of sensory, mnemonic, and response-related events. Here, we report that the dopamine D2 receptor selectively modulates the neural activities associated with memory-guided saccades in oculomotor delayed-response tasks yet has little or no effect on the persistent mnemonic-related activity, which is instead modulated by D1 receptors. This associates the D2 receptor with a specific component of working memory circuitry and fractionates the modulatory effects of D1 and D2 receptors on the neural machinery of a cognitive process.
There is substantial evidence that human serum contains antibodies to many autoantigens. For example, all healthy people have autoantibodies (immunoglobulin M) to some undefined brain antigens. In this study immunoblots and immunohistochemical staining were used to detect antibodies to neural tissues in serum samples from 200 healthy people and 200 patients with various neurological diseases. Ninety-nine percent of the 400 subjects had serum immunoglobulin M and 95 percent had immunoglobulin G that bound to a 200-kilodalton protein in homogenates of neural tissues. In most cases there were no antibodies to anything else in the homogenates. The 200-kilodalton protein was the heaviest of the neurofilament triplet proteins. These observations do not support a role for antibodies to the 200-kilodalton protein of neurofilaments in the pathogenesis of neurological diseases.
Quantitative analysis of Golgi-stained neurons in the preoptic area of the brain of prepuberal Macaca fascicularis monkeys indicated structural differences between males and females. Neurons of males had more dendritic bifurcations and a higher frequency of spines. The bifurcation difference appeared in all cell types and was concentrated in the ventrolateral preoptic area. The spine difference was greatest in the central region of the preoptic area. No differences in gross measurements of this brain region were found. These results suggest that sexual dimorphism in the function of the monkey preoptic area may be based on differences in neuronal structure.
gamma-Aminobutyric acid type-A (GABAA) receptors are the major sites of fast synaptic inhibition in the brain. They are presumed to be pentameric heteroligomers assembled from four classes of subunits with multiple members: alpha (1-6), beta (1-3), gamma (1-3) and delta (1). Here, GABAA receptors consisting of alpha 1, beta 1 and gamma 2L subunits, coexpressed in mammalian cells with the tyrosine kinase vSRC (the transforming gene product of the Rous sarcoma virus), were phosphorylated on tyrosine residues within the gamma 2L and beta 1 subunits. Tyrosine phosphorylation enhanced the whole-cell current induced by GABA. Site-specific mutagenesis of two tyrosine residues within the predicted intracellular domain of the gamma 2L subunit abolished tyrosine phosphorylation of this subunit and eliminated receptor modulation. A similar modulation of GABAA receptor function was observed in primary neuronal cultures. As GABAA receptors are critical in mediating fast synaptic inhibition, such a regulation by tyrosine kinases may therefore have profound effects on the control of neuronal excitation.
The periaqueductal gray matter of the mesencephalon (PAG) subserves a variety of diverse autonomic functions and also appears to be a site for opiate action in the induction of immunosuppression. Microinjections of morphine into the PAG, but not into other opiate receptor-containing neuroanatomical sites, result in a rapid suppression of natural killer (NK) cell activity. The NK cell suppression can be blocked by prior peripheral administration of the opiate antagonist naltrexone. These findings demonstrate that certain central actions of opiates that produce changes in NK cell function are mediated through opiate receptors in the PAG and identify a brain region involved in opiate regulation of immune function.
The electrophysiological properties of sensory neurons in the adult cortex are not immutable but can change in response to alterations of sensory input caused by manipulation of afferent pathways in the nervous system or by manipulation of the sensory environment. Such plasticity creates great potential for flexible processing of sensory information, but the actual effects of neuronal plasticity on perceptual performance are poorly understood. The link between neuronal plasticity and performance was explored here by recording the responses of directionally selective neurons in the visual cortex while rhesus monkeys practiced a familiar task involving discrimination of motion direction. Each animal experienced a short-term improvement in perceptual sensitivity during daily experiments; sensitivity increased by an average of 19 percent over a few hundred trials. The increase in perceptual sensitivity was accompanied by a short-term improvement in neuronal sensitivity that mirrored the perceptual effect both in magnitude and in time course, which suggests that improved psychophysical performance can result directly from increased neuronal sensitivity within a sensory pathway.
Adult neurogenesis, the birth and integration of new neurons from adult neural stem cells, is a striking form of structural plasticity and highlights the regenerative capacity of the adult mammalian brain. Accumulating evidence suggests that neuronal activity regulates adult neurogenesis and that new neurons contribute to specific brain functions. The mechanism that regulates the integration of newly generated neurons into the pre-existing functional circuitry in the adult brain is unknown. Here we show that newborn granule cells in the dentate gyrus of the adult hippocampus are tonically activated by ambient GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) before being sequentially innervated by GABA- and glutamate-mediated synaptic inputs. GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the adult brain, initially exerts an excitatory action on newborn neurons owing to their high cytoplasmic chloride ion content. Conversion of GABA-induced depolarization (excitation) into hyperpolarization (inhibition) in newborn neurons leads to marked defects in their synapse formation and dendritic development in vivo. Our study identifies an essential role for GABA in the synaptic integration of newly generated neurons in the adult brain, and suggests an unexpected mechanism for activity-dependent regulation of adult neurogenesis, in which newborn neurons may sense neuronal network activity through tonic and phasic GABA activation.
Cortical gamma oscillations (20-80 Hz) predict increases in focused attention, and failure in gamma regulation is a hallmark of neurological and psychiatric disease. Current theory predicts that gamma oscillations are generated by synchronous activity of fast-spiking inhibitory interneurons, with the resulting rhythmic inhibition producing neural ensemble synchrony by generating a narrow window for effective excitation. We causally tested these hypotheses in barrel cortex in vivo by targeting optogenetic manipulation selectively to fast-spiking interneurons. Here we show that light-driven activation of fast-spiking interneurons at varied frequencies (8-200 Hz) selectively amplifies gamma oscillations. In contrast, pyramidal neuron activation amplifies only lower frequency oscillations, a cell-type-specific double dissociation. We found that the timing of a sensory input relative to a gamma cycle determined the amplitude and precision of evoked responses. Our data directly support the fast-spiking-gamma hypothesis and provide the first causal evidence that distinct network activity states can be induced in vivo by cell-type-specific activation.
Independent specialization of arthropod body segments has led to more than a century of debate on the homology of morphologically diverse segments, each defined by a lateral appendage and a ganglion of the central nervous system. The plesiomorphic composition of the arthropod head remains enigmatic because variation in segments and corresponding appendages is extreme. Within extant arthropod classes (Chelicerata, Myriapoda, Crustacea and Hexapoda--including the insects), correspondences between the appendage-bearing second (deutocerebral) and third (tritocerebral) cephalic neuromeres have been recently resolved on the basis of immunohistochemistry and Hox gene expression patterns. However, no appendage targets the first ganglion, the protocerebrum, and the corresponding segmental identity of this anterior region remains unclear. Reconstructions of stem-group arthropods indicate that the anteriormost region originally might have borne an ocular apparatus and a frontal appendage innervated by the protocerebrum. However, no study of the central nervous system in extant arthropods has been able to corroborate this idea directly, although recent analyses of cephalic gene expression patterns in insects suggest a segmental status for the protocerebral region. Here we investigate the developmental neuroanatomy of a putative basal arthropod, the pycnogonid sea spider, with immunohistochemical techniques. We show that the first pair of appendages, the chelifores, are innervated at an anterior position on the protocerebrum. This is the first true appendage shown to be innervated by the protocerebrum, and thus pycnogonid chelifores are not positionally homologous to appendages of extant arthropods but might, in fact, be homologous to the 'great appendages' of certain Cambrian stem-group arthropods.
Albino mice injected with monosodium glutamate developed brain lesions in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus. Lesions involved primarily microglial cells with no effect to the perikarya of neurons. Distal neuronal processes were only slightly affected.
As we move through our environment, the flow of the deforming images on our retinae provides rich information about ego motion and about the three-dimensional structure of the external world. Flow-fields comprise five independent components, including radial and circular motion. Here we provide psychophysical evidence for the existence of neural mechanisms in human vision that integrate motion signals along these complex trajectories. Signal-to-noise sensitivity for discriminating the direction of radial, circular and translational motion increased predictably with the number of exposed sectors, implying the existence of specialized detectors that integrate motion signals of different directions from different locations. However, contrast sensitivity for complex motion did not increase greatly with sector number, implying that the specialized detectors are preceded by a first stage of local-motion mechanisms that impose a contrast threshold. These findings fit well with recent electrophysiological evidence in monkey showing that whereas motion-sensitive neurons in primary visual cortex respond best to local translation, many neurons in the medial superior temporal cortex have large receptive fields tuned to radial, circular or spiral motion.
The sensation of pain alerts us to real or impending injury and triggers appropriate protective responses. Unfortunately, pain often outlives its usefulness as a warning system and instead becomes chronic and debilitating. This transition to a chronic phase involves changes within the spinal cord and brain, but there is also remarkable modulation where pain messages are initiated - at the level of the primary sensory neuron. Efforts to determine how these neurons detect pain-producing stimuli of a thermal, mechanical or chemical nature have revealed new signalling mechanisms and brought us closer to understanding the molecular events that facilitate transitions from acute to persistent pain.
The analgesic effect of clinically used exogenous opioids, such as morphine, is mediated primarily through mu-opioid receptors, but the function of the kappa-receptor in opioid analgesia is unclear. Although kappa-receptor agonists can produce analgesia, behavioural studies indicate that kappa agonists applied intravenously or locally into the spinal cord antagonize morphine analgesia. As morphine, a primary mu agonist, also binds to kappa-receptors and the analgesic effectiveness of morphine decreases with repeated use (tolerance), it is important to understand the mechanism for the functional interaction between kappa- and mu-opioid receptors in the central nervous system. Here we present in vitro electrophysiological and in vivo behavioural evidence that activation of the kappa-receptor specifically antagonizes mu-receptor-mediated analgesia. We show that in slice preparations of a rat brainstem nucleus, which is critical for the action of opioids in controlling pain, functional kappa- and mu-receptors are each localized on physiologically different types of neuron. Activation of the kappa-receptor hyperpolarizes neurons that are activated indirectly by the mu-receptor. In rats, kappa-receptor activation in this brainstem nucleus significantly attenuates local mu-receptor-mediated analgesia. Our findings suggest a new cellular mechanism for the potentially ubiquitous opposing interaction between mu- and kappa-opioid receptors and may help in the design of treatments for pain.
Songs of birds comprise hierarchical sets of vocal gestures. In zebra finches, songs include notes and syllables (groups of notes) delivered in fixed sequences. During singing, premotor neurons in the forebrain nucleus HVc exhibited reliable changes in activity rates whose patterns were uniquely associated with syllable identity. Neurons in the forebrain nucleus robustus archistriatalis, which receives input from the HVc, exhibited precisely timed and structured bursts of activity that were uniquely associated with note identity. Hence, units of vocal behavior are represented hierarchically in the avian forebrain. The representation of temporal sequences at each level of the hierarchy may be established by means of a decoding process involving interactions of higher level input with intrinsic local circuitry. Behavior is apparently represented by precise temporal patterning of spike trains at lower levels of the hierarchy.
Subdivisions of the human peri-Sylvian language cortex were derived from stimulation mapping during craniotomies under local anesthesia. Naming, reading, short-term verbal memory, single and sequential orofacial movements, and phoneme identification were tested. Sequential orofacial movements and phoneme identification were altered from the same brain sites and thus identified a common system for language production and understanding. This system surrounded a final motor pathway for speech and was surrounded by a separate short-term verbal-memory system. Between the sequential motor-phoneme identification and memory systems were sites where only naming or reading were altered, including sites related exclusively by syntax.
The influence of sound location on the responses of auditory neurons in the forebrain of the owl (Tyto alba) was studied directly by using a remotely controlled, movable sound source under free-field, anechoic conditions. Some auditory neurons demonstrated well-defined receptive fields that were (i) restricted both in elevation and in azimuth and (ii) relatively independent of the intensity and the nature of the sound stimulus. The majority of the fields were located frontally and contralateral to the recording site.
The efficacy and short-term modification of neocortical synaptic connections vary with the type of target neuron. We investigated presynaptic Ca2+ and release probability at single synaptic contacts between pairs of neurons in layer 2/3 of the rat neocortex. The amplitude of Ca2+ signals in boutons of pyramids contacting bitufted or multipolar interneurons or other pyramids was dependent on the target cell type. Optical quantal analysis at single synaptic contacts suggested that release probabilities are also target cell-specific. Both the Ca2+ signal and the release probability of different boutons of a pyramid contacting the same target cell varied little. We propose that the mechanisms that regulate the functional properties of boutons of a pyramid normalize the presynaptic Ca2+ influx and release probability for all those boutons that innervate the same target cell.
Intracerebral microdialysis of awake rats was used to monitor the possible release of neurotrophic factors from brain cells in response to injury and excitation. Perfusates were tested with ganglia bioassays and enzyme immunoassay. Trophic activity was released after implantation of the microdialysis probe into the hippocampus but not into the striatum, as assessed by increased nerve fiber outgrowth from Remak's ganglion. Kainic acid treatment significantly increased the release of trophic activity from hippocampal sites. These findings suggest that the brain responds to mechanical injury as well as to certain excitatory stimuli by regional extracellular release of neurotrophic activity that is not identical to the actions of known neurotrophic factors.
The neurotransmitter dopamine has biological attributes that make it amenable to study by positron emission tomography, unlike many of the 40 or so neurotransmitters that have been identified in the brain. Dopamine deficiency in the nigrostriatal system is a characteristic of Parkinson's disease, and a disturbance of dopamine metabolism is still widely held to be responsible for the syndrome of schizophrenia. Despite its importance in the regulation of locomotion and mood, it has been impossible to visualize the intracerebral distribution of dopamine and measure its regional metabolism in man. In the first demonstration of the regional distribution of a neurotransmitter in the brain of conscious normal man, we show here that L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-dopa) labelled in the 6-position with the positron-emitting radionuclide fluorine-18, localizes specifically in the dopaminergic pathways of the human brain where its turnover could be measured atraumatically by positron emission tomography.
Sex differences in the pattern and maturation of lateral asymmetries of the human brain have been recently found by a number of investigators, suggesting that sex-related factors may differentially affect the two sides of the body. In this study, asymmetries in the size of the two feet were strongly related to sex and handedness, right-handed males having larger right feet and right-handed females having larger left feet, the reverse being seen in non-right-handed individuals. Since these differences were apparent even in children younger than 6 years, the fetal sex steroids may be critical in governing the maturation of both cerebral and pedal asymmetries.
Transection of the direct cortico-motoneuronal pathway at the mid-cervical segment of the spinal cord in the macaque monkey results in a transient impairment of finger movements. Finger dexterity recovers within a few months. Combined brain imaging and reversible pharmacological inactivation of motor cortical regions suggest that the recovery involves the bilateral primary motor cortex during the early recovery stage and more extensive regions of the contralesional primary motor cortex and bilateral premotor cortex during the late recovery stage. These changes in the activation pattern of frontal motor-related areas represent an adaptive strategy for functional compensation after spinal cord injury.
A total deficiency in or resistance to the protein leptin causes severe obesity. As leptin levels rise with increasing adiposity in rodents and man, it is proposed to act as a negative feedback 'adipostatic signal' to brain centres controlling energy homeostasis, limiting obesity in times of nutritional abundance. Starvation is also a threat to homeostasis that triggers adaptive responses, but whether leptin plays a role in the physiology of starvation is unknown. Leptin concentration falls during starvation and totally leptin-deficient ob/ob mice have neuroendocrine abnormalities similar to those of starvation, suggesting that this may be the case. Here we show that preventing the starvation-induced fall in leptin with exogenous leptin substantially blunts the changes in gonadal, adrenal and thyroid axes in male mice, and prevents the starvation-induced delay in ovulation in female mice. In contrast, leptin repletion during this period of starvation has little or no effect on body weight, blood glucose or ketones. We propose that regulation of the neuroendocrine system during starvation could be the main physiological role of leptin.
The long-term, chronic, paralysis resulting from spinal cord injury in the cat has been reversed by the use of an alpha 2-adrenergic receptor agonist, clonidine. Administration of this drug resulted in "normalization" of sensory-motor and autonomic dysfunctions. Preliminary studies of the clonidine in humans with traumatically injured spinal cord indicate that autonomic dysreflexia can be controlled and spasticity minimized. The data suggest that biochemical and pharmacologic manipulation of receptors may ameliorate paralysis following traumatic injury to the spinal cord as well as to the brain and brainstem.
Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) and its neuron-specific regulator p35 are essential for neuronal migration and for the laminar configuration of the cerebral cortex. In addition, p35/Cdk5 kinase concentrates at the leading edges of axonal growth cones and regulates neurite outgrowth in cortical neurons in culture. The Rho family of small GTPases is implicated in a range of cellular functions, including cell migration and neurite outgrowth. Here we show that the p35/Cdk5 kinase co-localizes with Rac in neuronal growth cones. Furthermore, p35 associates directly with Rac in a GTP-dependent manner. Another Rac effector, Pak1 kinase, is also present in the Rac-p35/Cdk5 complexes and co-localizes with p35/Cdk5 and Rac at neuronal peripheries. The active p35/Cdk5 kinase causes Pak1 hyperphosphorylation in a Rac-dependent manner, which results in down-regulation of Pak1 kinase activity. Because the Rho family of GTPases and the Pak kinases are implicated in actin polymerization, the modification of Pak1, imposed by the p35/Cdk5 kinase, is likely to have an impact on the dynamics of the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in neurons, thus promoting neuronal migration and neurite outgrowth.
Sensory information detected by the peripheral nervous system is represented as a topographic map in the brain. It has long been thought that the topography of the map is determined by graded positional cues that are expressed by the target. Here, we analyzed the pre-target axon sorting for olfactory map formation in mice. In olfactory sensory neurons, an axon guidance receptor, Neuropilin-1, and its repulsive ligand, Semaphorin-3A, are expressed in a complementary manner. We found that expression levels of Neuropilin-1 determined both pre-target sorting and projection sites of axons. Olfactory sensory neuron-specific knockout of Semaphorin-3A perturbed axon sorting and altered the olfactory map topography. Thus, pre-target axon sorting plays an important role in establishing the topographic order based on the relative levels of guidance molecules expressed by axons.
A multineurotransmitter neuronal system that synthesizes and secretes both acetylated and deacetylated forms of alpha-melantropin and beta-endorphin is present in rat and human brain. The N-acetylated from of alpha-melanotropin had more potent behavioral effects than the deacetylated alpha-melanotropin. In the case of beta-endorphin, however, the deacetylated form has been shown to be more potent than the acetylated form. Enzymatic N-acetylation appears to be an important regulatory process for modulating the behavioral activity of peptides secreted from the opiomelanotropinergic multineurotransmitter neuron.
Nova proteins are neuron-specific antigens targeted in paraneoplastic opsoclonus myoclonus ataxia (POMA), an autoimmune neurologic disease characterized by abnormal motor inhibition. Nova proteins regulate neuronal pre-messenger RNA splicing by directly binding to RNA. To identify Nova RNA targets, we developed a method to purify protein-RNA complexes from mouse brain with the use of ultraviolet cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP).Thirty-four transcripts were identified multiple times by Nova CLIP.Three-quarters of these encode proteins that function at the neuronal synapse, and one-third are involved in neuronal inhibition.Splicing targets confirmed in Nova-/- mice include c-Jun N-terminal kinase 2, neogenin, and gephyrin; the latter encodes a protein that clusters inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acid and glycine receptors, two previously identified Nova splicing targets.Thus, CLIP reveals that Nova coordinately regulates a biologically coherent set of RNAs encoding multiple components of the inhibitory synapse, an observation that may relate to the cause of abnormal motor inhibition in POMA.
The activity of L-dopa decarboxylase was greatly reduced in the striatum, less so in the hypothalamus, and unchanged in the cortex of brains of patients with Parkinson's disease. However, it appears that even in the striatum enough activity remained to allow for the formation of dopamine from L-dopa in patients treated with large doses of L-dopa.
A rabbit antiserum to a peptide sequence present in the precursor for thyrotropin-releasing hormone (proTRH), deduced from cloned amphibian-skin complementary DNA, was raised by immunization with the synthetic decapeptide Cys-Lys-Arg-Gln-His-Pro-Gly-Lys-Arg-Cys (proTRH-SH). Immunohistochemical studies on rat brain tissue showed staining of neuronal perikarya in the parvicellular division of the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and the raphe complex of the medulla, identical to that already described for thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). Immunostaining was abolished by preincubation with proTRH-SH (10(-6)M) but not TRH (10(-5)M). Both TRH precursor and TRH were located in neurons of the paraventricular nucleus. However, in contrast to the findings for TRH, no staining was observed in axon terminals of the median eminence. These results suggest that a TRH precursor analogous to that reported in frog skin is present in the rat brain and that TRH in the mammalian central nervous system is a product of ribosomal biosynthesis.
Primates have visual tracking systems that help stabilize the eyes on the surroundings by responding to retinal image motion at ultra-short latencies. However, as the observer moves through the environment, the image motion on the retina depends on the three-dimensional structure of the scene. We report here that the very earliest of these tracking responses is elicited only by objects moving in the immediate vicinity of the plane of fixation: objects nearer or farther are ignored. This selectivity is achieved by means of a stereoscopic depth mechanism which uses the fact that the two eyes have differing viewpoints, so only objects in the plane of fixation have images that occupy corresponding positions on the two retinae. Such behaviour is readily explained by the known binocular properties of some motion-selective neurons in the visual cortex. Some (stereoanomalous) subjects showed highly specific tracking deficits as though lacking one subtype of these neurons.
The hippocampus is crucial for spatial memory formation, yet it does not store long-lasting memories. By combining functional brain imaging and region-specific neuronal inactivation in mice, we identified prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices as critical for storage and retrieval of remote spatial memories [correction]. Imaging of activity-dependent genes also revealed an involvement of parietal and retrosplenial cortices during consolidation of remote memory. Long-term memory storage within some of these neocortical regions was accompanied by structural changes including synaptogenesis and laminar reorganization, concomitant with a functional disengagement of the hippocampus and posterior cingulate cortex [correction]. Thus, consolidation of spatial memory requires a time-dependent hippocampal-cortical dialogue, ultimately enabling widespread cortical networks to mediate effortful recall and use of cortically stored remote memories independently.
Cognitive activity resulted in increased flow of blood to the cerebral hemispheres. The increase was greater to the left hemisphere for a verbal task and greater to the right hemisphere for a spatial task. The direction and degree of hemispheric flow asymmetry were influenced by sex and handedness, females having a higher rate of blood flow per unit weight of brain, and females and left-handers having a greater percentage of fast-clearing tissue, presumably gray matter.
Human colour vision depends on three classes of cone photoreceptors, those sensitive to short (S), medium (M) or long (L) wavelengths, and on how signals from these cones are combined by neurons in the retina and brain. Macaque monkey colour vision is similar to human, and the receptive fields of macaque visual neurons have been used as an animal model of human colour processing. P retinal ganglion cells and parvocellular neurons are colour-selective neurons in macaque retina and lateral geniculate nucleus. Interactions between cone signals feeding into these neurons are still unclear. On the basis of experimental results with chromatic adaptation, excitatory and inhibitory inputs from L and M cones onto P cells (and parvocellular neurons) were thought to be quite specific (Fig. 1a). But these experiments with spatially diffuse adaptation did not rule out the 'mixed-surround' hypothesis: that there might be one cone-specific mechanism, the receptive field centre, and a surround mechanism connected to all cone types indiscriminately (Fig. 1e). Recent work has tended to support the mixed-surround hypothesis. We report here the development of new stimuli to measure spatial maps of the linear L-, M- and S-cone inputs to test the hypothesis definitively. Our measurements contradict the mixed-surround hypothesis and imply cone specificity in both centre and surround.
Every day, individuals make dozens of choices between an alternative with higher overall value and a more tempting but ultimately inferior option. Optimal decision-making requires self-control. We propose two hypotheses about the neurobiology of self-control: (i) Goal-directed decisions have their basis in a common value signal encoded in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), and (ii) exercising self-control involves the modulation of this value signal by dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to monitor brain activity while dieters engaged in real decisions about food consumption. Activity in vmPFC was correlated with goal values regardless of the amount of self-control. It incorporated both taste and health in self-controllers but only taste in non-self-controllers. Activity in DLPFC increased when subjects exercised self-control and correlated with activity in vmPFC.
The subventricular zone of many adult non-human mammals generates large numbers of new neurons destined for the olfactory bulb. Along the walls of the lateral ventricles, immature neuronal progeny migrate in tangentially oriented chains that coalesce into a rostral migratory stream (RMS) connecting the subventricular zone to the olfactory bulb. The adult human subventricular zone, in contrast, contains a hypocellular gap layer separating the ependymal lining from a periventricular ribbon of astrocytes. Some of these subventricular zone astrocytes can function as neural stem cells in vitro, but their function in vivo remains controversial. An initial report found few subventricular zone proliferating cells and rare migrating immature neurons in the RMS of adult humans. In contrast, a subsequent study indicated robust proliferation and migration in the human subventricular zone and RMS. Here we find that the infant human subventricular zone and RMS contain an extensive corridor of migrating immature neurons before 18 months of age but, contrary to previous reports, this germinal activity subsides in older children and is nearly extinct by adulthood. Surprisingly, during this limited window of neurogenesis, not all new neurons in the human subventricular zone are destined for the olfactory bulb--we describe a major migratory pathway that targets the prefrontal cortex in humans. Together, these findings reveal robust streams of tangentially migrating immature neurons in human early postnatal subventricular zone and cortex. These pathways represent potential targets of neurological injuries affecting neonates.
Protein quality-control, especially the removal of proteins with aberrant structures, has an important role in maintaining the homeostasis of non-dividing neural cells. In addition to the ubiquitin-proteasome system, emerging evidence points to the importance of autophagy--the bulk protein degradation pathway involved in starvation-induced and constitutive protein turnover--in the protein quality-control process. However, little is known about the precise roles of autophagy in neurons. Here we report that loss of Atg7 (autophagy-related 7), a gene essential for autophagy, leads to neurodegeneration. We found that mice lacking Atg7 specifically in the central nervous system showed behavioural defects, including abnormal limb-clasping reflexes and a reduction in coordinated movement, and died within 28 weeks of birth. Atg7 deficiency caused massive neuronal loss in the cerebral and cerebellar cortices. Notably, polyubiquitinated proteins accumulated in autophagy-deficient neurons as inclusion bodies, which increased in size and number with ageing. There was, however, no obvious alteration in proteasome function. Our results indicate that autophagy is essential for the survival of neural cells, and that impairment of autophagy is implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders involving ubiquitin-containing inclusion bodies.
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) consists of specific physical barriers, enzymes and transporters, which together maintain the necessary extracellular environment of the central nervous system (CNS). The main physical barrier is found in the CNS endothelial cell, and depends on continuous complexes of tight junctions combined with reduced vesicular transport. Other possible constituents of the BBB include extracellular matrix, astrocytes and pericytes, but the relative contribution of these different components to the BBB remains largely unknown. Here we demonstrate a direct role of pericytes at the BBB in vivo. Using a set of adult viable pericyte-deficient mouse mutants we show that pericyte deficiency increases the permeability of the BBB to water and a range of low-molecular-mass and high-molecular-mass tracers. The increased permeability occurs by endothelial transcytosis, a process that is rapidly arrested by the drug imatinib. Furthermore, we show that pericytes function at the BBB in at least two ways: by regulating BBB-specific gene expression patterns in endothelial cells, and by inducing polarization of astrocyte end-feet surrounding CNS blood vessels. Our results indicate a novel and critical role for pericytes in the integration of endothelial and astrocyte functions at the neurovascular unit, and in the regulation of the BBB.
CKAMP44, identified here by a proteomic approach, is a brain-specific type I transmembrane protein that associates with AMPA receptors in synaptic spines. CKAMP44 expressed in Xenopus oocytes reduced GluA1- and A2-mediated steady-state currents, but did not affect kainate- or N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated currents. Mouse hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons expressed CKAMP44 at low abundance, and overexpression of CKAMP44 led to stronger and faster AMPA receptor desensitization, slower recovery from desensitization, and a reduction in the paired-pulse ratio of AMPA currents. By contrast, dentate gyrus granule cells exhibited strong CKAMP44 expression, and CKAMP44 knockout increased the paired-pulse ratio of AMPA currents in lateral and medial perforant path-granule cell synapses. CKAMP44 thus modulates short-term plasticity at specific excitatory synapses.
Cerebral activation was measured with positron emission tomography in ten human volunteers. The primary auditory cortex showed increased activity in response to noise bursts, whereas acoustically matched speech syllables activated secondary auditory cortices bilaterally. Instructions to make judgments about different attributes of the same speech signal resulted in activation of specific lateralized neural systems. Discrimination of phonetic structure led to increased activity in part of Broca's area of the left hemisphere, suggesting a role for articulatory recoding in phonetic perception. Processing changes in pitch produced activation of the right prefrontal cortex, consistent with the importance of right-hemisphere mechanisms in pitch perception.
Voluntary hand movements in humans involve the primary motor cortex (M1). A functional magnetic resonance imaging method that measures relative cerebral blood flow was used to identify a distributed, overlapping pattern of hand movement representation within the posterior precentral gyrus, which contains M1. The observed pattern resembles those reported in nonhuman primates and differs from a somatotopically organized plan typically used to portray human motor cortex organization. Finger and wrist movements activated a wide expanse of the posterior precentral gyrus, and representations for different finger movements overlapped each other and the wrist representation. Multiple sites of activation occurred in the precentral gyrus for all movements. The overlapping representations may mediate motor and cognitive functions requiring coordinated neural processing for finger and wrist actions rather than discrete control implied by somatotopic maps.
The spontaneous electrical activity in cerebral ganglia of several insect species does not disappear during diapause. Some recordings of electrical activity in pupae of the cecropia silkworm (in which the brain is considered to be electrically "silent" during diapause) suggest that at least some activity is maintained, but possibly it is restricted to certain regions of the brain.
Neurons in inferotemporal cortex (area TE) of the monkey had visual receptive fields which were very large (greater than 10 by 10 degrees) and almost always included the fovea. Some extended well into both halves of the visual field, while others were confined to the ipsilateral or contralateral side. These neurons were differentially sensitive to several of the following dimensions of the stimulus: size and shape, color, orientation, and direction of movement.
Midbrain dopamine systems are crucially involved in motivational processes underlying the learning and execution of goal-directed behaviour. Dopamine neurons in monkeys are uniformly activated by unpredicted appetitive stimuli such as food and liquid rewards and conditioned, reward-predicting stimuli. By contrast, fully predicted stimuli are ineffective, and the omission of predicted reward depresses their activity. These characteristics follow associative-learning rules, suggesting that dopamine responses report an error in reward prediction. Accordingly, neural network models are efficiently trained using a dopamine-like reinforcement signal. However, it is unknown whether the responses to environmental stimuli concern specific motivational attributes or reflect more general stimulus salience. To resolve this, we have compared dopamine impulse responses to motivationally opposing appetitive and aversive stimuli. In contrast to appetitive events, primary and conditioned non-noxious aversive stimuli either failed to activate dopamine neurons or, in cases of close resemblance with appetitive stimuli, induced weaker responses than appetitive stimuli. Thus, dopamine neurons preferentially report environmental stimuli with appetitive rather than aversive motivational value.
The brain's cerebral cortex decomposes visual images into information about oriented edges, direction and velocity information, and color. How does the cortex decompose perceived sounds? A reverse correlation technique demonstrates that neurons in the primary auditory cortex of the awake primate have complex patterns of sound-feature selectivity that indicate sensitivity to stimulus edges in frequency or in time, stimulus transitions in frequency or intensity, and feature conjunctions. This allows the creation of classes of stimuli matched to the processing characteristics of auditory cortical neurons. Stimuli designed for a particular neuron's preferred feature pattern can drive that neuron with higher sustained firing rates than have typically been recorded with simple stimuli. These data suggest that the cortex decomposes an auditory scene into component parts using a feature-processing system reminiscent of that used for the cortical decomposition of visual images.
Saturable and stereospecific binding sites for (+)-[3H]amphetamine were demonstrated in membrane preparations from rat brain. The density of these binding sites varies among brain regions and is highest in the hypothalamus and brainstem. Specific (+)-[3H]amphetamine binding in hypothalamus is largely confined to synaptosomal membranes, rapidly reversible, and sensitive to both heat and proteolytic enzymes. Scatchard analysis of the equilibrium binding data revealed two distinct sites with apparent affinity constants of 93 and 300 nanomoles per liter, respectively. The effects of various psychotropic drugs as well as a number of putative neurotransmitters and related agonists and antagonists in displacing specific (+)-[3H]amphetamine binding demonstrate that these binding sites are not associated with any previously described neurotransmitter or drug receptors, but are specific for amphetamine and related phenylethylamine derivatives. Furthermore, the relative affinities of a series of phenylethylamine derivatives for (+)-[3H]amphetamine binding sites in hypothalamic membranes is highly correlated to their potencies as anorexic agents. These results suggest the presence of specific receptor sites in hypothalamus that mediate the anorexic activity of amphetamine and related drugs.
Throughout the day, cognitive performance is under the combined influence of circadian processes and homeostatic sleep pressure. Some people perform best in the morning, whereas others are more alert in the evening. These chronotypes provide a unique way to study the effects of sleep-wake regulation on the cerebral mechanisms supporting cognition. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging in extreme chronotypes, we found that maintaining attention in the evening was associated with higher activity in evening than morning chronotypes in a region of the locus coeruleus and in a suprachiasmatic area (SCA) including the circadian master clock. Activity in the SCA decreased with increasing homeostatic sleep pressure. This result shows the direct influence of the homeostatic and circadian interaction on the neural activity underpinning human behavior.
We observed robust coupling between the high- and low-frequency bands of ongoing electrical activity in the human brain. In particular, the phase of the low-frequency theta (4 to 8 hertz) rhythm modulates power in the high gamma (80 to 150 hertz) band of the electrocorticogram, with stronger modulation occurring at higher theta amplitudes. Furthermore, different behavioral tasks evoke distinct patterns of theta/high gamma coupling across the cortex. The results indicate that transient coupling between low- and high-frequency brain rhythms coordinates activity in distributed cortical areas, providing a mechanism for effective communication during cognitive processing in humans.
The brain temperature of trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) was altered by perfusion of the gills with warm or cool water. Neuronal activity was recorded with microelectrodes. Twelve neurons responded to an increase in temperature with increased activity, and five neurons responded to a decrease in temperature with an increase in activity.
Theories of motor control postulate that the brain uses internal models of the body to control movements accurately. Internal models are neural representations of how, for instance, the arm would respond to a neural command, given its current position and velocity. Previous studies have shown that the cerebellar cortex can acquire internal models through motor learning. Because the human cerebellum is involved in higher cognitive function as well as in motor control, we propose a coherent computational theory in which the phylogenetically newer part of the cerebellum similarly acquires internal models of objects in the external world. While human subjects learned to use a new tool (a computer mouse with a novel rotational transformation), cerebellar activity was measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging. As predicted by our theory, two types of activity were observed. One was spread over wide areas of the cerebellum and was precisely proportional to the error signal that guides the acquisition of internal models during learning. The other was confined to the area near the posterior superior fissure and remained even after learning, when the error levels had been equalized, thus probably reflecting an acquired internal model of the new tool.
We have found that two-photon fluorescence imaging of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) provides the sensitivity and spatial three-dimensional resolution to resolve metabolic signatures in processes of astrocytes and neurons deep in highly scattering brain tissue slices. This functional imaging reveals spatiotemporal partitioning of glycolytic and oxidative metabolism between astrocytes and neurons during focal neural activity that establishes a unifying hypothesis for neurometabolic coupling in which early oxidative metabolism in neurons is eventually sustained by late activation of the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle. Our model integrates existing views of brain energy metabolism and is in accord with known macroscopic physiological changes in vivo.
Qualitatively distinct patterns of cardiovascular and neuroendocrine responses were observed in male college students during mental work and during sensory intake task performance. During mental work, Type A (coronary-prone) subjects showed greater muscle vasodilatation and more enhanced secretion of norepinephrine, epinephrine, and cortisol than Type B subjects. During sensory intake, Type A hyperresponsivity was found for testosterone and, among those subjects with a positive family history of hypertension, for cortisol. As a demonstration of combined cardiovascular, sympathetic nervous system, and neuroendocrine hyperresponsivity to specific cognitive tasks in Type A subjects, this study breaks ground in the search for mechanisms mediating the increased coronary disease risk among Type A persons.
Neurons in the superior temporal gyrus of anesthetized rhesus monkeys were exposed to complex acoustic stimuli. Bandpassed noise bursts with defined center frequencies evoked responses that were greatly enhanced over those evoked by pure tones. This finding led to the discovery of at least one new cochleotopic area in the lateral belt of the nonprimary auditory cortex. The best center frequencies of neurons varied along a rostrocaudal axis, and the best bandwidths of the noise bursts varied along a mediolateral axis. When digitized monkey calls were used as stimuli, many neurons showed a preference for some calls over others. Manipulation of the calls' frequency structure and playback of separate components revealed different types of spectral integration. The lateral areas of the monkey auditory cortex appear to be part of a hierarchical sequence in which neurons prefer increasingly complex stimuli and may form an important stage in the preprocessing of communication sounds.
A pheromone biosynthesis activating neuropeptide (PBAN) hormone that controls sex pheromone production in female moths was identified from the brain-subesophageal ganglion complexes of the adult corn earworm, Heliothis zea. PBAN has 33 amino acid residues and a molecular weight of 3900. Its amino acid sequence has no significant homology with any of the fully characterized peptide hormones. The synthetic peptide, at a dose of between 2 and 4 picomoles, induced production of a normal quantity of sex pheromone in ligated H. zea females. The peptide also induced pheromone production in six other species of moths, thus indicating that this or similar peptides may be responsible for the regulation of pheromone production in moths.
An unresolved question in neuroscience and psychology is how the brain monitors performance to regulate behavior. It has been proposed that the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), on the medial surface of the frontal lobe, contributes to performance monitoring by detecting errors. In this study, event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to examine ACC function. Results confirm that this region shows activity during erroneous responses. However, activity was also observed in the same region during correct responses under conditions of increased response competition. This suggests that the ACC detects conditions under which errors are likely to occur rather than errors themselves.
Intention is central to the concept of voluntary action. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we compared conditions in which participants made self-paced actions and attended either to their intention to move or to the actual movement. When they attended to their intention rather than their movement, there was an enhancement of activity in the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA). We also found activations in the right dorsal prefrontal cortex and left intraparietal cortex. Prefrontal activity, but not parietal activity, was more strongly coupled with activity in the pre-SMA. We conclude that activity in the pre-SMA reflects the representation of intention.
Rats were trained to self-stimulate the medial prefrontal cortex, a region rich in dopaminergic terminals. After the region adjacent to the electrode site was labeled with [14C]dopamine, it was perfused repeatedly by means of push-pull cannulas. Electrical stimulation of this cortical area in six animals enhanced the release of dopamine and its associated metabolites in nine of 16 experiments. Thus in vivo evidence is provided that dopamine is involved in the brain self-stimulation mechanism within the frontal cortex.
Monkeys given orbital prefrontal lesions at 1, 4, or 8 weeks of age exhibited a severe learning disability when they were tested at 1 year of age, but showed substantial recovery by the time they were 2 years old. These results suggest that the protracted maturation of intact cortical regions is important in recovery of function after early brain injury.
A method combining steroid autoradiography and fluorescent dye retrograde neuroanatomical tracing has been devised. This method makes it possible to demonstrate that some estrogen-concentrating cells in the ventrolateral subdivision of the ventromedial nucleus of the rat hypothalamus are neurons that send axons to the dorsal midbrain. Other cells only concentrate estrogen or only project to the midbrain. Estrogen-concentrating neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus that project to the dorsal midbrain are likely to transmit hormone-influenced signals that regulate circuits for reproductive or other behaviors or autonomic functions.
In weanling mice treated with pharmacologic doses of aminophylline, the concentrations of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate and guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate in the brain increased 44 and 36 percent, respectively, and the cerebral metabolic rate was three times that in controls. In neonatal mice, therapeutic doses of aminophylline greatly decreased the rate of anoxic survival in vivo and the duration of gasping of the isolated head. The findings suggest caution in the use of this drug and other methylxanthines in hypoxic human newborns.
To investigate whether the temporal cortex of a nonprimate species contains cells responsive to the sight of faces, a study was made in conscious sheep of the responses of neurons in this brain region to the sight of faces. Of 561 cells from which responses were recorded, 40 responded preferentially to faces. Different categories of these cells were influenced by dominance (presumably indicated by the presence and size of horns), breed and familiarity, and threatening faces such as those of humans and dogs. These results demonstrate that cells that respond preferentially to faces are present in the temporal cortex of a nonprimate species, and that the responses of these cells are influenced by factors relevant to social interaction.
Alzheimer's disease is characterized by widespread deposition of amyloid in the central nervous system. The 4-kilodalton amyloid beta protein is derived from a larger amyloid precursor protein and forms amyloid deposits in the brain by an unknown pathological mechanism. Except for aged nonhuman primates, there is no animal model for Alzheimer's disease. Transgenic mice expressing amyloid beta protein in the brain could provide such a model. To investigate this possibility, the 4-kilodalton human amyloid beta protein was expressed under the control of the promoter of the human amyloid precursor protein in two lines of transgenic mice. Amyloid beta protein accumulated in the dendrites of some but not all hippocampal neurons in 1-year-old transgenic mice. Aggregates of the amyloid beta protein formed amyloid-like fibrils that are similar in appearance to those in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep is associated with intense neuronal activity, ocular saccades, muscular atonia and dreaming. The function of REM sleep remains elusive and its neural correlates have not been characterized precisely in man. Here we use positron emission tomography and statistical parametric mapping to study the brain state associated with REM sleep in humans. We report a group study of seven subjects who maintained steady REM sleep during brain scanning and recalled dreams upon awakening. The results show that regional cerebral blood flow is positively correlated with REM sleep in pontine tegmentum, left thalamus, both amygdaloid complexes, anterior cingulate cortex and right parietal operculum. Negative correlations between regional cerebral blood flow and REM sleep are observed bilaterally, in a vast area of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, in parietal cortex (supramarginal gyrus) as well as in posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus. Given the role of the amygdaloid complexes in the acquisition of emotionally influenced memories, the pattern of activation in the amygdala and the cortical areas provides a biological basis for the processing of some types of memory during REM sleep.
After adaptation of the visual system to motion of a pattern in a particular direction, a static pattern appears to move in the opposite direction-the motion aftereffect (MAE). It is thought that the MAE is not accompanied by a shift in perceived spatial position of the pattern being viewed, providing psychophysical evidence for a dissociation of the neural processing of motion and position that complements anatomical and physiological evidence of functional specialization in primate and human visual cortex. However, here we measure the perceived orientation of a static windmill pattern after adaptation to rotary motion and find a gradual shift in orientation in the direction of the illusory rotation, though at a rate much lower than the apparent rotation speed. The orientation shift, which started to decline within a few seconds, could persist longer than the MAE, and disappeared when the MAE was nulled by physical motion of the windmill pattern. Our results indicate that the representation of the position of spatial pattern is dynamically updated by neurons involved in the analysis of motion.
Parkinson's disease is a widespread condition caused by the loss of midbrain neurons that synthesize the neurotransmitter dopamine. Cells derived from the fetal midbrain can modify the course of the disease, but they are an inadequate source of dopamine-synthesizing neurons because their ability to generate these neurons is unstable. In contrast, embryonic stem (ES) cells proliferate extensively and can generate dopamine neurons. If ES cells are to become the basis for cell therapies, we must develop methods of enriching for the cell of interest and demonstrate that these cells show functions that will assist in treating the disease. Here we show that a highly enriched population of midbrain neural stem cells can be derived from mouse ES cells. The dopamine neurons generated by these stem cells show electrophysiological and behavioural properties expected of neurons from the midbrain. Our results encourage the use of ES cells in cell-replacement therapy for Parkinson's disease.
A new class of single neurons showing no spontaneous activity in waking, rapid eye movement sleep, and slow-wave sleep was found in the brainstem of unrestrained cats. Systematic testing showed that these cells discharge only in response to specific stimuli and remain silent for as long as 40 minutes in the absence of stimulation. Silent cells were widely distributed in the pons and midbrain and constituted a major percentage of observed neurons. The economy of discharge shown by these cells contrasts with the spontaneous activity of virtually all other neurons that have been observed in the brains of unrestrained animals and suggests the widespread existence of specialized neural systems that show only phasic activity.
The ability to respond to unexpected stimuli (the 'orienting response') is a fundamental characteristic of mammalian behaviour, but the brain mechanisms by which novelty is detected remain poorly defined. Electrophysiological recordings of scalp and intracranial event-related potentials (ERPs) have shown that novel stimuli activate a distributed network involving prefrontal and posterior association cortex. In addition, ERP and single-neuron recordings, as well as neuroimaging and modelling studies, have suggested that temporal cortical regions, including the hippocampus, are also involved. To examine further the role of the medial temporal lobe in novelty processing, I measured physiological responses to novel auditory and tactile stimuli in patients with damage to the posterior hippocampal region. In normal control subjects, unexpected novel stimuli produce a characteristic ERP signal, accompanied by an autonomic skin response. Both responses are reduced in hippocampal lesion patients, whereas the response to expected control stimuli is unaffected. Thus the hippocampal region, in addition to its known role in memory formation, is an essential component of the distributed limbic-cortical network that detects and responds to novel stimuli.
Examination of structure-function correlates in the human brain reveals that there is a high degree of functional specificity in the information transmitted over neural systems. It also appears that the human brain has a modular organization consisting of identifiable component processes that participate in the generation of a cognitive state. The effects of isolating entire modular systems or of disconnecting the component parts can be observed. The features of a left hemisphere specialized capacity to interpret the actions of modules are discussed in terms of human consciousness.
Morphological, physiological and pharmacological evidence indicates that opioid peptides, which in the brain are located intraneurally, may function as neurotransmitters. Similar evidence is not yet available for the opioid peptides that are stored in chromaffin cells of adrenal medulla and in axon terminals located in adrenal medulla and sympathetic ganglia. The present report contributes evidence suggesting that the opioid peptides which are stored in the axon terminals of the splanchnic nerves located in adrenal medulla may function as neuromodulators of the acetylcholine receptors located on chromaffin cells that are involved in catecholamine release. We support this functional role of the opioid peptides by showing that primary cultures of chromaffin cells of bovine medulla contain opiate receptors. When these receptors are occupied by specific agonists, the number of nicotinic receptors and the amount of catecholamine released by maximal doses of nicotine are reduced. Thus, like in other neuronal systems also in adrenal medulla, the action of opioid peptides is inhibitory. The specificity of this action is in part supported by the inability of opiate receptor agonists to reduce the Ca2+-dependent release of catecholamines elicited by K+ ions.
Minocycline mediates neuroprotection in experimental models of neurodegeneration. It inhibits the activity of caspase-1, caspase-3, inducible form of nitric oxide synthetase (iNOS) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Although minocycline does not directly inhibit these enzymes, the effects may result from interference with upstream mechanisms resulting in their secondary activation. Because the above-mentioned factors are important in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), we tested minocycline in mice with ALS. Here we report that minocycline delays disease onset and extends survival in ALS mice. Given the broad efficacy of minocycline, understanding its mechanisms of action is of great importance. We find that minocycline inhibits mitochondrial permeability-transition-mediated cytochrome c release. Minocycline-mediated inhibition of cytochrome c release is demonstrated in vivo, in cells, and in isolated mitochondria. Understanding the mechanism of action of minocycline will assist in the development and testing of more powerful and effective analogues. Because of the safety record of minocycline, and its ability to penetrate the blood-brain barrier, this drug may be a novel therapy for ALS.
The unnatural (+) enantiomer of morphine had minimal activity in three opiate assays in vitro: the rat brain homogenate binding assay, the electrically stimulated guinea pig ileum assay, and the inhibition of adenylate cyclase in neuroblastoma X glioma hybrid cell homogenates. When (+)-morphine was microinfected into the periaqueductal gray (a site known to mediate morphine analgesia) of drug-naive rats, there was only minimal analgesia, but the hyperresponsivity usually observed after microinfection of (-)-morphine occurred. Also, when (+)-morphine was microinfected into the midbrain reticular formation of drug-naive rats, rotation similar to that following microinjection of (-)-morphine occurred. These behaviors were not blocked by naloxone. Significantly, they typically occur in precipitated abstinence in morphine-dependent rats. These observations suggest that there are at least two classes of receptors, one stereospecific and blocked by naloxone and the other only weakly stereospecific and not blocked by naloxone, and that precipitated abstinence may be due, in part, to a selective blockade of receptors of the former class but not of the latter.
The excitatory amino acid, L-glutamate, acting through its N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, may contribute to neuronal death following cerebral vascular occlusion. In support of this hypothesis, NMDA receptor antagonists reduce the volume of infarction produced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in vivo and attenuate Ca2+ influx and neuronal death elicited by L-glutamate or NMDA in vitro. A complementary DNA coding for a major component of the NMDA receptor channel complex, a single protein of M(r) 105.5K (NMDA-R1), has been isolated from rat brain. Here we demonstrate that inhibition of the synthesis of NMDA-R1 by treatment with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides selectively reduces the expression of NMDA receptors, prevents the neurotoxicity elicited by NMDA in vitro and reduces the volume of the focal ischaemic infarction produced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in the rat.
Behavioural responses to wind are thought to have a critical role in controlling the dispersal and population genetics of wild Drosophila species, as well as their navigation in flight, but their underlying neurobiological basis is unknown. We show that Drosophila melanogaster, like wild-caught Drosophila strains, exhibits robust wind-induced suppression of locomotion in response to air currents delivered at speeds normally encountered in nature. Here we identify wind-sensitive neurons in Johnston's organ, an antennal mechanosensory structure previously implicated in near-field sound detection (reviewed in refs 5 and 6). Using enhancer trap lines targeted to different subsets of Johnston's organ neurons, and a genetically encoded calcium indicator, we show that wind and near-field sound (courtship song) activate distinct populations of Johnston's organ neurons, which project to different regions of the antennal and mechanosensory motor centre in the central brain. Selective genetic ablation of wind-sensitive Johnston's organ neurons in the antenna abolishes wind-induced suppression of locomotion behaviour, without impairing hearing. Moreover, different neuronal subsets within the wind-sensitive population respond to different directions of arista deflection caused by air flow and project to different regions of the antennal and mechanosensory motor centre, providing a rudimentary map of wind direction in the brain. Importantly, sound- and wind-sensitive Johnston's organ neurons exhibit different intrinsic response properties: the former are phasically activated by small, bi-directional, displacements of the aristae, whereas the latter are tonically activated by unidirectional, static deflections of larger magnitude. These different intrinsic properties are well suited to the detection of oscillatory pulses of near-field sound and laminar air flow, respectively. These data identify wind-sensitive neurons in Johnston's organ, a structure that has been primarily associated with hearing, and reveal how the brain can distinguish different types of air particle movements using a common sensory organ.
The long-latency electrical response of the brain stem evoked by stimulation of the cortex of freely moving monkeys is modified by a change of attention. The modification may be either suppression or augmentation, according to the background activity prior to the shift of attention.
The transport of [(3)H]putrescine is demonstrated by autoradiography in the retino-tectal tract of Brachydanio rerio embryos. Transport of [(3)H]putrescine appears to be more rapid than that of tritium-labeled protein and is not inhibited by a colchicine effect on axonal neurotubules as is protein transport. The radioactivity transported to the brain is found, on electrophoresis, in the putrescine fraction.
When kainic acid, a putative neurotoxin for neurons with glutamatergic input, is injected into the brainstem, it produces a selective pattern of degeneration in the cochlear nucleus. The rate and extent of degeneration is correlated with the distribution of the primary auditory fibers. This evidence supports the hypothesis that glutamate is the neurotransmitter for primary auditory fibers.
During early development of the mammalian cerebral cortex, young neurons migrate outward from the site of their final mitosis in the ventricular zone into the cortical plate, where they form the adult cortex. Time-lapse confocal microscopy was used to observe directly the dynamic behaviors of migrating cells in living slices of developing cortex. The majority of cells migrated along a radial pathway, consistent with the view that cortical neurons migrate along radial glial fibers. A fraction of cells, however, turned within the intermediate zone and migrated orthogonal to the radial fibers. This orthogonal migration may contribute to the tangential dispersion of clonally related cortical neurons.
The development and maintenance of the nervous system depends on proteins known as neurotrophic factors. Although the prototypical neurotrophic factor, nerve growth factor (NGF), has been intensively studied for decades, the discovery and characterization of additional such factors has been impeded by their low abundance. Sequence homologies between NGF and the recently cloned brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) were used to design a strategy that has now resulted in the cloning of a gene encoding a novel neurotrophic factor, termed neurotrophin-3 (NT-3). The distribution of NT-3 messenger RNA and its biological activity on a variety of neuronal populations clearly distinguish NT-3 from NGF and BDNF, and provide compelling evidence that NT-3 is an authentic neurotrophic factor that has its own characteristic role in vivo.
The proposal that nitric oxide (NO) or its reactant products mediate toxicity in brain remains controversial in part because of the use of nonselective agents that block NO formation in neuronal, glial, and vascular compartments. In mutant mice deficient in neuronal NO synthase (NOS) activity, infarct volumes decreased significantly 24 and 72 hours after middle cerebral artery occlusion, and the neurological deficits were less than those in normal mice. This result could not be accounted for by differences in blood flow or vascular anatomy. However, infarct size in the mutant became larger after endothelial NOS inhibition by nitro-L-arginine administration. Hence, neuronal NO production appears to exacerbate acute ischemic injury, whereas vascular NO protects after middle cerebral artery occlusion. The data emphasize the importance of developing selective inhibitors of the neuronal isoform.
Muscle eye brain disease (MEB) and Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD) are congenital muscular dystrophies with associated, similar brain malformations. The FCMD gene, fukutin, shares some homology with fringe-like glycosyltransferases, and the MEB gene, POMGnT1, seems to be a new glycosyltransferase. Here we show, in both MEB and FCMD patients, that alpha-dystroglycan is expressed at the muscle membrane, but similar hypoglycosylation in the diseases directly abolishes binding activity of dystroglycan for the ligands laminin, neurexin and agrin. We show that this post-translational biochemical and functional disruption of alpha-dystroglycan is recapitulated in the muscle and central nervous system of mutant myodystrophy (myd) mice. We demonstrate that myd mice have abnormal neuronal migration in cerebral cortex, cerebellum and hippocampus, and show disruption of the basal lamina. In addition, myd mice reveal that dystroglycan targets proteins to functional sites in brain through its interactions with extracellular matrix proteins. These results suggest that at least three distinct mammalian genes function within a convergent post-translational processing pathway during the biosynthesis of dystroglycan, and that abnormal dystroglycan-ligand interactions underlie the pathogenic mechanism of muscular dystrophy with brain abnormalities.
The possibility that neurons in the basal ganglia and cerebellum innervate areas of the cerebral cortex that are involved in cognitive function has been a controversial subject. Here, retrograde transneuronal transport of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1) was used to identify subcortical neurons that project via the thalamus to area 46 of the primate prefrontal cortex. This cortical area is known to be involved in spatial working memory. Many neurons in restricted regions of the dentate nucleus of the cerebellum and in the internal segment of the globus pallidus were labeled by transneuronal transport of virus from area 46. The location of these neurons was different from those labeled after HSV1 transport from motor areas of the cerebral cortex. These observations define an anatomical substrate for the involvement of basal ganglia and cerebellar output in higher cognitive function.
When gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in vertebrate brain, binds to its receptor it activates a chloride channel. Neurotransmitter action at the GABAA receptor is potentiated by both benzodiazepines and barbiturates which are therapeutically useful drugs (reviewed in ref. 1). There is strong evidence that this receptor is heterogeneous. We have previously isolated complementary DNAs encoding an alpha- and a beta-subunit and shown that both are needed for expression of a functional GABAA receptor. We have now isolated cDNAs encoding two additional GABAA receptor alpha-subunits, confirming the heterogeneous nature of the receptor/chloride channel complex and demonstrating a molecular basis for it. These alpha-subunits are differentially expressed within the CNS and produce, when expressed with the beta-subunit in Xenopus oocytes, receptor subtypes which can be distinguished by their apparent sensitivity to GABA. Highly homologous receptor subtypes which differ functionally seem to be a common feature of brain receptors.
The abuse of phencyclidine [1(1-phencylohexyl)piperidine, PCP], commonly referred to as angel dust or hog, is rapidly reaching epidemic proportions. PCP users often appear violent and increases in PCP-implicated homicides and suicides have been reported. In animal studies PCP has been demonstrated in brain up to 48 h after administration, long after blood levels become undetectable. However, there is little further information on the distribution of PCP within the central nervous system with regard to the possible sites of action. Recently, Sokoloff and associates described a new technique which can be used to visualise possible sites of drug action. The technique is based on the premise that neuronal activity is closely related to energy metabolism. Therefore, by directly monitoring 2-deoxy-D-glucose consumption before and after a pharmacological stimulus, we can obtain autoradiographic evidence of changes in neuronal activity in discrete areas brain as a response to that stimulus. Using this procedure, we now report that PCP causes dramatic changes in glucose metabolism in very specific regions of the rat brain.
Tyrosine-specific protein phosphorylation has been implicated in the regulation of cell transformation and proliferation. However, recent studies have shown that the expression of protein tyrosine kinases in adult brain is very high, suggesting that tyrosine-specific protein phosphorylation may also have a role in the regulation of neuronal function. Although a number of substrate proteins are phosphorylated on tyrosine residues, the functional alteration of proteins by tyrosine phosphorylation has previously been convincingly demonstrated only for protein tyrosine kinases. The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, a neurotransmitter-gated ion channel, is phosphorylated by a protein tyrosine kinase in post-synaptic membranes in vitro and in vivo. We demonstrate here that this tyrosine phosphorylation increases the rate of the rapid phase of desensitization of the nicotinic receptor, as measured by single channel recording of purified nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, when reconstituted in lipid vesicles. These data provide direct evidence for the regulation of ion channel properties by tyrosine phosphorylation. The results, which demonstrate a functional role of tyrosine phosphorylation in the nervous system, suggest a widespread role for tyrosine phosphorylation in neuronal signal transduction.
Among 10 breakthroughs that Science announced at the end of 2002 was the discovery of a photosensing (melanopsin-containing) retinal ganglion cell (RGC) and its role in entraining the circadian clock. This breakthrough exemplifies the ultimate goal of neuroscience: to understand the nervous system from molecules to behavior. Light-sensing RGCs constitute one of a dozen discrete RGC populations coding various aspects of visual scenes by virtue of their unique morphology, physiology, and coverage of the retina. Interestingly, the function of the melanopsin-containing RGCs in entraining the circadian clock need not involve much retinal processing, making it the simplest form of processing in the retina. This review focuses on recent advances in our understanding of retinal circuitry, visual processing, and retinal development demonstrated by innovative experimental techniques. It also discusses the advantages of using the retina as a model system to address some of the key questions in neuroscience.
Through the development of a high-acuity fovea, primates with frontal eyes have acquired the ability to use binocular eye movements to track small objects moving in space. The smooth-pursuit system moves both eyes in the same direction to track movement in the frontal plane (frontal pursuit), whereas the vergence system moves left and right eyes in opposite directions to track targets moving towards or away from the observer (vergence tracking). In the cerebral cortex and brainstem, signals related to vergence eye movements--and the retinal disparity and blur signals that elicit them--are coded independently of signals related to frontal pursuit. Here we show that these types of signal are represented in a completely different way in the smooth-pursuit region of the frontal eye fields. Neurons of the frontal eye field modulate strongly during both frontal pursuit and vergence tracking, which results in three-dimensional cartesian representations of eye movements. We propose that the brain creates this distinctly different intermediate representation to allow these neurons to function as part of a system that enables primates to track and manipulate objects moving in three-dimensional space.
The binding of [3H]diazepam to benzodiazepine receptors was studied in extensively washed membranes of rat cerebral cortex in the presence of the depressant barbiturate, pentobarbital. Pentobarbital, like the endogenous neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), increased the basal binding and also potentiated the GABA-enhanced binding of [3H]diazepam to benzodiazepine receptors by increasing the apparent affinity of [3H]diazepam for the benzodiazepine receptor. The concentrations of pentobarbital necessary to elicit these effects in vitro are the same as those observed after treatment with pharmacologically relevant doses, suggesting that a common neurochemical association may exist between these types of compounds.
A major obstacle to understanding the function and development of the vertebrate brain is the difficulty in monitoring dynamic patterns of electrical activity in the millesecond time domain; this has limited investigations of such phenomena as modular organization of functional units, seizure activities and spreading depression. The use of voltage-sensitive dyes and the recent development of the use of an array of photodiodes has provided a unique technique for monitoring the dynamic patterns of electrical activity in real time from a variety of invertebrate or vertebrate neuronal preparations including the rat cortex. In the present study, this technique has been used to investigate the intact optic tectum of the frog. We demonstrate that optical measurements can be used for real-time imaging of spatio-temporal patterns of neuronal responses and for identification of functional units evoked by natural visual stimuli. We report also the structure of the new voltage-sensitive probe that facilitates the in vivo applications of this technique.
The extrastriate visual cortex can be divided into functionally distinct temporal and parietal regions, which have been implicated in feature-related ('what') and spatial ('where') vision, respectively. Neuropsychological studies of patients with damage to either the temporal or the parietal regions provide support for this functional distinction. Given the prevailing modular theoretical framework and the fact that prefrontal cortex receives inputs from both temporal and parietal streams, recent studies have focused on the role of prefrontal cortex in understanding where and how information about object identity is integrated with (or remains segregated from) information about object location. Here we show that many neurons in primate posterior parietal cortex (the 'where' pathway) show sensory shape selectivities to simple, two-dimensional geometric shapes while the animal performs a simple fixation task. In a delayed match-to-sample paradigm, many neuronal units also show significant differences in delay-period activity, and these differences depend on the shape of the sample. These results indicate that units in posterior parietal cortex contribute to attending to and remembering shape features in a way that is independent of eye movements, reaching, or object manipulation. These units show shape selectivity equivalent to any shown in the ventral pathway.
Efficient control of synaptic transmission requires a rapid mechanism for terminating the actions of neurotransmitters. For amino acids and monoamines, this is achieved by their uptake into the cell by specific high-affinity transporters; acetylcholine is first broken down in the extracellular space and then choline is taken up by the cell. Because ATP is hydrolysed to adenosine by membrane-bound enzymes (ectonucleotidases) that are present in most tissues, it has been assumed that these enzymes terminate the neurotransmitter actions of ATP in the brain and in the periphery. We show here, however, that stimulation of sympathetic nerves innervating the guinea-pig vas deferens releases not only neuronal ATP, but also soluble nucleotidases that break down this ATP to adenosine, indicating that inactivation of ATP is increased by nerve activity. This release of specific nucleotidases together with ATP represents a new mechanism for terminating the actions of a neurotransmitter.
Self-renewing, totipotent embryonic stem (ES) cells may provide a virtually unlimited donor source for transplantation. A protocol that permits the in vitro generation of precursors for oligodendrocytes and astrocytes from ES cells was devised. Transplantation in a rat model of a human myelin disease shows that these ES cell-derived precursors interact with host neurons and efficiently myelinate axons in brain and spinal cord. Thus, ES cells can serve as a valuable source of cell type-specific somatic precursors for neural transplantation.
Sulfonylurea-sensitive adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-regulated potassium (KATP) channels are present in brain cells and play a role in neurosecretion at nerve terminals. KATP channels in substantia nigra, a brain region that shows high sulfonylurea binding, are inactivated by high glucose concentrations and by antidiabetic sulfonylureas and are activated by ATP depletion and anoxia. KATP channel inhibition leads to activation of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) release, whereas KATP channel activation leads to inhibition of GABA release. These channels may be involved in the response of the brain to hyper- and hypoglycemia (in diabetes) and ischemia or anoxia.
The spectacular escalation in complexity in early bilaterian evolution correlates with a strong increase in the number of microRNAs. To explore the link between the birth of ancient microRNAs and body plan evolution, we set out to determine the ancient sites of activity of conserved bilaterian microRNA families in a comparative approach. We reason that any specific localization shared between protostomes and deuterostomes (the two major superphyla of bilaterian animals) should probably reflect an ancient specificity of that microRNA in their last common ancestor. Here, we investigate the expression of conserved bilaterian microRNAs in Platynereis dumerilii, a protostome retaining ancestral bilaterian features, in Capitella, another marine annelid, in the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus, a deuterostome, and in sea anemone Nematostella, representing an outgroup to the bilaterians. Our comparative data indicate that the oldest known animal microRNA, miR-100, and the related miR-125 and let-7 were initially active in neurosecretory cells located around the mouth. Other sets of ancient microRNAs were first present in locomotor ciliated cells, specific brain centres, or, more broadly, one of four major organ systems: central nervous system, sensory tissue, musculature and gut. These findings reveal that microRNA evolution and the establishment of tissue identities were closely coupled in bilaterian evolution. Also, they outline a minimum set of cell types and tissues that existed in the protostome-deuterostome ancestor.
Although histaminergic neurones have not yet been histochemically visualized, there is little doubt that histamine (HA) has a neurotransmitter role in the invertebrate and mammalian central nervous system. For example, a combination of biochemical, electrophysiological and lesion studies in rats have shown that histamine is synthesized in and released from a discrete set of neurones ascending through the lateral hypothalamic area and widely projecting in the telencephalon. Histamine acts on target cells in mammalian brain via stimulation of two classes of receptor (H1 and H2) previously characterized in peripheral organs and probably uses Ca2+ and cyclic AMP, respectively, as second messengers. It is well established that several neurotransmitters affect neuronal activity in the central nervous system through stimulation not only of postsynaptic receptors, but also of receptors located presynaptically which often display distinct pharmacological specificity and by which they may control their own release. Such 'autoreceptors' have been demonstrated (or postulated) in the case of noradrenaline, dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurones but have never been demonstrated for histamine. We show here that histamine inhibits its own release from depolarized slices of rat cerebral cortex, an action apparently mediated by a class of receptor (H3) pharmacologically distinct from those previously characterized, that is, the H1 and H2 receptors.
Chronic blockade of dopamine D2 receptors, a common mechanism of action for antipsychotic drugs, down-regulates D1 receptors in the prefrontal cortex and, as shown here, produces severe impairments in working memory. These deficits were reversed in monkeys by short-term coadministration of a D1 agonist, ABT 431, and this improvement was sustained for more than a year after cessation of D1 treatment. These findings indicate that pharmacological modulation of the D1 signaling pathway can produce long-lasting changes in functional circuits underlying working memory. Resetting this pathway by brief exposure to the agonist may provide a valuable strategy for therapeutic intervention in schizophrenia and other dopamine dysfunctional states.
A common single-nucleotide polymorphism in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene, a methionine (Met) substitution for valine (Val) at codon 66 (Val66Met), is associated with alterations in brain anatomy and memory, but its relevance to clinical disorders is unclear. We generated a variant BDNF mouse (BDNF(Met/Met)) that reproduces the phenotypic hallmarks in humans with the variant allele. BDNF(Met) was expressed in brain at normal levels, but its secretion from neurons was defective. When placed in stressful settings, BDNF(Met/Met) mice exhibited increased anxiety-related behaviors that were not normalized by the antidepressant, fluoxetine. A variant BDNF may thus play a key role in genetic predispositions to anxiety and depressive disorders.
The cerebro-hepato-renal syndrome is a rare familial malady with cerebral, renal, and skeletal abnormalities, severe hypotonia, cirrhosis, iron and lipid storage, and death within 6 months. Correlated electron microscopic, histochemical, and biochemical studies demonstrate defects in two oxidative organelles. Peroxisomes cannot be found in hepatocytes and renal proximal tubules. In hepatocytes and cortical astrocytes, mitochondria are distorted in their appearance and glycogen stores are increased. Oxygen consumnption of brain and liver mitochondrial preparations with succinate and with substrates reducing nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide is markedly diminished, but the consumption is normal with ascorbate and tetramethylphenylenediamine, which suggests a defect in electron transport prior to the cytochromes. Histochemical studies of mitochondrial oxidation point to a defect between the succinate dehydrogenase flavoprotein and coenzyme Q, possibly in the region of nonheme iron protein.
The temporal pattern and relative timing of action potentials among neocortical neurons may carry important information. However, how cortical circuits detect or generate coherent activity remains unclear. Using paired recordings in rat neocortical slices, we found that the firing of fast-spiking cells can reflect the spiking pattern of single-axon pyramidal inputs. Moreover, this property allowed groups of fast-spiking cells interconnected by electrical and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-releasing (GABAergic) synapses to detect the relative timing of their excitatory inputs. These results indicate that networks of fast-spiking cells may play a role in the detection and promotion of synchronous activity within the neocortex.
The cerebellar cortex is perhaps the best characterized structure in the mammalian central nervous system. Although the major cerebellar cell classes are well known, a new class of cerebellar cortical neuron has now been identified with a monoclonal antibody (Mab) generated by a procedure for rapid immunization and selective immunosuppression of antibody responses. This procedure generates a high frequency of immunoglobulin G-class antibodies of desired specificity, and has allowed the generation of two antibodies that recognize subsets of cerebellar cortical neurons. One of these antibodies defines a previously unrecognized class of cerebellar neuron. The distribution and antigenic characteristics of this neuron suggest that it has a distinct role in cerebellar circuitry.
Experience-dependent brain plasticity typically declines after an early critical period during which circuits are established. Loss of plasticity with closure of the critical period limits improvement of function in adulthood, but the mechanisms that change the brain's plasticity remain poorly understood. Here, we identified an increase in expression of Lynx1 protein in mice that prevented plasticity in the primary visual cortex late in life. Removal of this molecular brake enhanced nicotinic acetylcholine receptor signaling. Lynx1 expression thus maintains stability of mature cortical networks in the presence of cholinergic innervation. The results suggest that modulating the balance between excitatory and inhibitory circuits reactivates visual plasticity and may present a therapeutic target.
One strategy for deciphering inherited neurological disease is to examine the expression of individual genes controlling the assembly and physiology of specific cell groups within the developing mammalian central nervous system (CNS). This neurogenetic approach, using defined single-locus mutations arising on coisogeneic mouse strains, has recently been used to analyse a major class of neuronal membrane diseases involving abnormal excitability, the epilepsies, and to identify examples of hereditary variation in signalling properties at central synapses. An interesting mutation, the Tottering (tg) gene, causes a delayed onset, recessive neurological disorder in the mouse featuring a stereotyped triad of ataxia, intermittent myoclonus and cortical spike-wave discharges accompanied by behavioural absence seizures which resemble petit mal epilepsy. Axon branches of the locus coeruleus, a noradrenergic brain-stem nucleus, hyperinnervate specific target regions of the tg brain. The number of parent coerulean perikarya is unaffected, indicating a true proliferation of the terminal axonal arbor. With the exception of this unusually precise error of axonal growth, no other cytopathology has been identified in the tg brain. Here I present evidence that selective lesions of the central noradrenergic axons early in development limit the expression of the disease.
Huntington's disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative disease caused by expansion of a polyglutamine tract in the huntingtin protein. Transcriptional dysregulation has been implicated in HD pathogenesis. Here, we report that huntingtin interacts with the transcriptional activator Sp1 and coactivator TAFII130. Coexpression of Sp1 and TAFII130 in cultured striatal cells from wild-type and HD transgenic mice reverses the transcriptional inhibition of the dopamine D2 receptor gene caused by mutant huntingtin, as well as protects neurons from huntingtin-induced cellular toxicity. Furthermore, soluble mutant huntingtin inhibits Sp1 binding to DNA in postmortem brain tissues of both presymptomatic and affected HD patients. Understanding these early molecular events in HD may provide an opportunity to interfere with the effects of mutant huntingtin before the development of disease symptoms.
The nascent field of neuroeconomics seeks to ground economic decision making in the biological substrate of the brain. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging of Ultimatum Game players to investigate neural substrates of cognitive and emotional processes involved in economic decision-making. In this game, two players split a sum of money;one player proposes a division and the other can accept or reject this. We scanned players as they responded to fair and unfair proposals. Unfair offers elicited activity in brain areas related to both emotion (anterior insula) and cognition (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex). Further, significantly heightened activity in anterior insula for rejected unfair offers suggests an important role for emotions in decision-making.
Formation of the mammalian brain requires choreographed migration of neurons to generate highly ordered laminar structures such as those in the cortices of the forebrain and the cerebellum. These processes are severely disrupted by mutations in reelin which cause widespread misplacement of neurons and associated ataxia in reeler mice. Reelin is a large extracellular protein secreted by pioneer neurons that coordinates cell positioning during neurodevelopment. Two new autosomal recessive mouse mutations, scramble and yotari have been described that exhibit a phenotype identical to reeler. Here we report that scrambler and yotari arise from mutations in mdab1, a mouse gene related to the Drosophila gene disabled (dab). Both scrambler and yotari mice express mutated forms of mdab1 messenger RNA and little or no mDab1 protein. mDab1 is a phosphoprotein that appears to function as an intracellular adaptor in protein kinase pathways. Expression analysis indicates that mdab1 is expressed in neuronal populations exposed to Reelin. The similar phenotypes of reeler, scrambler, yotari and mdab1 null mice indicate that Reelin and mDab1 function as signalling molecules that regulate cell positioning in the developing brain.
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P3), a second messenger molecule involved in actions of neurotransmitters, hormones and growth factors, releases calcium from vesicular non-mitochondrial intracellular stores. An Ins(1,4,5)P3 binding protein, purified from brain membranes, has been shown to be phosphorylated by cyclic-AMP-dependent protein kinase and localized by immunohistochemical techniques to intracellular particles associated with the endoplasmic reticulum. Although the specificity of the Ins(1,4,5)P3 binding protein for inositol phosphates and the high affinity of the protein for Ins(1,4,5)P3 indicate that it is a physiological Ins(1,4,5)P3 receptor mediating calcium release, direct evidence for this has been difficult to obtain. Also, it is unclear whether a single protein mediates both the recognition of Ins(1,4,5)P3 and calcium transport or whether these two functions involve two or more distinct proteins. In the present study we report reconstitution of the purified Ins(1,4,5)P3 binding protein into lipid vesicles. We show that Ins(1,4,5)P3 and other inositol phosphates stimulate calcium flux in the reconstituted vesicles with potencies and specificities that match the calcium releasing actions of Ins(1,4,5)P3. These results indicate that the purified Ins(1,4,5)P3 binding protein is a physiological receptor responsible for calcium release.
2-Deoxy-2[18F]fluoro-D-glucose positron emission tomography performed in human infants during development revealed progressive changes in local cerebral glucose utilization. In infants 5 weeks of age and younger, glucose utilization was highest in the sensorimotor cortex, thalamus, midbrain-brainstem, and cerebellar vermis. By 3 months, glucose metabolic activity had increased in the parietal, temporal, and occipital cortices and the basal ganglia, with subsequent increases in frontal and various association regions occurring by 8 months. These functional changes measured with positron emission tomography are in agreement with behavioral, neurophysiological, and anatomical alterations known to occur during infant development.
After lesions in the differentiated central nervous system (CNS) of higher vertebrates, interrupted fibre tracts do not regrow and elongate by more than an initial sprout of approximately 1 mm. Transplantations of pieces of peripheral nerves into various parts of the CNS demonstrate the widespread capability of CNS neurons to regenerate lesioned axons over long distances in a peripheral nerve environment. CNS white matter, cultured oligodendrocytes (the myelin-producing cells of the CNS), and CNS myelin itself, are strong inhibitors of neuron growth in culture, a property associated with defined myelin membrane proteins of relative molecular mass (Mr) 35,000 (NI-35) and 250,000 (NI-250). We have now intracerebrally applied the monoclonal antibody IN-1, which neutralizes the inhibitory effect of both these proteins, to young rats by implanting antibody-producing tumours. In 2-6-week-old rats we made complete transections of the cortico-spinal tract, a major fibre tract of the spinal cord, the axons of which originate in the motor and sensory neocortex. Previous studies have shown a complete absence of cortico-spinal tract regeneration after the first postnatal week in rats, and in adult hamsters and cats. In IN-1-treated rats, massive sprouting occurred at the lesion site, and fine axons and fascicles could be observed up to 7-11 mm caudal to the lesion within 2-3 weeks. In control rats, a similar sprouting reaction occurred, but the maximal distance of elongation rarely exceeded 1 mm. These results demonstrate the capacity for CNS axons to regenerate and elongate within differentiated CNS tissue after the neutralization of myelin-associated neurite growth inhibitors.
The fly Drosophila melanogaster can discriminate and remember visual landmarks. It analyses selected parts of its visual environment according to a small number of pattern parameters such as size, colour or contour orientation, and stores particular parameter values. Like humans, flies recognize patterns independently of the retinal position during acquisition of the pattern (translation invariance). Here we show that the central-most part of the fly brain, the fan-shaped body, contains parts of a network mediating visual pattern recognition. We have identified short-term memory traces of two pattern parameters--elevation in the panorama and contour orientation. These can be localized to two groups of neurons extending branches as parallel, horizontal strata in the fan-shaped body. The central location of this memory store is well suited to mediate translational invariance.
Concentrations of norepinephrine in cerebrospinal fluid are higher in schizophrenic patients, particularly in those with paranoid features, than in normal volunteer subjects of the same age. This observation supports recent reports of elevated concentrations of norepinephrine in specific brain areas adjacent to the cerebral ventricles of paranoid schizophrenic patients. Overflow of the amine from periventricular regions into the cerebrospinal fluid may reflect abnormally high release or diminished enzymatic destruction of norepinephrine in patients with schizophrenia.
The mechanisms by which neurotransmitter receptors are immobilized at postsynaptic sites in neurons are largely unknown. The activity of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors is mechanosensitive and dependent on the integrity of actin, suggesting a functionally important interaction between NMDA receptors and the postsynaptic cytoskeleton. alpha-Actinin-2, a member of the spectrin/dystrophin family of actin-binding proteins, is identified here as a brain postsynaptic density protein that colocalizes in dendritic spines with NMDA receptors and the putative NMDA receptor-clustering molecule PSD-95. alpha-Actinin-2 binds by its central rod domain to the cytoplasmic tail of both NR1 and NR2B subunits of the NMDA receptor, and can be immunoprecipitated with NMDA receptors and PSD-95 from rat brain. Intriguingly, NR1-alpha-actinin binding is directly antagonized by Ca2+/calmodulin. Thus alpha-actinin may play a role in both the localization of NMDA receptors and their modulation by Ca2+.
Localization of [3H]estradiol in tyrosine hydroxylase-containing neurons of rat brain was shown by a combined technique of autoradiography and immunohistochemistry. [3H]Estradiol was concentrated in the nuclei of tyrosine hydroxylase-containing neurons in the nucleus arcuatus, nucleus periventricularis hypothalami, and the zona incerta. These results suggest that estradiol acts directly on dopamine-producing neurons of the tuberoinfundibular system and incertohypothalamic system.
Memory function often declines with age, and is believed to deteriorate initially because of changes in synaptic function rather than loss of neurons. Some individuals then go on to develop Alzheimer's disease with neurodegeneration. Here we use Tg2576 mice, which express a human amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP) variant linked to Alzheimer's disease, to investigate the cause of memory decline in the absence of neurodegeneration or amyloid-beta protein amyloidosis. Young Tg2576 mice (< 6 months old) have normal memory and lack neuropathology, middle-aged mice (6-14 months old) develop memory deficits without neuronal loss, and old mice (> 14 months old) form abundant neuritic plaques containing amyloid-beta (refs 3-6). We found that memory deficits in middle-aged Tg2576 mice are caused by the extracellular accumulation of a 56-kDa soluble amyloid-beta assembly, which we term Abeta*56 (Abeta star 56). Abeta*56 purified from the brains of impaired Tg2576 mice disrupts memory when administered to young rats. We propose that Abeta*56 impairs memory independently of plaques or neuronal loss, and may contribute to cognitive deficits associated with Alzheimer's disease.
Orientational differences in human visual acuity can be related parametrically to the distribution of optimal orientations for the receptive fields of neurons in the striate cortex of the rhesus monkey. Both behavioral measures of acuity and the distribution of receptive fields exhibit maximums for stimuli horizontal or vertical relative to the retina; the effect diminishes with distance from the fovea. The anisotropy in the neuronal population and in visual acuity appear to be determined by postnatal visual experience.
Stimulation of phosphoinositide hydrolysis by excitatory amino acids was studied in synaptoneurosomes of kitten striate cortex at several postnatal ages. Ibotenate and glutamate stimulated phosphoinositide turnover during the second and third postnatal months; N-methyl-D-aspartate and DL-alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) were without effect. The developmental profile of ibotenate-stimulated phosphoinositide turnover parallels the postnatal changes in cortical susceptibility to visual deprivation. The transient increase in ibotenate-stimulated phosphoinositide turnover does not occur in visual cortex of kittens reared in complete darkness.
alpha2-Adrenergic receptors (alpha2ARs) present in the brainstem decrease blood pressure and are targets for clinically effective antihypertensive drugs. The existence of three alpha2AR subtypes, the lack of subtype-specific ligands, and the cross-reactivity of alpha2AR agonists with imidazoline receptors has precluded an understanding of the role of individual alpha2AR subtypes in the hypotensive response. Gene targeting was used to introduce a point mutation into the alpha2aAR subtype in the mouse genome. The hypotensive response to alpha2AR agonists was lost in the mutant mice, demonstrating that the alpha2aAR subtype plays a principal role in this response.
When humans are offered the choice between rewards available at different points in time, the relative values of the options are discounted according to their expected delays until delivery. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we examined the neural correlates of time discounting while subjects made a series of choices between monetary reward options that varied by delay to delivery. We demonstrate that two separate systems are involved in such decisions. Parts of the limbic system associated with the midbrain dopamine system, including paralimbic cortex, are preferentially activated by decisions involving immediately available rewards. In contrast, regions of the lateral prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex are engaged uniformly by intertemporal choices irrespective of delay. Furthermore, the relative engagement of the two systems is directly associated with subjects' choices, with greater relative fronto-parietal activity when subjects choose longer term options.
Visual spatial resolution is limited by factors ranging from optics to neuronal filters in the visual cortex, but it is not known to what extent it is also limited by the resolving power of attention. To investigate this, we studied adaptation to lines of specific orientation, a process that occurs in primary visual cortex. When a single grating is presented in the periphery of the visual field, human observers are aware of its orientation, but when it is flanked by other similar gratings ('crowding'), its orientation becomes impossible to discern. Nevertheless, we show that orientation-specific adaptation is not affected by crowding, implying that spatial resolution is limited by an attentional filter acting beyond the primary visual cortex. Consistent with this, we find that attentional resolution is greater in the lower than in the upper visual field, whereas there is no corresponding asymmetry in the primary visual cortex. We suggest that the attentional filter acts in one or more higher visual cortical areas to restrict the availability of visual information to conscious awareness.
Acoustically evoked neural activity has been recorded from the brainstem and auditory cortex of guinea pigs after complete destruction of the organ of Corti by the aminoglycosidic antibiotic amikacin. These responses to sound differ in important respects from the evoked potentials normally recorded from the auditory pathways. At the brainstem level they resemble the potentials reported by others after stimulation of the vestibular nerve.
The hypoglossal motor neurons that innervate the vocal organ (syrinx) of the male zebra finch show a selective, long-latency (50-millisecond) response to sound. This response is eliminated by lesions to forebrain song-control nuclei. Different song syllables elicit a response from different syringeal motor neurons. Conspecific vocalizations may therefore be perceived as members of a set of vocal gestures and thus distinct from other environmental sounds. This hypothesis is an avian parallel to the motor theory of speech perception in humans.
In the central nervous system (CNS), the principal mediators of fast synaptic excitatory neurotransmission are L-glutamate-gated ion channels that are responsive to the glutamate agonist alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA). In each member of a family of four abundant AMPA receptors, a small segment preceding the predicted fourth transmembrane region has been shown to exist in two versions with different amino acid sequences. These modules, designated "flip" and "flop," are encoded by adjacent exons of the receptor genes and impart different pharmacological and kinetic properties on currents evoked by L-glutamate or AMPA, but not those evoked by kainate. For each receptor, the alternatively spliced messenger RNAs show distinct expression patterns in rat brain, particularly in the CA1 and CA3 fields of the hippocampus. These results identify a switch in the molecular and functional properties of glutamate receptors operated by alternative splicing.
The physical changes representing a memory are believed to be localized to specific neurons, widely distributed in multiple parallel pathways in the brain. 2-Fluorodeoxyglucose, labeled with two discriminable radioactive tracers, was used to construct quantitative metabolic maps in split-brain cats during a visual task. One side of the brain served to estimate the metabolic variability of nonspecific influences. The other side was used to map metabolic changes related to the presence of previously learned visual cues, as well as changes related to nonspecific influences, in the same periods of time. When the two sides were compared, between 5 million and 100 million neurons (depending upon the significance level selected) were identified in which activity increased during presentation of the familiar cues. The wide distribution of these neurons throughout the brain is compatible with prior evidence of a distributed memory system. However, the large number of neurons involved is difficult to reconcile with theories in which individual neurons are dedicated to specific memories.
The effect of ethanol on hippocampal axonal sprouiting was studied with a histochemical technique for identifying acetylcholinesterase. Unilateral lesion of the entorhinal cortex in adult rats produced an increase in the density of acetylcho-linesterase staining in the outer molecular layer and a concomitant increase in the width of the pale-staining commissural-associational zone of the dentate gyrus. Other rats were given ethanol (11.3 +/- 0.45 grams per kilogram) for 2 weeks before and 9 days after receiving the lesion. Ethanol abolished the expansion of the commissural-associational zone. The effect of ethanol on sprouting axons suggests that it may inhibit recovery of function after brain injury.
Positron emission tomography was used to measure cerebral activity and to evaluate regional interrelationships within visual cortices and their projections during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep in human subjects. REM sleep was associated with selective activation of extrastriate visual cortices, particularly within the ventral processing stream, and an unexpected attenuation of activity in the primary visual cortex; increases in regional cerebral blood flow in extrastriate areas were significantly correlated with decreases in the striate cortex. Extrastriate activity was also associated with concomitant activation of limbic and paralimbic regions, but with a marked reduction of activity in frontal association areas including lateral orbital and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices. This pattern suggests a model for brain mechanisms subserving REM sleep where visual association cortices and their paralimbic projections may operate as a closed system dissociated from the regions at either end of the visual hierarchy that mediate interactions with the external world.
L-Glutamate and norepinephrine are examples of a major excitatory neurotransmitter and a neuromodulator in the cerebral cortex, respectively. Little is known of how chemical signaling between the anatomically distinct chemical pathways occurs. Specific activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) class of glutamate receptor in synaptosomal preparations from guinea pig cerebral cortex caused release of both of these chemicals, and this release was blocked by agents that inhibit nitric oxide (NO) production or remove NO from the extracellular space. Furthermore, neurotransmitter release correlated with cortical NO production after NMDA receptor stimulation. These results suggest that NO production and its extracellular movement may be links in the pathway from NMDA receptor activation to changes in chemical signaling in surrounding synaptic terminals in the cerebral cortex.
The runners-up for 2007's Breakthrough of the Year include advances in cellular and structural biology, astrophysics, physics, immunology, synthetic chemistry, neuroscience, and computer science.
Various chronic antidepressant treatments increase adult hippocampal neurogenesis, but the functional importance of this phenomenon remains unclear. Here, using genetic and radiological methods, we show that disrupting antidepressant-induced neurogenesis blocks behavioral responses to antidepressants. Serotonin 1A receptor null mice were insensitive to the neurogenic and behavioral effects of fluoxetine, a serotonin selective reuptake inhibitor. X-irradiation of a restricted region of mouse brain containing the hippocampus prevented the neurogenic and behavioral effects of two classes of antidepressants. These findings suggest that the behavioral effects of chronic antidepressants may be mediated by the stimulation of neurogenesis in the hippocampus.
The opioid peptides Leu-enkephalin and Met-enkephalin are stored intraneuronally in the brain where they are thought to act as neurotransmitters and/or neuromodulators. Evidence for their release from nerve terminals has come from biochemical and pharmacological studies in vitro with brain tissue slices and synaptosomes. Enkephalins also exist in the peripheral nervous system in nerve cell bodies and axon terminals in the gastrointestinal tract, sympathetic ganglia and adrenal gland. In the adrenal gland, high levels of enkephalins are present both in axon terminals of the splanchnic nerve and in the adrenal medullary chromaffin cells where they are stored together with the catecholamines in the chromaffin granules. Stimulation of the adrenal gland in vivo or the perfused gland in vitro causes release of catecholamines and enkephalins into the adrenal vein. However, it is not clear whether the origin of the released enkephalins is the adrenal medullary chromaffin cells or the enkephalin-containing splanchnic nerve terminals that innervate the medulla. We now show that enkephalin and catecholamines are released together from primary cultures of bovine adrenal medullary chromaffin cells by nicotine in a Ca2+-dependent manner.
Inflammatory diseases and neuropathic insults are frequently accompanied by severe and debilitating pain, which can become chronic and often unresponsive to conventional analgesic treatment. A loss of synaptic inhibition in the spinal dorsal horn is considered to contribute significantly to this pain pathology. Facilitation of spinal gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic neurotransmission through modulation of GABA(A) receptors should be able to compensate for this loss. With the use of GABA(A)-receptor point-mutated knock-in mice in which specific GABA(A) receptor subtypes have been selectively rendered insensitive to benzodiazepine-site ligands, we show here that pronounced analgesia can be achieved by specifically targeting spinal GABA(A) receptors containing the alpha2 and/or alpha3 subunits. We show that their selective activation by the non-sedative ('alpha1-sparing') benzodiazepine-site ligand L-838,417 (ref. 13) is highly effective against inflammatory and neuropathic pain yet devoid of unwanted sedation, motor impairment and tolerance development. L-838,417 not only diminished the nociceptive input to the brain but also reduced the activity of brain areas related to the associative-emotional components of pain, as shown by functional magnetic resonance imaging in rats. These results provide a rational basis for the development of subtype-selective GABAergic drugs for the treatment of chronic pain, which is often refractory to classical analgesics.
Acidic amino acids, such as l-glutamate, are believed to be excitatory neurotransmitters in the mammalian brain and exert effects on several different receptors named after the selective agonists kainate, quisqualate and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA). The first two receptors collectively termed non-NMDA receptors, have been implicated in the mediation of synaptic transmission in many excitatory pathways in the central nervous system (CNS), whereas NMDA receptors, with few exceptions do not appear to be involved; this is typified in the hippocampus where there is a high density of NMDA receptors yet selective NMDA receptor antagonists, such as D-2-amino-5-phosphonovalerate (APV), do not affect synaptic potentials. NMDA receptors have, however, been shown to be involved in long-term potentiation (LTP) in the hippocampus, a form of synaptic plasticity which may be involved in learning and memory. NMDA receptors have also been found to contribute to epileptiform activity in this region. We now describe how NMDA receptors can participate during high-frequency synaptic transmission in the hippocampus, their involvement during low-frequency transmission being greatly suppressed by Mg2+. A frequency dependent alleviation of this blockade provides a novel synaptic mechanism whereby a single neurotransmitter can transmit very different information depending on the temporal nature of the input. This mechanism could account for the involvement of NMDA receptors in the initiation of LPT and their contribution, in part, to epileptic activity.
The vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) is a simple movement that has been used to investigate the neural basis for motor learning in monkeys. The function of the VOR is to stabilize retinal images by generating smooth eye movements that are equal and opposite to each head movement. Learning occurs whenever image motion occurs persistently during head turns; as a result image stability is gradually restored. A hypothesis is proposed in which the output from the cerebellar cortex of the flocculus guides learning; the locus of learning is in the brain stem, in VOR pathways that are under inhibitory control from the flocculus. Other, parallel VOR pathways do not receive inputs from the flocculus and are not subject to learning. Similarities among the VOR and other motor systems suggest some organizing principles that may apply in many forms of motor learning.
Pyramidal neurons in layer 5 of the neocortex of the brain extend their axons and dendrites into all layers. They are also unusual in having both an axonal and a dendritic zone for the initiation of action potentials. Distal dendritic inputs, which normally appear greatly attenuated at the axon, must cross a high threshold at the dendritic initiation zone to evoke calcium action potentials but can then generate bursts of axonal action potentials. Here we show that a single back-propagating sodium action potential generated in the axon facilitates the initiation of these calcium action potentials when it coincides with distal dendritic input within a time window of several milliseconds. Inhibitory dendritic input can selectively block the initiation of dendritic calcium action potentials, preventing bursts of axonal action potentials. Thus, excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials arising in the distal dendrites can exert significantly greater control over action potential initiation in the axon than would be expected from their electrotonically isolated locations. The coincidence of a single back-propagating action potential with a subthreshold distal excitatory postsynaptic potential to evoke a burst of axonal action potentials represents a new mechanism by which the main cortical output neurons can associate inputs arriving at different cortical layers.
The mammalian central nervous system (CNS) contains a remarkable array of neural cells, each with a complex pattern of connections that together generate perceptions and higher brain functions. Here we describe a large-scale screen to create an atlas of CNS gene expression at the cellular level, and to provide a library of verified bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) vectors and transgenic mouse lines that offer experimental access to CNS regions, cell classes and pathways. We illustrate the use of this atlas to derive novel insights into gene function in neural cells, and into principal steps of CNS development. The atlas, library of BAC vectors and BAC transgenic mice generated in this screen provide a rich resource that allows a broad array of investigations not previously available to the neuroscience community.
Thalamic inputs strongly drive neurons in the primary visual cortex, even though these neurons constitute only approximately 5% of the synapses on layer 4 spiny stellate simple cells. We modeled the feedforward excitatory and inhibitory inputs to these cells based on in vivo recordings in cats, and we found that the reliability of spike transmission increased steeply between 20 and 40 synchronous thalamic inputs in a time window of 5 milliseconds, when the reliability per spike was most energetically efficient. The optimal range of synchronous inputs was influenced by the balance of background excitation and inhibition in the cortex, which could gate the flow of information into the cortex. Ensuring reliable transmission by spike synchrony in small populations of neurons may be a general principle of cortical function.
In the primary visual cortex, the development of orientation selectivity is influenced by patterns of neural activity. The introduction of artificially correlated activity into the visual pathway (through synchronous activation of retinal ganglion cell axons in the optic nerve) substantially weakens the orientation selectivity of neurons in superficial and deep cortical layers. This is consistent with activity having an instructive role in shaping cortical neuron receptive field tuning properties.
Human recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) may benefit ischemic stroke patients by dissolving clots. However, independent of thrombolysis, tPA may also have deleterious effects on neurons by promoting excitotoxicity. Zinc neurotoxicity has been shown to be an additional key mechanism in brain injuries. Hence, if tPA affects zinc neurotoxicity, this may provide additional insights into its effect on neuronal death. Independent of its proteolytic action, tPA markedly attenuated zinc-induced cell death in cortical culture, and, when injected into cerebrospinal fluid, also reduced kainate seizure-induced hippocampal neuronal death in adult rats.
Drugs of abuse probably exert their reinforcing effects through 'reward' pathways in the central nervous system (CNS). Neuronal systems mediating opiate reinforcement have been investigated using pharmacological and electrolytic lesion procedures. Drugs that interfere with catecholaminergic and cholinergic neuronal activity decrease intravenous (i.v.) morphine self-administration in monkeys and rats. Electrolytic lesion procedures in rats have demonstrated that the medial forebrain bundle and caudate nucleus are important in maintaining i.v. morphine self-administration. We have now carried out a direct investigation of striatal (caudate nucleus, putamen and globus pallidus) neuronal systems. We show here that striatal catecholaminergic systems are important in mediating opiate reinforcement, and present direct evidence for the involvement of neurotransmitter systems in morphine reward.
The adrenaline-forming enzyme (phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase) was elevated in the A1 and A2 regions of the brainstem of 4-week-old spontaneously (genetic) hypertensive rats and in the A1 region of adult experimentally (deoxycorticosterone acetate and sodium chloride) hypertensive rats. The administration of a phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase inhibitor to experimentally hypertensive animals caused a reduction of the elevated blood pressure to normal values. These results implicate adrenaline-containing neurons in the brainstem in the development of hypertension.
In the striate cortex of adult monkeys and cats, both electrophysiology1-3 and the 2-deoxyglucose autoradiographic technique of Sokoloff4-8 suggest that neurones are arranged in functional columns or slabs that run through the full thickness of the cortex, each column containing cells with a preference for a particular orientation of line or edge in the visual field. There is disagreement, however, concerning the organization of visual cortex in very young animals and the role of visual experience in cortical development. Orientation-selective neurones clearly exist in immature cat cortex, but reports differ on their frequency, angular selectivity and degree of columnar organization (see ref. 9 for review). We have used 2-deoxyglucose autoradiography to investigate the development of cat striate cortex. This technique reveals the spatial distribution of activity in populations of neurones and should therefore provide information about how the columnar pattern develops and whether its maturation depends on visual stimulation. We report here that in normal animals, periodic metabolic labelling around layer IV was first clearly observed at 21 days of age and by 35 days the pattern had become truly columnar; in a matched series of animals deprived of normal pattern vision no differential label was observed except for weak periodicity in a single 35-day-old animal. These results suggest that cat striate cortex is immature at the time of eye-opening and that visual experience is crucial for normal maturation.
The psychological and neurobiological processes underlying moral judgement have been the focus of many recent empirical studies. Of central interest is whether emotions play a causal role in moral judgement, and, in parallel, how emotion-related areas of the brain contribute to moral judgement. Here we show that six patients with focal bilateral damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPC), a brain region necessary for the normal generation of emotions and, in particular, social emotions, produce an abnormally 'utilitarian' pattern of judgements on moral dilemmas that pit compelling considerations of aggregate welfare against highly emotionally aversive behaviours (for example, having to sacrifice one person's life to save a number of other lives). In contrast, the VMPC patients' judgements were normal in other classes of moral dilemmas. These findings indicate that, for a selective set of moral dilemmas, the VMPC is critical for normal judgements of right and wrong. The findings support a necessary role for emotion in the generation of those judgements.
The massive health problem associated with cigarette smoking is exacerbated by the addictive properties of tobacco smoke and the limited success of current approaches to cessation of smoking. Yet little is known about the neuropharmacological actions of cigarette smoke that contribute to smoking behaviour, or why smoking is so prevalent in psychiatric disorders and is associated with a decreased risk of Parkinson's disease. Here we report that brains of living smokers show a 40% decrease in the level of monoamine oxidase B (MAO B; EC 1.4.3.4) relative to non-smokers or former smokers. MAO B is involved in the breakdown of dopamine, a neurotransmitter implicated in reinforcing and motivating behaviours as well as movement. MAO B inhibition is therefore associated with enhanced activity of dopamine, as well as with decreased production of hydrogen peroxide, a source of reactive oxygen species. We propose that reduction of MAO B activity may synergize with nicotine to produce the diverse behavioural and epidemiological effects of smoking.
The neural substrates that the fruitfly Drosophila uses to sense smell, taste and light share marked structural and functional similarities with ours, providing attractive models to dissect sensory stimulus processing. Here we focus on two of the remaining and less understood prime sensory modalities: graviception and hearing. We show that the fly has implemented both sensory modalities into a single system, Johnston's organ, which houses specialized clusters of mechanosensory neurons, each of which monitors specific movements of the antenna. Gravity- and sound-sensitive neurons differ in their response characteristics, and only the latter express the candidate mechanotransducer channel NompC. The two neural subsets also differ in their central projections, feeding into neural pathways that are reminiscent of the vestibular and auditory pathways in our brain. By establishing the Drosophila counterparts of these sensory systems, our findings provide the basis for a systematic functional and molecular dissection of how different mechanosensory stimuli are detected and processed.
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we investigated the mechanism by which cholinergic enhancement improves working memory. We studied the effect of the cholinesterase inhibitor physostigmine on subcomponents of this complex function. Cholinergic enhancement increased the selectivity of neural responses in extrastriate cortices during visual working memory, particularly during encoding. It also increased the participation of ventral extrastriate cortex during memory maintenance and decreased the participation of anterior prefrontal cortex. These results indicate that cholinergic enhancement improves memory performance by augmenting the selectivity of perceptual processing during encoding, thereby simplifying processing demands during memory maintenance and reducing the need for prefrontal participation.
Neural transplantation can restore striatal dopaminergic neurotransmission in animal models of Parkinson's disease. It has now been shown that mesencephalic dopamine neurons, obtained from human fetuses of 8 to 9 weeks gestational age, can survive in the human brain and produce marked and sustained symptomatic relief in a patient severely affected with idiopathic Parkinson's disease. The grafts, which were implanted unilaterally into the putamen by stereotactic surgery, restored dopamine synthesis and storage in the grafted area, as assessed by positron emission tomography with 6-L-[18F]fluorodopa. This neurochemical change was accompanied by a therapeutically significant reduction in the patient's severe rigidity and bradykinesia and a marked diminuation of the fluctuations in the patient's condition during optimum medication (the "on-off" phenomenon). The clinical improvement was most marked on the side contralateral to the transplant.
One of the basic functions of the cerebral cortex is the analysis and representation of relations among the components of sensory and motor patterns. It is proposed that the cortex applies two complementary strategies to cope with the combinatorial problem posed by the astronomical number of possible relations: (i) the analysis and representation of frequently occurring, behaviorally relevant relations by groups of cells with fixed but broadly tuned response properties; and (ii) the dynamic association of these cells into functionally coherent assemblies. Feedforward connections and reciprocal associative connections, respectively, are thought to underlie these two operations. The architectures of both types of connections are susceptible to experience-dependent modifications during development, but they become fixed in the adult. As development proceeds, feedforward connections also appear to lose much of their functional plasticity, whereas the synapses of the associative connections retain a high susceptibility to use-dependent modifications. The reduced plasticity of feedforward connections is probably responsible for the invariance of cognitive categories acquired early in development. The persistent adaptivity of reciprocal connections is a likely substrate for the ability to generate representations for new perceptual objects and motor patterns throughout life.
There is a long-standing controversy regarding the mechanisms that generate the functional subdivisions of the cerebral neocortex. One model proposes that thalamic axonal input specifies these subdivisions; the competing model postulates that patterning mechanisms intrinsic to the dorsal telencephalon generate neocortical regions. Gbx-2 mutant mice, whose thalamic differentiation is disrupted, were investigated. Despite the lack of cortical innervation by thalamic axons, neocortical region-specific gene expression (Cadherin-6, EphA-7, Id-2, and RZR-beta) developed normally. This provides evidence that patterning mechanisms intrinsic to the neocortex specify the basic organization of its functional subdivisions.
Serotonin-containing neurones in brain have been proposed to have a role in the control of physiological mechanisms such as sleep, thermoregulation, pain perception and endocrine secretions as well as in the physiopathology of migraine or depressive illness. One difficulty in testing these possibilities lies in the scarcity of pharmacological agents able to interact selectively with the probably multiple classes of serotonin receptors in the central nervous system. Development of such agents would be facilitated by simple in vitro models in which biological responses to serotonin in mammalian brain could be quantified. Thus a serotonin-sensitive adenylate cyclase has been characterized in rat brain, but the response to serotonin is weak in newborn and practically absent in adult animals. In addition, two pharmacologically distinct classes of serotoninergic binding site have been identified using 3H-serotonin and 3H-spiperone as ligands, but their identification as receptors remains to be established. More recently, serotonin has been shown to stimulate phosphorylation of a neuronal protein in slices from the facial motor nucleus, although the receptors mediating this action were not characterized. We now report that serotonin stimulates glycogen hydrolysis in slices of cerebral cortex, that this action is mediated by a novel class of receptors and that tricyclic antidepressants are among the best competitive antagonists of the indolamine.
The fine-tuning of circuits in sensory cortex requires sensory experience during an early critical period. Visual deprivation during the critical period has catastrophic effects on visual function, including loss of visual responsiveness to the deprived eye, reduced visual acuity, and loss of tuning to many stimulus characteristics. These changes occur faster than the remodelling of thalamocortical axons, but the intracortical plasticity mechanisms that underlie them are incompletely understood. Long-term depression of excitatory intracortical synapses has been proposed as a general candidate mechanism for the loss of cortical responsiveness after visual deprivation. Alternatively (or in addition), the decreased ability of the deprived eye to activate cortical neurons could be due to enhanced intracortical inhibition. Here we show that visual deprivation leaves excitatory connections in layer 4 (the primary input layer to cortex) unaffected, but markedly potentiates inhibitory feedback between fast-spiking basket cells (FS cells) and star pyramidal neurons (star pyramids). Further, a previously undescribed form of long-term potentiation of inhibition (LTPi) could be induced at synapses from FS cells to star pyramids, and was occluded by previous visual deprivation. These data suggest that potentiation of inhibition is a major cellular mechanism underlying the deprivation-induced degradation of visual function, and that this form of LTPi is important in fine-tuning cortical circuitry in response to visual experience.
Neuropeptides, critical brain peptides that modulate animal behavior by affecting the activity of almost every neuronal circuit, are inherently difficult to predict directly from a nascent genome sequence because of extensive posttranslational processing. The combination of bioinformatics and proteomics allows unprecedented neuropeptide discovery from an unannotated genome. Within the Apis mellifera genome, we have inferred more than 200 neuropeptides and have confirmed the sequences of 100 peptides. This study lays the groundwork for future molecular studies of Apis neuropeptides with the identification of 36 genes, 33 of which were previously unreported.
Here we describe a patient who, as a result of brain damage, had a dramatic inability to retrieve proper names, and who thus offered the opportunity of observing the distinction made in the brain between proper and common names. Although category specific aphasic disturbances are relatively common, this patient's anomia for proper names is very rare: only two other cases have been described so far. The opposite phenomenon, a selective sparing of proper names, has also been recently observed. It is widely assumed that double dissociations such as this reflect the premorbid organization of the cognitive system: the categories of proper and common nouns, therefore, would be separately represented or, at least, separately accessed in the intact brain. The only other such deficits, including the inability to learn arbitrary links between words and to guess the titles of pieces of music, are believed to be indicative of a problem in dealing with purely referential relations. This, in turn, would indirectly confirm the role of proper names as pure referring expressions.
Immunoreactive corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) and dynorphin-(I-8) were visualized in rat hypothalamus by immunohistofluorescence with specific antibodies. In brains from colchicine-treated, adrenalectomized rats, neuronal perikarya with immunoreactive CRF were observed in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. The CRF occurred together with the dynorphin-(1-8). However, the CRF immunoreactivity occurred only in a subpopulation of the dynorphin-(1-8) immunoreactive cells. These findings suggest that there may be a functional interrelationship of CRF with dynorphin-related opioid peptides and provide further evidence that neurons may contain more than one bioactive substance.
The use of a variety of probes for neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors has indicated that there are sites on neurons that bind the acetylcholine receptor antagonist alpha-bungarotoxin, but do not regulate cation channels in response to the binding of acetylcholine. Sites with high binding affinity for nicotine and for alpha-bungarotoxin also show different distributions in brain. A monoclonal antibody (mAb35) raised against acetylcholine receptors from Electrophorus electric organ has been used to purify receptors from chick brain. These receptors do not bind alpha-bungarotoxin but have a high affinity for nicotine and antibodies raised against them block the function of acetylcholine receptors in ciliary ganglia. We have raised a monoclonal antibody (mAb270) against acetylcholine receptors from chicken brain (P.J.W., R. Liu, S. Shimasaki, F. Esch, B. Morley & J.M.L., manuscript in preparation), which has been used to purify a similar receptor from rat brain. Here we show that this antibody identifies a functional nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in rat-neuron-like PC12 cells which is probably not encoded by the cDNA clone (lambda PCA48) previously suggested as a candidate for the acetylcholine receptor gene. Additionally, we show that mAb270 binds to the same areas of rat brain as nicotine.
Electrophysiological studies of human temporal-lobe epilepsy suggest that a loss of hippocampal GABA-mediated inhibition may underlie the neuronal hyperexcitability. However, GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-containing cells are preserved and GABA receptors are maintained in the surviving hippocampal neurons. Diminished GABA release may therefore mediate the loss of inhibition. Here we show that, in the human brain, potassium-stimulated release of GABA was increased, and glutamate-induced, calcium-independent release of GABA was markedly decreased, in epileptogenic hippocampi, in contrast with contralateral, non-epileptogenic hippocampi. The glutamate-induced GABA release in vivo was transporter-mediated in rats. Furthermore, in amygdala-kindled rats, a model for human epilepsy, a decrease in glutamate-induced GABA release was associated with a 48% decrease in the number of GABA transporters. These data suggest that temporal-lobe epilepsy is characterized in part by a loss of glutamate-stimulated GABA release that is secondary to a reduction in the number of GABA transporters.
Theoretical studies suggest that primary visual cortex (area V1) uses a sparse code to efficiently represent natural scenes. This issue was investigated by recording from V1 neurons in awake behaving macaques during both free viewing of natural scenes and conditions simulating natural vision. Stimulation of the nonclassical receptive field increases the selectivity and sparseness of individual V1 neurons, increases the sparseness of the population response distribution, and strongly decorrelates the responses of neuron pairs. These effects are due to both excitatory and suppressive modulation of the classical receptive field by the nonclassical receptive field and do not depend critically on the spatiotemporal structure of the stimuli. During natural vision, the classical and nonclassical receptive fields function together to form a sparse representation of the visual world. This sparse code may be computationally efficient for both early vision and higher visual processing.
The efficient introduction of genetic material into quiescent nerve cells is important in the study of brain function and for gene therapy of neurological disorders. A replication-deficient adenoviral vector that contained a reporter gene encoding beta-galactosidase infected rat nerve cells in vitro and in vivo. beta-Galactosidase was expressed in almost all sympathetic neurons and astrocytes in culture. After stereotactic inoculations into the rat hippocampus and the substantia nigra, beta-galactosidase activity was detected for 2 months. Infected cells were identified as microglial cells, astrocytes, or neurons with anatomical, morphological, and immunohistochemical criteria. No obvious cytopathic effect was observed.
It is important for animals to estimate the value of rewards as accurately as possible. Because the number of potential reward values is very large, it is necessary that the brain's limited resources be allocated so as to discriminate better among more likely reward outcomes at the expense of less likely outcomes. We found that midbrain dopamine neurons rapidly adapted to the information provided by reward-predicting stimuli. Responses shifted relative to the expected reward value, and the gain adjusted to the variance of reward value. In this way, dopamine neurons maintained their reward sensitivity over a large range of reward values.
The identification of pathways mediated by the kinase Cdk5 and the ligand reelin has provided a conceptual framework for exploring the molecular mechanisms underlying proper lamination of the developing mammalian cerebral cortex. In this report, we identify a component of the regulation of Cdk5-mediated cortical lamination by genetic analysis of the roles of the class III POU domain transcription factors, Brn-1 and Brn-2, expressed during the development of the forebrain and coexpressed in most layer II-V cortical neurons. Brn-1 and Brn-2 appear to critically control the initiation of radial migration, redundantly regulating the cell-autonomous expression of the p35 and p39 regulatory subunits of Cdk5 in migrating cortical neurons, with Brn-1(-/-)/Brn-2(-/-) mice exhibiting cortical inversion.
The hippocampus is one of several brain areas thought to play a central role in affective behaviors, but the underlying local network dynamics are not understood. We used quantitative voltage-sensitive dye imaging to probe hippocampal dynamics with millisecond resolution in brain slices after bidirectional modulation of affective state in rat models of depression. We found that a simple measure of real-time activity-stimulus-evoked percolation of activity through the dentate gyrus relative to the hippocampal output subfield-accounted for induced changes in animal behavior independent of the underlying mechanism of action of the treatments. Our results define a circuit-level neurophysiological endophenotype for affective behavior and suggest an approach to understanding circuit-level substrates underlying psychiatric disease symptoms.
Recognizing a deficiency of indispensable amino acids (IAAs) for protein synthesis is vital for dietary selection in metazoans, including humans. Cells in the brain's anterior piriform cortex (APC) are sensitive to IAA deficiency, signaling diet rejection and foraging for complementary IAA sources, but the mechanism is unknown. Here we report that the mechanism for recognizing IAA-deficient foods follows the conserved general control (GC) system, wherein uncharged transfer RNA induces phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) via the GC nonderepressing 2 (GCN2) kinase. Thus, a basic mechanism of nutritional stress management functions in mammalian brain to guide food selection for survival.
The neurotransmitter dopamine has been demonstrated by biochemical, histochemical and immunocytochemical techniques to be unevenly distributed in the mammalian central nervous system. DARPP-32 (dopamine- and cyclic-AMP-regulated phosphoprotein of molecular weight 32,000) is a neuronal phosphoprotein that displays a regional distribution in the mammalian brain very similar to that of dopamine-containing nerve terminals, being highly concentrated in the basal ganglia. The state of phosphorylation of DARPP-32 can be regulated by dopamine and by cyclic AMP in intact nerve cells, suggesting a role for this phosphoprotein in mediating certain of the effects of dopamine on dopaminoceptive cells. The observation that many of the physical and chemical properties of purified DARPP-32 resemble those of phosphatase inhibitor-1 (inhibitor-1), a widely distributed inhibitor of protein phosphatase-1, suggests that DARPP-32 might also function as a phosphatase inhibitor. We report here that DARPP-32 inhibits protein phosphatase-1 at nanomolar concentrations. Moreover, like inhibitor-1, DARPP-32 is effective as an inhibitor in its phosphorylated but not its dephosphorylated form. Thus, the basal ganglia of mammalian brain contain a region-specific neuronal phosphoprotein that is a protein phosphatase inhibitor.
Microglia are the resident macrophages of the central nervous system and are associated with the pathogenesis of many neurodegenerative and brain inflammatory diseases; however, the origin of adult microglia remains controversial. We show that postnatal hematopoietic progenitors do not significantly contribute to microglia homeostasis in the adult brain. In contrast to many macrophage populations, we show that microglia develop in mice that lack colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) but are absent in CSF-1 receptor-deficient mice. In vivo lineage tracing studies established that adult microglia derive from primitive myeloid progenitors that arise before embryonic day 8. These results identify microglia as an ontogenically distinct population in the mononuclear phagocyte system and have implications for the use of embryonically derived microglial progenitors for the treatment of various brain disorders.
The existence of cholinergic neuronal cell bodies in mammalian cerebral cortex was long the subject of much controversy (see ref. 1 for review). Recently, however, a specific cholinergic marker, the acetylcholine synthesizing enzyme, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT, E.C.2.3.1.6), was demonstrated by immunohistochemical methods to be present in bipolar neurones in rat cortex. Here we show that at least 80% of these intrinsic cholinergic neurones also contain immunoreactivity for vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), a neuroactive peptide found to be present in a subpopulation of cortical neurones. On the other hand, we find that the ChAT-positive cells in the basal forebrain, which are another major source of cholinergic innervation of the cortex, contain no detectable VIP-immunoreactivity. In addition, we have observed by both light and electron microscopy that some VIP- and some ChAT-positive structures in cortex are closely associated with blood vessels.
Glutamate, the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, acts primarily on two types of ionotropic receptors: alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Work over the past decade indicates that regulated changes in the number of synaptic AMPA receptors may serve as a mechanism for information storage. Recent studies demonstrate that a family of small transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins (TARPs) controls both AMPA receptor trafficking and channel gating. TARPs provide the first example of auxiliary subunits of ionotropic receptors. Here we review the pivotal role that TARPs play in the life cycle of AMPA receptors.
Optical imaging of animal somatosensory, olfactory and visual cortices has revealed maps of functional activity. In non-human primates, high-resolution maps of the visual cortex have been obtained using only an intrinsic reflection signal. Although the time course of the signal is slower than membrane potential changes, the maximum optical changes correspond to the maximal neuronal activity. The intrinsic optical signal may represent the flow of ionic currents, oxygen delivery, changes in blood volume, potassium accumulation or glial swelling. Here we use similar techniques to obtain maps from human cortex during stimulation-evoked epileptiform afterdischarges and cognitively evoked functional activity. Optical changes increased in magnitude as the intensity and duration of the afterdischarges increased. In areas surrounding the afterdischarge activity, optical changes were in the opposite direction and possibly represent an inhibitory surround. Large optical changes were found in the sensory cortex during tongue movement and in Broca's and Wernicke's language areas during naming exercises. The adaptation of high-resolution optical imaging for use on human cortex provides a new technique for investigation of the organization of the sensory and motor cortices, language, and other cognitive processes.
How is it that we can perceive, learn and be aware of the world? The development of new techniques for studying large-scale brain activity, together with insights from computational modeling and a better understanding of cognitive processes, have opened the door for collaborative research that could lead to major advances in our understanding of ourselves.
With [3H]cytidine as a precursor, phosphoinositide turnover can be localized in brain slices by selective autoradiography of the product [3H]cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol, which is membrane-bound. In the cerebellum, glutamatergic stimulation elicits an increase of phosphoinositide turnover only in Purkinje cells and the molecular layer. In the hippocampus, both glutamatergic and muscarinic cholinergic stimulation increase phosphoinositide turnover, but with distinct localizations. Cholinergic stimulation affects CA1, CA3, CA4, and subiculum, whereas glutamatergic effects are restricted to the subiculum and CA3. Imaging phosphoinositide turnover in brain slices, which are amenable to electrophysiologic studies, will permit a dynamic localized analysis of regulation of this second messenger in response to synaptic stimulation of specific neuronal pathways.
We have anatomically analyzed retinotopic organization using the 14C-labeled 2-deoxy-D-glucose method. The method has several advantages over conventional electrophysiological mapping techniques. In the striate cortex, the anatomical substrate for retinotopic organization is surprisingly well ordered, and there seems to be a systematic relationship between ocular dominance strips and cortical magnification. The 2-deoxyglucose maps in this area appear to be largely uninfluenced by known differences in long-term metabolic activity. This method should prove useful in analyzing retinotopic organization in various visual areas of the brain and in different species.
Although the biological basis of schizophrenia is not known, possible causes include genetic defects, viruses, amines, brain structure and metabolism, neuroreceptors, and G proteins. The hypothesis of dopamine overactivity in schizophrenia is based on the fact that neuroleptics block dopamine D2 receptors in direct relation to their clinical antipsychotic potencies. Moreover, dopamine D2 or D2-like receptors are elevated in postmortem schizophrenia brain tissue. This elevation, however, is only found in vivo using [11C]methylspiperone but not [11C]raclopride. The dopamine D4 receptor gene has not yet been excluded in schizophrenia because the 21 gene variants of D4 have not yet been tested. Because the link between D1 and D2 receptors is reduced in schizophrenia tissue, we tested whether one component of this link was sensitive to guanine nucleotide. We report here that the binding of [3H]raclopride to D2 receptors in schizophrenia was not sensitive to guanine nucleotide. This finding permitted analysis of data on the binding of [3H]emonapride to the D2, D3 and D4 receptors. We conclude that the combined density of D2 and D3 receptors (labelled by [3H]raclopride) is increased by only 10% in schizophrenia brain, as found by Farde et al., but that it is the density of dopamine D4 receptors which is sixfold elevated in schizophrenia. These findings resolve the apparent discrepancy, mentioned above, wherein the density of [11C]methylspiperone-labelled sites (D2, D3 and D4), but not that of [11C]raclopride-labelled sites (D2 and D3), was found elevated in the schizophrenia striatum.
In the visual cortex of the brain, long-ranging tangentially oriented axon collaterals interconnect regularly spaced clusters of cells. These connections develop after birth and attain their specificity by pruning. To test whether there is selective stabilization of connections between those cells that exhibit correlated activity, kittens were raised with artificially induced strabismus (eye deviation) to eliminate the correlation between signals from the two eyes. In area 17, cell clusters were driven almost exclusively from either the right or the left eye and tangential intracortical fibers preferentially connected cell groups activated by the same eye. Thus, circuit selection depends on visual experience, and the selection criterion is the correlation of activity.
The mammalian brain exhibits diverse types of neural plasticity, including activity-dependent neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. How transient activation of mature neurons leads to long-lasting modulation of adult neurogenesis is unknown. Here we identify Gadd45b as a neural activity-induced immediate early gene in mature hippocampal neurons. Mice with Gadd45b deletion exhibit specific deficits in neural activity-induced proliferation of neural progenitors and dendritic growth of newborn neurons in the adult hippocampus. Mechanistically, Gadd45b is required for activity-induced DNA demethylation of specific promoters and expression of corresponding genes critical for adult neurogenesis, including brain-derived neurotrophic factor and fibroblast growth factor. Thus, Gadd45b links neuronal circuit activity to epigenetic DNA modification and expression of secreted factors in mature neurons for extrinsic modulation of neurogenesis in the adult brain.
Chloride channels have several functions, including the regulation of cell volume, stabilizing membrane potential, signal transduction and transepithelial transport. The plasma membrane Cl- channels already cloned belong to different structural classes: ligand-gated channels, voltage-gated channels, and possibly transporters of the ATP-binding-cassette type (if the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator is a Cl- channel). The importance of chloride channels is illustrated by the phenotypes that can result from their malfunction: cystic fibrosis, in which transepithelial transport is impaired, and myotonia, in which ClC-1, the principal skeletal muscle Cl- channel, is defective. Here we report the properties of ClC-2, a new member of the voltage-gated Cl- channel family. Its sequence is approximately 50% identical to either the Torpedo electroplax Cl- channel, ClC-0 (ref. 8), or the rat muscle Cl- channel, ClC-1 (ref. 9). Isolated initially from rat heart and brain, it is also expressed in pancreas, lung and liver, for example, and in pure cell lines of fibroblastic, neuronal, and epithelial origin, including tissues and cells affected by cystic fibrosis. Expression in Xenopus oocytes induces Cl- currents that activate slowly upon hyperpolarization and display a linear instantaneous current-voltage relationship. The conductivity sequence is Cl- greater than or equal to Br- greater than I-. The presence of ClC-2 in such different cell types contrasts with the highly specialized expression of ClC-1 (ref. 9) and also with the cloned cation channels, and suggests that its function is important for most cells.
Two ordered representations of the body surface, S-I and S-II, have been described on the cortical surface of the brains of a variety of mammals; additional separate topographical maps have been found in the somatosensory cortex of the cat and monkey. Except for minor variations in the placement of the body parts, the basic somatotopy of the maps is remarkably consistent across species. As the reasons for this consistency and the minor variations are unclear, we examined the somatotopy of the bat, whose body plan has been modified extensively so that the forelimb can be used for flight. We report here that in both S-I and S-II of the grey-headed flying fox, not only is the representation of the distal forelimb displaced from its usual position on the map, but the digits are directed caudally instead of rostrally as they are in all other mammals studied. The variant somatotopy appears to reflect the postural differences between flying and walking mammals, supporting the notion that topographical maps may have functional significance apart from their point-to-point connections with the sensory periphery.
A role for beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP) in the development of Alzheimer's disease has been indicated by genetics, and many conditions in which beta-APP is raised have been associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease or an Alzheimer's-like pathology. Inflammatory events may also contribute to Alzheimer's disease. Here we investigate whether a secreted derivative of beta-APP (sAPP-alpha) can induce inflammatory reactions in microglia, which are brain cells of monocytic lineage. We found that treatment with sAPP-alpha increased markers of activation in microglia and enhanced their production of neurotoxins. The ability of sAPP-alpha to activate microglia was blocked by prior incubation of the protein with apolipoprotein E3 but not apolipoprotein E4, a variant associated with an increased risk for Alzheimer's. A product of amyloidogenic beta-APP processing (sAPP-beta) also activated microglia. Because sAPP-beta is deficient in the neuroprotective activity shown by sAPP-alpha, our results indicate that increased amyloidogenic processing could adversely affect the balance of sAPP activities that determine neuronal viability.
X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is a complex human disease that causes intellectual disability. Causal mutations have been found in approximately 90 X-linked genes; however, molecular and biological functions of many of these genetically defined XLMR genes remain unknown. PHF8 (PHD (plant homeo domain) finger protein 8) is a JmjC domain-containing protein and its mutations have been found in patients with XLMR and craniofacial deformities. Here we provide multiple lines of evidence establishing PHF8 as the first mono-methyl histone H4 lysine 20 (H4K20me1) demethylase, with additional activities towards histone H3K9me1 and me2. PHF8 is located around the transcription start sites (TSS) of approximately 7,000 RefSeq genes and in gene bodies and intergenic regions (non-TSS). PHF8 depletion resulted in upregulation of H4K20me1 and H3K9me1 at the TSS and H3K9me2 in the non-TSS sites, respectively, demonstrating differential substrate specificities at different target locations. PHF8 positively regulates gene expression, which is dependent on its H3K4me3-binding PHD and catalytic domains. Importantly, patient mutations significantly compromised PHF8 catalytic function. PHF8 regulates cell survival in the zebrafish brain and jaw development, thus providing a potentially relevant biological context for understanding the clinical symptoms associated with PHF8 patients. Lastly, genetic and molecular evidence supports a model whereby PHF8 regulates zebrafish neuronal cell survival and jaw development in part by directly regulating the expression of the homeodomain transcription factor MSX1/MSXB, which functions downstream of multiple signalling and developmental pathways. Our findings indicate that an imbalance of histone methylation dynamics has a critical role in XLMR.
It has been proposed that the efficacy of neuronal connections is strengthened when there is a persistent causal relationship between presynaptic and postsynaptic activity. Such activity-dependent plasticity may underlie the reorganization of cortical representations during learning, although direct in vivo evidence is lacking. Here we show that stable reorganization of motor output can be induced by an artificial connection between two sites in the motor cortex of freely behaving primates. An autonomously operating electronic implant used action potentials recorded on one electrode to trigger electrical stimuli delivered at another location. Over one or more days of continuous operation, the output evoked from the recording site shifted to resemble the output from the corresponding stimulation site, in a manner consistent with the potentiation of synaptic connections between the artificially synchronized populations of neurons. Changes persisted in some cases for more than one week, whereas the output from sites not incorporated in the connection was unaffected. This method for inducing functional reorganization in vivo by using physiologically derived stimulus trains may have practical application in neurorehabilitation after injury.
Prolonged tissue damage or injury often leads to chronic pain states such that noxious stimuli evoke hyperalgesia and innocuous tactile stimuli evoke pain (allodynia). The neuropeptide nociceptin, also known as orphanin FQ, is an endogenous ligand for the orphan opioid-like receptor which induces both hyperalgesia and allodynia when administered by injection through the theca of the spinal cord into the subarachnoid space (that is, intrathecally). Here we show that the nociceptin precursor contains another biologically active peptide which we call nocistatin. Nocistatin blocks nociceptin-induced allodynia and hyperalgesia, and attenuates pain evoked by prostaglandin E2. It is the carboxy-terminal hexapeptide of nocistatin (Glu-Gln-Lys-Gln-Leu-Gln), which is conserved in bovine, human and murine species, that possesses allodynia-blocking activity. We have also isolated endogenous nocistatin from bovine brain. Furthermore, intrathecal pretreatment with anti-nocistatin antibody decreases the threshold for nociceptin-induced allodynia. Although nocistatin does not bind to the nociceptin receptor, it binds to the membrane of mouse brain and of spinal cord with high affinity. Our results show that nocistatin is a new biologically active peptide produced from the same precursor as nociceptin and indicate that these two peptides may play opposite roles in pain transmission.
In the vertebrate brain, neurons grouped in parallel laminae receive distinct sets of synaptic inputs. In the avian optic tectum, arbors and synapses of most retinal axons are confined to 3 of 15 laminae. The adhesion molecule N-cadherin and cell surface glycoconjugates recognized by a plant lectin are selectively associated with these "retinorecipient" laminae. The lectin and a monoclonal antibody to N-cadherin perturbed laminar selectivity in distinct fashions. In contrast, neurotrophins increased the complexity of retinal arbors without affecting their laminar distribution. Thus, cell surface molecules and soluble trophic factors may collaborate to shape lamina-specific arbors in the brain, with the former predominantly affecting their position and the latter their size.
Nigral basal adenylate cyclase and dopamine-sensitive adenylate cyclase, glutamate decarboxylase, choline acetyltransferase, and tyrosine hydroxylase activities were measured in rats with hemitransections at various levels or with electrolytic lesions of the medial forebrain bundle or the crus cerebri. The loss of nigral dopamine-sensitive adenylate cyclase activity after the various brain lesions was correlated with loss of nigral glutamic acid decarboxylase but not that of tyrosine hydroxylase; nigral choline acetyltransferase was unaffected in all cases. The data indicate that the nigral dopamine-sensitive adenylate cylase activity may be localized on neurons afferent to the nigra, probably originating from the globus pallidus and possibly from the tail of the caudate. The results suggest that dopamine, released from nigral dendrites, may influence dopaminergic activity indirectly by modulating impulses transmitted to the nigrostriatal neurons through the crus cerebri.
The concentration of the primary brain metabolite of norepinephrine is diminished in the lumbar spinal fluid of patients with Korsakoff's syndrome. The extent of its reduction is significantly correlated with measures of memory impairment for individual patients. These data suggest that the memory disorder of Korsakoff's syndrome may result from damage to ascending noradrenergic pathways by the diencephalic and brainstem lesions associated with this disease.
Although extensive data support a central pathogenic role for amyloid beta protein (Abeta) in Alzheimer's disease, the amyloid hypothesis remains controversial, in part because a specific neurotoxic species of Abeta and the nature of its effects on synaptic function have not been defined in vivo. Here we report that natural oligomers of human Abeta are formed soon after generation of the peptide within specific intracellular vesicles and are subsequently secreted from the cell. Cerebral microinjection of cell medium containing these oligomers and abundant Abeta monomers but no amyloid fibrils markedly inhibited hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) in rats in vivo. Immunodepletion from the medium of all Abeta species completely abrogated this effect. Pretreatment of the medium with insulin-degrading enzyme, which degrades Abeta monomers but not oligomers, did not prevent the inhibition of LTP. Therefore, Abeta oligomers, in the absence of monomers and amyloid fibrils, disrupted synaptic plasticity in vivo at concentrations found in human brain and cerebrospinal fluid. Finally, treatment of cells with gamma-secretase inhibitors prevented oligomer formation at doses that allowed appreciable monomer production, and such medium no longer disrupted LTP, indicating that synaptotoxic Abeta oligomers can be targeted therapeutically.
Protein-RNA interactions have critical roles in all aspects of gene expression. However, applying biochemical methods to understand such interactions in living tissues has been challenging. Here we develop a genome-wide means of mapping protein-RNA binding sites in vivo, by high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP). HITS-CLIP analysis of the neuron-specific splicing factor Nova revealed extremely reproducible RNA-binding maps in multiple mouse brains. These maps provide genome-wide in vivo biochemical footprints confirming the previous prediction that the position of Nova binding determines the outcome of alternative splicing; moreover, they are sufficiently powerful to predict Nova action de novo. HITS-CLIP revealed a large number of Nova-RNA interactions in 3' untranslated regions, leading to the discovery that Nova regulates alternative polyadenylation in the brain. HITS-CLIP, therefore, provides a robust, unbiased means to identify functional protein-RNA interactions in vivo.
Contemporary brain research progresses along two main lines: the microlevel approach explores single neurons and subcellular elements, while macrolevel studies focus on more complex cerebral functions, including behavior. This review presents results obtained mainly in our laboratory by means of an intermediate method, magnetoencephalography (MEG), which reflects cortical activity of neuronal populations at the level fo cytoarchitectonic areas. Because it is completely noninvasive, MEG can be used to study brain functions that are characteristically human.
Microspectrophotometric analysis of single cells in Feulgen preparations revealed tetraploid amounts of DNA in Purkinje neurons of human cerebellar cortex.
Low levels of cerebral concussion in the cat produce reversible behavioral suppression presumably associated with unconsciousness. This injury is also associated with increased rates of glucose utilization in regions within the dorsomedial pontine tegmentum. Microinjection of carbachol into these regions produced behavioral suppression resembling that following concussion. These data, together with previously published observations on cholinergic responses to brain injury, suggest that concussive unconsciousness may be attributable in part to activation of cholinergic pontine sites.
The mammalian cerebral cortex is characterized by complex patterns of anatomical and functional areas that differ markedly between species, but the molecular basis for this functional subdivision is largely unknown. Here, we show that mutations in GPR56, which encodes an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) with a large extracellular domain, cause a human brain cortical malformation called bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria (BFPP). BFPP is characterized by disorganized cortical lamination that is most severe in frontal cortex. Our data suggest that GPCR signaling plays an essential role in regional development of human cerebral cortex.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is currently the mainstay of neuroimaging in cognitive neuroscience. Advances in scanner technology, image acquisition protocols, experimental design, and analysis methods promise to push forward fMRI from mere cartography to the true study of brain organization. However, fundamental questions concerning the interpretation of fMRI data abound, as the conclusions drawn often ignore the actual limitations of the methodology. Here I give an overview of the current state of fMRI, and draw on neuroimaging and physiological data to present the current understanding of the haemodynamic signals and the constraints they impose on neuroimaging data interpretation.
Every eye movement produces a shift in the visual image on the retina. The receptive field, or retinal response area, of an individual visual neuron moves with the eyes so that after an eye movement it covers a new portion of visual space. For some parietal neurons, the location of the receptive field is shown to shift transiently before an eye movement. In addition, nearly all parietal neurons respond when an eye movement brings the site of a previously flashed stimulus into the receptive field. Parietal cortex both anticipates the retinal consequences of eye movements and updates the retinal coordinates of remembered stimuli to generate a continuously accurate representation of visual space.
A mixture of seven food dyes inhibited the accumulation of eight neurotransmitters or neurotransmitter precursors by rat brain homogenate. At a low concentration (1 microgram per milliliter), erythrosin B (FD&C red 3) was the only dye that inhibited dopamine accumulation. Erythrosin also was effective in decreasing the accumulation of all the other transmitter substances, suggesting that the inhibition is nonspecific and probably secondary to general membrane alteration.
The population vector hypothesis was introduced almost twenty years ago to illustrate that a population vector constructed from neural activity in primary motor cortex (MI) of non-human primates could predict the direction of hand movement during reaching. Alternative explanations for this population signal have been suggested but could not be tested experimentally owing to movement complexity in the standard reaching model. We re-examined this issue by recording the activity of neurons in contralateral MI of monkeys while they made reaching movements with their right arms oriented in the horizontal plane-where the mechanics of limb motion are measurable and anisotropic. Here we found systematic biases between the population vector and the direction of hand movement. These errors were attributed to a non-uniform distribution of preferred directions of neurons and the non-uniformity covaried with peak joint power at the shoulder and elbow. These observations contradict the population vector hypothesis and show that non-human primates are capable of generating reaching movements to spatial targets even though population vectors based on MI activity do not point in the direction of hand motion.
The participation of the medial temporal cortex and other cerebral structures in the memory impairment that accompanies aging was examined by means of positron emission tomography. Cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was measured during encoding and recognition of faces. Young people showed increased rCBF in the right hippocampus and the left prefrontal and temporal cortices during encoding and in the right prefrontal and parietal cortex during recognition. Old people showed no significant activation in areas activated during encoding in young people but did show right prefrontal activation during recognition. Age-related impairments of memory may be due to a failure to encode the stimuli adequately, which is reflected in the lack of cortical and hippocampal activation during encoding.
In invertebrate predators such as the praying mantis and vertebrate predators such as wild cats the ability to detect small differences in inter-ocular retinal disparities is a critical means for accurately determining the depth of moving objects such as prey. In mammals, the first neurons along the visual pathway that encode binocular disparities are found in the visual cortex. However, a precise functional architecture for binocular disparity has never been demonstrated in any species, and coarse maps for disparity have been found in only one primate species. Moreover, the dominant approach for assaying the developmental plasticity of binocular cortical neurons used monocular tests of ocular dominance to infer binocular function. The few studies that examined the relationship between ocular dominance and binocular disparity of individual cells used single-unit recordings and have provided conflicting results regarding whether ocular dominance can predict the selectivity or sensitivity to binocular disparity. We used two-photon calcium imaging to sample the response to monocular and binocular visual stimuli from nearly every adjacent neuron in a small region of the cat visual cortex, area 18. Here we show that local circuits for ocular dominance always have smooth and graded transitions from one apparently monocular functional domain to an adjacent binocular region. Most unexpectedly, we discovered a new map in the cat visual cortex that had a precise functional micro-architecture for binocular disparity selectivity. At the level of single cells, ocular dominance was unrelated to binocular disparity selectivity or sensitivity. When the local maps for ocular dominance and binocular disparity both had measurable gradients at a given cortical site, the two gradient directions were orthogonal to each other. Together, these results indicate that, from the perspective of the spiking activity of individual neurons, ocular dominance cannot predict binocular disparity tuning. However, the precise local arrangement of ocular dominance and binocular disparity maps provide new clues regarding how monocular and binocular depth cues may be combined and decoded.
Presynaptic axonal differentiation is essential for synapse formation and the establishment of neuronal circuits. However, the mechanisms that coordinate presynaptic development in the brain are largely unknown. We found that the major mitotic E3 ubiquitin ligase Cdc20-anaphase promoting complex (Cdc20-APC) regulates presynaptic differentiation in primary postmitotic mammalian neurons and in the rat cerebellar cortex. Cdc20-APC triggered the degradation of the transcription factor NeuroD2 and thereby promoted presynaptic differentiation. The NeuroD2 target gene encoding Complexin II, which acts locally at presynaptic sites, mediated the ability of NeuroD2 to suppress presynaptic differentiation. Thus, our findings define a Cdc20-APC ubiquitin signaling pathway that governs presynaptic development, which holds important implications for neuronal connectivity and plasticity in the brain.
In the mammalian visual cortex, many neurons are driven binocularly and response properties such as orientation preference or spatial frequency tuning are virtually identical for the two eyes. A precise match of orientation is essential in order to detect disparity and is therefore a prerequisite for stereoscopic vision. It is not clear whether this match is accomplished by activity-dependent mechanisms together with the common visual experience normally received by the eyes, or whether the visual system relies on other, perhaps even innate, cues to achieve this task. Here we test whether visual experience is responsible for the match in a reverse-suturing experiment in which kittens were raised so that both eyes were never able to see at the same time. A comparison of the layout of the two maps formed under these conditions showed them to be virtually identical. Considering that the two eyes never had common visual experience, this indicates that correlated visual input is not required for the alignment of orientation preference maps.
The peptide arginine-vasopressin (mammals) and its evolutionary precursor arginine-vasotocin (non-mammals) modulate reproductive physiology and numerous related social behaviours, as do oxytocin (mammals) and its homologues mesotocin and isotocin (fish). The distributions in the brain and/or the behavioural functions of these peptides often differ between the sexes, and between species with divergent social structures. Here we present neurophysiological evidence that males with vocal characteristics typical of females share a pattern of neuropeptide function with females rather than conspecific males. The plainfin midshipman fish (Porichthys notatus) has two male morphs with different reproductive tactics and vocalizations (a key species-typical behaviour which varies in its physical attributes and contextual usage, depending on the morph's social strategy). Forebrain-evoked, rhythmic vocal-motor activity that precisely mimics natural vocalizations was modulated by arginine-vasotocin, isotocin and their antagonists delivered to the preoptic area-anterior hypothalamus, a primary site for behavioural integration in all vertebrates. Peptides had different effects in males that acoustically court females (arginine-vasotocin-sensitive) than in females and sneak-spawning males (isotocin-sensitive), showing that the neuromodulatory mechanisms that establish reproduction-related behaviour can be dissociated from gonadal sex.
Neurons can produce action potentials with high temporal precision. A fundamental issue is whether, and how, this capability is used in information processing. According to the 'cell assembly' hypothesis, transient synchrony of anatomically distributed groups of neurons underlies processing of both external sensory input and internal cognitive mechanisms. Accordingly, neuron populations should be arranged into groups whose synchrony exceeds that predicted by common modulation by sensory input. Here we find that the spike times of hippocampal pyramidal cells can be predicted more accurately by using the spike times of simultaneously recorded neurons in addition to the animals location in space. This improvement remained when the spatial prediction was refined with a spatially dependent theta phase modulation. The time window in which spike times are best predicted from simultaneous peer activity is 10-30 ms, suggesting that cell assemblies are synchronized at this timescale. Because this temporal window matches the membrane time constant of pyramidal neurons, the period of the hippocampal gamma oscillation and the time window for synaptic plasticity, we propose that cooperative activity at this timescale is optimal for information transmission and storage in cortical circuits.
Amyloid-beta peptide is central to the pathology of Alzheimer's disease, because it is neurotoxic--directly by inducing oxidant stress, and indirectly by activating microglia. A specific cell-surface acceptor site that could focus its effects on target cells has been postulated but not identified. Here we present evidence that the 'receptor for advanced glycation end products' (RAGE) is such a receptor, and that it mediates effects of the peptide on neurons and microglia. Increased expressing of RAGE in Alzheimer's disease brain indicates that it is relevant to the pathogenesis of neuronal dysfunction and death.
The expression patterns of the recently discovered family of semaphorin genes suggests that they have widespread roles in embryonic development. Some seem to guide neuronal growth cones, but otherwise their functions are unknown. Semaphorin III is a membrane-associated secreted protein with a developmentally dynamic pattern of expression, including particular domains of the nervous system, the borders of developing bones, and the heart. In vitro, semaphorin III causes growth-cone collapse, and repels cutaneous sensory axons from the ventral spinal cord. Mutants in the Drosophila gene semaII, which encodes a related semaphorin, die after eclosion, but no responsible abnormality is evident. We have generated mice mutant in the semaIII gene by homologous recombination. Here we show that in the mutants, some sensory axons project into inappropriate regions of the spinal cord where semaIII is normally expressed. The cerebral cortex of homozygous mutant mice shows a paucity of neuropil and abnormally oriented neuronal processes, especially of the large pyramidal neurons. Certain embryonic bones and cartilaginous structures develop abnormally, with vertebral fusions and partial rib duplications. The few mice that survive more than a few days postnatally manifest pronounced and selective hypertrophy of the right ventricle of the heart and dilation of the right atrium. Thus, semaphorin III might serve as a signal that restrains growth in several developing organs.
Knowledge of the bioelectric signal-to-noise ratios in rat brain makes it possible to demonstrate for the first time that the brain functions as a coherent signal detector, an important class of detectors that are explicitly formulated within the statistical theory of communication. Within an afferent neuronal channel of a single modality, the brain functions as a parallel signal processor.
Brain activity was mapped in normal subjects during passive observation of the movements of an 'alien' hand and while imagining grasping objects with their own hand. None of the tasks required actual movement. Shifting from one mental task to the other greatly changed the pattern of brain activation. During observation of hand movements, activation was mainly found in visual cortical areas, but also in subcortical areas involved in motor behaviour, such as the basal ganglia and the cerebellum. During motor imagery, cortical and subcortical areas related to motor preparation and programming were strongly activated. These data support the notion that motor learning during observation of movements and mental practice involves rehearsal of neural pathways related to cognitive stages of motor control.
In human long-term memory, ideas and concepts become associated in the learning process. No neuronal correlate for this cognitive function has so far been described, except that memory traces are thought to be localized in the cerebral cortex; the temporal lobe has been assigned as the site for visual experience because electric stimulation of this area results in imagery recall and lesions produce deficits in visual recognition of objects. We previously reported that in the anterior ventral temporal cortex of monkeys, individual neurons have a sustained activity that is highly selective for a few of the 100 coloured fractal patterns used in a visual working-memory task. Here I report the development of this selectivity through repeated trials involving the working memory. The few patterns for which a neuron was conjointly selective were frequently related to each other through stimulus-stimulus association imposed during training. The results indicate that the selectivity acquired by these cells represents a neuronal correlate of the associative long-term memory of pictures.
Monkeys whose optic chiasm and forebrain commissures had been sectioned and control monkeys with only the optic chiasm cut were tested for interocular transfer of discriminations based on direction of movement. Only the control animals showed transfer to the untrained eye, which suggests that discrimination of movement, like pattern, is a function strongly dependent on the cortex.
Sensory experience in early life shapes the mammalian brain. An impairment in the activity-dependent refinement of functional connections within developing visual cortex was identified here in a mouse model. Gene-targeted disruption of one isoform of glutamic acid decarboxylase prevented the competitive loss of responsiveness to an eye briefly deprived of vision, without affecting cooperative mechanisms of synapse modification in vitro. Selective, use-dependent enhancement of fast intracortical inhibitory transmission with benzodiazepines restored plasticity in vivo, rescuing the genetic defect. Specific networks of inhibitory interneurons intrinsic to visual cortex may detect perturbations in sensory input to drive experience-dependent plasticity during development.
We often evaluate the self and others from social comparisons. We feel envy when the target person has superior and self-relevant characteristics. Schadenfreude occurs when envied persons fall from grace. To elucidate the neurocognitive mechanisms of envy and schadenfreude, we conducted two functional magnetic resonance imaging studies. In study one, the participants read information concerning target persons characterized by levels of possession and self-relevance of comparison domains. When the target person's possession was superior and self-relevant, stronger envy and stronger anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) activation were induced. In study two, stronger schadenfreude and stronger striatum activation were induced when misfortunes happened to envied persons. ACC activation in study one predicted ventral striatum activation in study two. Our findings document mechanisms of painful emotion, envy, and a rewarding reaction, schadenfreude.
Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome is a rare familial neurodegenerative condition that is vertically transmitted, in an apparently autosomal dominant way. It can also be horizontally transmitted to non-human primates and rodents through intracerebral inoculation of brain homogenates from patients with the disease. The exact incidence of the syndrome is unknown but is estimated to be between one and ten per hundred million. Patients initially suffer from ataxia or dementia and deteriorate until they die, in one to ten years. Protease-resistant prion protein (PrP) and PrP-immunoreactive amyloid plaques with characteristic morphology accumulate in the brains of these patients. Current diagnostic criteria for Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome incorporate clinical and neuropathological features, as animal transmission studies can be unreliable. PrP is implicated in the pathogenesis and transmission of the condition and in scrapie, an equivalent animal disease. It was discovered by enriching scrapie-infected hamster brain fractions for infectivity. Because there is compelling evidence that the scrapie isoform of PrP is a necessary component of the infectious particle, it seemed possible that the PrP gene on the short arm of human chromosome 20 in Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome might be abnormal. We show here that PrP codon 102 is linked to the putative gene for the syndrome in two pedigrees, providing the best evidence to date that this familial condition is inherited despite also being infectious, and that substitution of leucine for proline at PrP codon 102 may lead to the development of Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome.
The glutamate receptor (GluR) channel plays a key part in brain function. Among GluR channel subtypes, the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor channel which is highly permeable to Ca2+ is essential for the synaptic plasticity underlying memory, learning and development. Furthermore, abnormal activation of the NMDA receptor channel may trigger the neuronal cell death observed in various brain disorders. A complementary DNA encoding a subunit of the rodent NMDA receptor channel (NMDAR1 or zeta 1) has been cloned and its functional properties investigated. Here we report the identification and primary structure of a novel mouse NMDA receptor channel subunit, designated as epsilon 1, after cloning and sequencing the cDNA. The epsilon 1 subunit shows 11-18% amino-acid sequence identity with rodent GluR channel subunits that have been characterized so far and has structural features common to neurotransmitter-gated ion channels. Expression from cloned cDNAs of the epsilon 1 subunit together with the zeta 1 subunit in Xenopus oocytes yields functional GluR channels with high activity and characteristics of the NMDA receptor channel. Furthermore, the heteromeric NMDA receptor channel can be activated by glycine alone.
Humans restrain self-interest with moral and social values. They are the only species known to exhibit reciprocal fairness, which implies the punishment of other individuals' unfair behaviors, even if it hurts the punisher's economic self-interest. Reciprocal fairness has been demonstrated in the Ultimatum Game, where players often reject their bargaining partner's unfair offers. Despite progress in recent years, however, little is known about how the human brain limits the impact of selfish motives and implements fair behavior. Here we show that disruption of the right, but not the left, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) by low-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation substantially reduces subjects' willingness to reject their partners' intentionally unfair offers, which suggests that subjects are less able to resist the economic temptation to accept these offers. Importantly, however, subjects still judge such offers as very unfair, which indicates that the right DLPFC plays a key role in the implementation of fairness-related behaviors.
When an irrelevant 'accessory' stimulus is presented at about the same time as the imperative signal in a choice reaction time-task, the latency of the voluntary response is markedly reduced. The most prominent cognitive theories agree that this effect is attributable to a brief surge in arousal ('automatic alerting'), but they disagree over whether the facilitation is localized to a late, low-level motoric process or to an earlier stage, the process of orienting to and then perceptually categorizing the reaction stimulus. To test these alternative hypotheses, we used the onset of the lateralized readiness potential (a movement-related brain potential) as a temporal landmark to partition mean reaction time into two time segments. The first segment included the time required to perceive the visual stimulus and decide which hand to react with; the second included only motoric processes. Presentation of an irrelevant acoustic stimulus shortened the first interval but had no effect on the second. We therefore rejected the motoric hypothesis.
The specific binding of 3H-muscimol to synaptic membrane preparations obtained from the rate brain has been though to reflect the association of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), a potential candidate as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS), with its synaptic receptors. Treatment of synaptic membranes with Triton X-100 significantly increases the specific binding of 3H-muscimol. Several reports also indicate the presence of endogenous substances, such as GABA, acidic protein and phosphatidylethanolamine, which inhibit Na-independent binding of 3H-GABA in the synaptic membranous fractions from the rat brain. We report here that in the supernatant obtained from Triton-treated synaptic membranes there exists a new type of endogenous inhibitor of 3H-muscimol binding which is apparently different from the inhibitory substances described previously. The new inhibitor has a low molecular weight (MW) and probably originated from neurones rather than glial cells. We have termed this endogenous inhibitor the GABA receptor binding inhibitory factor (GRIF).
The tachykinins are a family of peptides with the carboxyl terminal amino acid sequence Phe-X-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2. Three major mammalian tachykinins have been identified--substance K, neuromedin K, and substance P--but only two tachykinin receptors have been postulated. Three tachykinins were labeled with radioiodinated Bolton-Hunter reagent and their binding characteristics were determined in crude membrane suspensions from several tissues. In cerebral cortex labeled eledoisin exhibited high-affinity binding that was inhibited by tachykinins in a manner indicating a definitive SP-E receptor site. In gastrointestinal smooth muscle and bladder, high-affinity binding of labeled substance P was inhibited in a pattern indicating a definitive SP-P site. In intestinal smooth muscle and bladder, however, labeled substance K and labeled eledoisin were both bound in a pattern indicating a preference for substance K itself. The results suggest the existence of three distinct types of tachykinin receptors: SP-P, SP-E, and SP-K.
A peptide that accumulated as the major product during the proteolysis of arginine vasopressin by rat brain synaptic membranes was isolated and its structure was shown to be the hexapeptide pGlu-Asn-Cys(Cys)-Pro-Arg-Gly-NH2. When administered intracerebroventricularly in extremely low doses, this vasopressin fragment and its desglycinamide derivative facilitated memory consolidation in a passive avoidance situation. These vasopressin metabolites, which are devoid of pressor activity, constitute highly potent neuropeptides with selective effects on memory and related processes; they are activated via proteolytic processing of vasopressin by brain peptidases.
The compound 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) induces an irreversible neurological syndrome in man and monkey which is similar to idiopathic Parkinson's disease in its clinical, pathological, neurochemical and pharmacological response properties. MPTP is selectively neurotoxic to the dopaminergic regions of the brain, destroying neurones in the substantia nigra (A8 and A9 cells, nigrostriatal system) but not the ventral tegmental area (A10 cells, mesolimbic system). Selective dopamine depletion and nigral cell loss after MPTP treatment has also been reported recently in the mouse. The mechanism by which a peripherally administered, low-molecular weight compound exerts permanent but selective toxic effects on dopamine systems in the brain may be relevant to parkinsonian syndromes induced by other toxins and to the disease process in idiopathic Parkinson's disease. We report here that MPTP is oxidized in the brain to a pyridinium species (a compound with potent herbicidal activity) and, in the monkey, is trapped intraneuronally. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this enzymatic oxidation is blocked in vivo in the mouse by a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, a condition which also blocks the neurotoxicity, indicating that the oxidative metabolism of MPTP is required for its neurotoxic effect.
The N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subtype of glutamate-gated ion channels possesses high calcium permeability and unique voltage-dependent sensitivity to magnesium and is modulated by glycine. Molecular cloning identified three complementary DNA species of rat brain, encoding NMDA receptor subunits NMDAR2A (NR2A), NR2B, and NR2C, which are 55 to 70% identical in sequence. These are structurally related, with less than 20% sequence identity, to other excitatory amino acid receptor subunits, including the NMDA receptor subunit NMDAR1 (NR1). Upon expression in cultured cells, the new subunits yielded prominent, typical glutamate- and NMDA-activated currents only when they were in heteromeric configurations with NR1. NR1-NR2A and NR1-NR2C channels differed in gating behavior and magnesium sensitivity. Such heteromeric NMDA receptor subtypes may exist in neurons, since NR1 messenger RNA is synthesized throughout the mature rat brain, while NR2 messenger RNA show a differential distribution.
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is a well-characterized polypeptide hormone with diverse biological activities, including stimulation of astrocyte division. A soluble astrocyte mitogen inhibitor, immunologically related to the EGF receptor, is present in rat brain. Injury to the brain causes a time-dependent reduction in the levels of this inhibitor and the concomitant appearance of EGF receptor on the astrocyte surface. Intracerebral injection of antibody capable of binding the inhibitor caused the appearance of numerous reactive astrocytes. EGF receptor-related inhibitors may play a key role in the control of glial cell division in both normal and injured brain.
Inhibin (I) a gonadal hormone glycoprotein which suppresses follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) secretion from the anterior pituitary, is a heterodimer consisting of an alpha subunit and one of two distinct beta subunits. S1 nuclease analysis has revealed that RNAs encoding all three subunits (alpha, beta A and beta B) are expressed in rat brain. We report here on the localization, and a potential function, of inhibin beta in the rat brain. A cell group centred in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), a major recipient of visceral sensory information, was stained immunohistochemically with antisera against synthetic fragments of I beta, but not I alpha. The distribution of I beta-stained fibres is consistent with known NTS projections, and includes a prominent projection to oxytocinergic aspects of the magnocellular neurosecretory system.
By chromatic adaptation, all three cone mechanisms of rhesus monkey vision can be identified in single neurons of striate cortex. This trichromatic inter-action occurs in cells sensitive to color and indicates that striate cortical cells tend to be more wavelength discriminating than cells at lower stages of the primate visual system.
The primate visual cortex, including that of man, receives separate input from each eye and these interact in binocular cortical neurones. This organization is known to be vulnerable to disruption in early life. To understand the development of human visual cortex, and to detect and assess disorders of binocular function at the earliest possible age, a robust method is needed for detecting binocular interactions in the infant's visual system. We have done this by recording cortical visual evoked responses (VERs) to the onset and offset of binocular correlation in a large-screen dynamic random dot display. We report here that, in general, the human infant has a functional binocular visual cortex by 3 months of age, with some individuals showing cortical binocularity at an earlier age.
A characteristic feature of the mammalian cortex is that projection neurons located in distinct cortical layers send their axons to different targets. In visual cortex, cells in layers 2 and 3 project to other cortical areas, whereas cells in layers 5 and 6 project to subcortical targets such as the lateral geniculate nucleus. The proper development of these projections is crucial for correct functioning of the visual system. Here we show that specific connections are established in an organotypic culture system in which rat visual cortex slices are co-cultured with another slice of the visual cortex or with a thalamic slice. The laminar origin and cellular morphology in vitro of cortical projections to other cortical regions or to subcortical targets are remarkably similar to those seen in vivo. In addition, axons of projecting cells are not restricted to particular pathways, but appear instead to grow directly towards their appropriate target. These observations raise the possibility that chemotropic attraction from the target areas may play an important part in the development of the cortical projection pattern.
The primate visual system contains dozens of distinct areas in the cerebral cortex and several major subcortical structures. These subdivisions are extensively interconnected in a distributed hierarchical network that contains several intertwined processing streams. A number of strategies are used for efficient information processing within this hierarchy. These include linear and nonlinear filtering, passage through information bottlenecks, and coordinated use of multiple types of information. In addition, dynamic regulation of information flow within and between visual areas may provide the computational flexibility needed for the visual system to perform a broad spectrum of tasks accurately and at high resolution.
Rats that had undergone removal of the frontal portion of the brain, including the olfactory bulbs, did not drink, or drank less than controls, when subjected to cellular dehydration. These same animals drank normally in response to extracellular volume reduction. Rats from which only the olfactory bulbs had been removed drank normally in both tests. An essential part of the neurological system mediating drinking produced by cellular dehydration, but not by volume reduction, therefore lies within the frontal cortex or immediate subcortical tissue.
Localization of the anatomic substrate for anticonvulsant activity mediated by gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) was examined using intracerebral injections of GABA agonists. Blockade of tonic hindlimb extension in the maximal electroshock test and blockade of tonic and clonic seizures produced by pentylenetetrazole and bicuculline were obtained by elevating GABA in the ventral midbrain tegmentum. Elevation  of GABA in forebrain and hindbrain areas had no  effect on convulsant activity. Blockade of tonic and clonic seizures was also obtained after microinjections of the direct GABA receptor agonist, muscimol, into the midbrain. The substantia nigra was identified as the critical midbrain site for GABA-mediated anticonvulsant activity. Local injection of GABA agonists into the midbrain provided seizure protection without a widespread augmentation of GABA-mediated activity throughout the brain and without impairing either alertness or motor function. Synapses in the substantia nigra appear to represent an important control mechanism for inhibiting the propagation of generalized convulsions.
Microelectrode recordings from behaving monkeys have shown that neuronal responses in the visual cerebral cortex can depend greatly on which aspect of the scene is the target of the animal's attention. Accumulating evidence suggests that while the early stages of the visual pathway provide a faithful representation of the retinal image, later stages of processing in the visual cortex hold representations that emphasize the viewer's current interest. By filtering out irrelevant signals and adding information about objects whose presence is remembered or inferred, the cortex creates an edited representation of the visual world that is dynamically modified to suit the immediate goals of the viewer.
In aged rodents, impairments in learning and memory have been associated with an age-dependent decline in forebrain of cholinergic function, and recent evidence indicates that the cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basalis magnocellularis, the septal-diagonal band area and the striatum undergo age-dependent atrophy. Thus, as in Alzheimer-type dementia in man, degenerative changes in the forebrain cholinergic system may contribute to age-related cognitive impairments in rodents. The cause of these degenerative changes is not known. Recent studies have shown that the central cholinergic neurons in the septal-diagonal band area, nucleus basalis and striatum are sensitive to the neurotrophic protein nerve growth factor (NGF). In particular, intraventricular injections or infusions of NGF in young adult rats have been shown to prevent retrograde neuronal cell death and promote behavioural recovery after damage to the septo-hippocampal connections. It is so far not known, however, whether the atrophic cholinergic neurons in aged animals are responsive to NGF treatment. We report here that continuous intracerebral infusion of NGF over a period of four weeks can partly reverse the cholinergic cell body atrophy and improve retention of a spatial memory task in behaviourally impaired aged rats.
Mathematicians, control engineers and information technologists are beginning to take a greater interest in neuroscience. They are perhaps starting to realize that they may be able to learn a few tricks from nature with which to improve their machines. At the same time there is a good chance that neuroscientists will benefit from their input of fresh ideas and techniques with which to attack the problems of understanding neural processing. One area of the brain which seems particularly promising in these respects is the cerebellum.
Topographical maps of neuronal connectivity occur in various brain regions. In the visual system of birds, retinal ganglion-cell axons from the anterior retina connect to a posterior part of the optic tectum, and posterior retinal axons connect to the anterior part, thereby establishing a point-to-point projection map. The chemoaffinity theory predicts that the orderly retinotectal projection is generated by a topographical arrangement of molecules. We report here that we have found several genes topographically expressed along the nasotemporal (anterior-posterior) axis in the embryonic chicken retina. Among these, two transcriptional regulators, belonging to the winged-helix family are expressed in a mutually exclusive manner in either the nasal or temporal part of the retina. Misexpression of each factor causes misprojection on the tectum along the rostrocaudal axis, showing that topographical expression of these transcription factors controls formation of the retinotectal map.
The two universally required components of the intracellular membrane fusion machinery, SNARE and SM (Sec1/Munc18-like) proteins, play complementary roles in fusion. Vesicular and target membrane-localized SNARE proteins zipper up into an alpha-helical bundle that pulls the two membranes tightly together to exert the force required for fusion. SM proteins, shaped like clasps, bind to trans-SNARE complexes to direct their fusogenic action. Individual fusion reactions are executed by distinct combinations of SNARE and SM proteins to ensure specificity, and are controlled by regulators that embed the SM-SNARE fusion machinery into a physiological context. This regulation is spectacularly apparent in the exquisite speed and precision of synaptic exocytosis, where synaptotagmin (the calcium-ion sensor for fusion) cooperates with complexin (the clamp activator) to control the precisely timed release of neurotransmitters that initiates synaptic transmission and underlies brain function.
The surface areas of the cerebral cortex excluding archipallium of 20 human, 11 cetacean, 6 carnivore, and 5 marsupial brains were determined by stereological methods. There exist rather strict relationships between volume, length of superficially exposed gyri, and cortical surface area.
Information processing in the cerebral cortex invariably involves the activation of millions of neurons that are widely distributed over its various areas. These distributed activity patterns need to be integrated into coherent representational states. A candidate mechanism for the integration and coordination of neuronal activity between different brain regions is synchronization on a fine temporal scale. In the visual cortex, synchronization occurs selectively between the responses of neurons that represent related features and that need to be integrated for the generation of coherent percepts; neurons in other areas of the cerebral cortex also synchronize their discharges. However, little is known about the patterns and the behavioural correlates of synchrony among widely separated cortical regions. Here we report that synchronization occurs between areas of the visual and parietal cortex, and between areas of the parietal and motor cortex, in the awake cat. When cats responded to a sudden change of a visual pattern, neuronal activity in cortical areas exhibited synchrony without time lags; this synchrony was particularly strong between areas subserving related functions. During reward and inter-trial episodes, zero-time-lag synchrony was lost and replaced by interactions exhibiting large and unsystematic time lags.
The dopamine-containing projection from the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain to the nucleus accumbens is critically involved in mediating the reinforcing properties of cocaine. Although neurons in this area respond to rewards on a subsecond timescale, neurochemical studies have only addressed the role of dopamine in drug addiction by examining changes in the tonic (minute-to-minute) levels of extracellular dopamine. To investigate the role of phasic (subsecond) dopamine signalling, we measured dopamine every 100 ms in the nucleus accumbens using electrochemical technology. Rapid changes in extracellular dopamine concentration were observed at key aspects of drug-taking behaviour in rats. Before lever presses for cocaine, there was an increase in dopamine that coincided with the initiation of drug-seeking behaviours. Notably, these behaviours could be reproduced by electrically evoking dopamine release on this timescale. After lever presses, there were further increases in dopamine concentration at the concurrent presentation of cocaine-related cues. These cues alone also elicited similar, rapid dopamine signalling, but only in animals where they had previously been paired to cocaine delivery. These findings reveal an unprecedented role for dopamine in the regulation of drug taking in real time.
The adult brain shows remarkable plasticity, as demonstrated by the improvement in fine sensorial discriminations after intensive practice. The behavioural aspects of such perceptual learning are well documented, especially in the visual system. Specificity for stimulus attributes clearly implicates an early cortical site, where receptive fields retain fine selectivity for these attributes; however, the neuronal correlates of a simple visual discrimination task remained unidentified. Here we report electrophysiological correlates in the primary visual cortex (V1) of monkeys for learning orientation identification. We link the behavioural improvement in this type of learning to an improved neuronal performance of trained compared to naive neurons. Improved long-term neuronal performance resulted from changes in the characteristics of orientation tuning of individual neurons. More particularly, the slope of the orientation tuning curve that was measured at the trained orientation increased only for the subgroup of trained neurons most likely to code the orientation identified by the monkey. No modifications of the tuning curve were observed for orientations for which the monkey had not been trained. Thus training induces a specific and efficient increase in neuronal sensitivity in V1.
Most of the neurons tested in the superior temporal cortex of awake squirrel monkeys responded to recorded species-specific vocalizations. Some cells responded with temporally complex patterns to many vocalizations. Other cells responded with simpler patterns to only one call. Most cells lay between these two extremes. On-line deletion of parts of a vocalization revealed the role of temporal interactions in determining the nature of some responses.
The amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta) plays a central pathophysiological role in Alzheimer's disease, but little is known about the concentration and dynamics of this secreted peptide in the extracellular space of the human brain. We used intracerebral microdialysis to obtain serial brain interstitial fluid (ISF) samples in 18 patients who were undergoing invasive intracranial monitoring after acute brain injury. We found a strong positive correlation between changes in brain ISF Abeta concentrations and neurological status, with Abeta concentrations increasing as neurological status improved and falling when neurological status declined. Brain ISF Abeta concentrations were also lower when other cerebral physiological and metabolic abnormalities reflected depressed neuronal function. Such dynamics fit well with the hypothesis that neuronal activity regulates extracellular Abeta concentration.
Calcium signalling in astrocytes couples changes in neural activity to alterations in cerebral blood flow by eliciting vasoconstriction or vasodilation of arterioles. However, the mechanism for how these opposite astrocyte influences provide appropriate changes in vessel tone within an environment that has dynamic metabolic requirements remains unclear. Here we show that the ability of astrocytes to induce vasodilations over vasoconstrictions relies on the metabolic state of the rat brain tissue. When oxygen availability is lowered and astrocyte calcium concentration is elevated, astrocyte glycolysis and lactate release are maximized. External lactate attenuates transporter-mediated uptake from the extracellular space of prostaglandin E(2), leading to accumulation and subsequent vasodilation. In conditions of low oxygen concentration extracellular adenosine also increases, which blocks astrocyte-mediated constriction, facilitating dilation. These data reveal the role of metabolic substrates in regulating brain blood flow and provide a mechanism for differential astrocyte control over cerebrovascular diameter during different states of brain activation.
The visual system separates processing of an object's form and color ("what") from its spatial location ("where"). In order to direct action to objects, the identity and location of those objects must somehow be integrated. To examine whether this process occurs within the prefrontal (PF) cortex, the activity of 195 PF neurons was recorded during a task that engaged both what and where working memory. Some neurons showed either object-tuned (what) or location-tuned (where) delay activity. However, over half (52 percent, or 64/123) of the PF neurons with delay activity showed both what and where tuning. These neurons may contribute to the linking of object information with the spatial information needed to guide behavior.
In the hippocampus and neocortex, high-frequency (tetanic) stimulation of an afferent pathway leads to long-term potentiation (LTP) of synaptic transmission. In the hippocampus it has recently been shown that long-term depression (LTD) of excitatory transmission can also be induced by certain combinations of synaptic activation. In most hippocampal and all neocortical pathways studied so far, the induction of LTP requires the activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-gated conductances. Here we report that LTD can occur in neurons of slices of the rat visual cortex and that the same tetanic stimulation can induce either LTP or LTD depending on the level of depolarization of the postsynaptic neuron. By applying intracellular current injections or pharmacological disinhibition to modify the depolarizing response of the postsynaptic neuron to tetanic stimulation, we show that the mechanisms of induction of LTD and LTP are both postsynaptic. LTD is obtained if postsynaptic depolarization exceeds a critical level but remains below a threshold related to NMDA receptor-gated conductances, whereas LTP is induced if this second threshold is reached.
Cocaine-induced alterations in gene expression cause changes in neuronal morphology and behavior that may underlie cocaine addiction. In mice, we identified an essential role for histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) dimethylation and the lysine dimethyltransferase G9a in cocaine-induced structural and behavioral plasticity. Repeated cocaine administration reduced global levels of H3K9 dimethylation in the nucleus accumbens. This reduction in histone methylation was mediated through the repression of G9a in this brain region, which was regulated by the cocaine-induced transcription factor DeltaFosB. Using conditional mutagenesis and viral-mediated gene transfer, we found that G9a down-regulation increased the dendritic spine plasticity of nucleus accumbens neurons and enhanced the preference for cocaine, thereby establishing a crucial role for histone methylation in the long-term actions of cocaine.
When an animal learns to make movements in response to different stimuli, changes in activity in the motor cortex seem to accompany and underlie this learning. The precise nature of modifications in cortical motor areas during the initial stages of motor learning, however, is largely unknown. Here we address this issue by chronically recording from neuronal ensembles located in the rat motor cortex, throughout the period required for rats to learn a reaction-time task. Motor learning was demonstrated by a decrease in the variance of the rats' reaction times and an increase in the time the animals were able to wait for a trigger stimulus. These behavioural changes were correlated with a significant increase in our ability to predict the correct or incorrect outcome of single trials based on three measures of neuronal ensemble activity: average firing rate, temporal patterns of firing, and correlated firing. This increase in prediction indicates that an association between sensory cues and movement emerged in the motor cortex as the task was learned. Such modifications in cortical ensemble activity may be critical for the initial learning of motor tasks.
Microglia, brain immune cells, engage in the clearance of dead cells or dangerous debris, which is crucial to the maintenance of brain functions. When a neighbouring cell is injured, microglia move rapidly towards it or extend a process to engulf the injured cell. Because cells release or leak ATP when they are stimulated or injured, extracellular nucleotides are thought to be involved in these events. In fact, ATP triggers a dynamic change in the motility of microglia in vitro and in vivo, a previously unrecognized mechanism underlying microglial chemotaxis; in contrast, microglial phagocytosis has received only limited attention. Here we show that microglia express the metabotropic P2Y6 receptor whose activation by endogenous agonist UDP triggers microglial phagocytosis. UDP facilitated the uptake of microspheres in a P2Y6-receptor-dependent manner, which was mimicked by the leakage of endogenous UDP when hippocampal neurons were damaged by kainic acid in vivo and in vitro. In addition, systemic administration of kainic acid in rats resulted in neuronal cell death in the hippocampal CA1 and CA3 regions, where increases in messenger RNA encoding P2Y6 receptors that colocalized with activated microglia were observed. Thus, the P2Y6 receptor is upregulated when neurons are damaged, and could function as a sensor for phagocytosis by sensing diffusible UDP signals, which is a previously unknown pathophysiological function of P2 receptors in microglia.
In primates, certain areas of the frontal cortex play a role in guiding movements toward visual or auditory objects in space. The projections from auditory centers to the frontal cortex of the bat Pteronotus parnellii were examined because echolocating bats utilize auditory cues to guide their movements in space. An area in the frontal cortex receives a direct projection from a division of the auditory thalamus, the suprageniculate nucleus, which in turn receives input from the anterolateral peri-olivary nucleus, an auditory center in the medulla. This pathway to the frontal cortex bypasses the main auditory centers in the midbrain and cortex and could involve as few as four neurons between the cochlea and the frontal cortex. The auditory cortex is also a major source of input to the frontal cortex. This area of the frontal cortex may link the auditory and motor systems by its projections to the superior colliculus.
Activity in several areas of the human brain and the monkey brain increases when a subject anticipates events associated with a reward, implicating a role for bias of decision and action. However, in real life, events do not always appear as expected, and we must choose an undesirable action. More than half of the neurons in the monkey centromedian (CM) thalamus were selectively activated when a small-reward action was required but a large-reward option was anticipated. Electrical stimulation of the CM after a large-reward action request substituted a brisk performance with a sluggish performance. These results suggest involvement of the CM in a mechanism complementary to decision and action bias.
During normal development of the vertebrate nervous system, large numbers of neurons in the central and peripheral nervous system undergo naturally occurring cell death. For example, about half of all spinal motor neurons die over a period of a few days in developing avian, rat and mouse embryos. Previous studies have shown that extracts from muscle and brain, secreted factors from glia, as well as several growth factors and neurotrophic agents, including muscle-derived factors, can promote the survival of developing motor neurons in vitro and in vivo. But because neurotrophins and other known trophic agents administered alone or in combination are insufficient to rescue all developing motor neurons from cell death, other neurotrophic molecules are probably essential for the survival and differentiation of motor neurons. Here we report that glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), a potent neurotrophic factor that enhances survival of mammalian midbrain dopaminergic neurons, rescues developing avian motor neurons from natural programmed cell death in vivo and promotes the survival of enriched populations of cultured motor neurons. Furthermore, treatment with this agent in vivo also prevents the induced death and atrophy of both avian and mouse spinal motor neurons following peripheral axotomy.
Alzheimer's disease is associated with increased production and aggregation of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptides. Abeta peptides are derived from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by sequential proteolysis, catalysed by the aspartyl protease BACE, followed by presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase cleavage. Presenilin interacts with nicastrin, APH-1 and PEN-2 (ref. 6), all of which are required for gamma-secretase function. Presenilins also interact with alpha-catenin, beta-catenin and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), but a functional role for these proteins in gamma-secretase activity has not been established. Here we show that therapeutic concentrations of lithium, a GSK-3 inhibitor, block the production of Abeta peptides by interfering with APP cleavage at the gamma-secretase step, but do not inhibit Notch processing. Importantly, lithium also blocks the accumulation of Abeta peptides in the brains of mice that overproduce APP. The target of lithium in this setting is GSK-3alpha, which is required for maximal processing of APP. Since GSK-3 also phosphorylates tau protein, the principal component of neurofibrillary tangles, inhibition of GSK-3alpha offers a new approach to reduce the formation of both amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, two pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease.
Somatostatin receptor concentrations were measured in patients with Alzheimer's disease and controls. In the frontal cortex (Brodmann areas 6, 9, and 10) and temporal cortex (Brodmann area 21), the concentrations of somatostatin in receptors in the patients were reduced to approximately 50 percent of control values. A 40 percent reduction was seen in the hippocampus, while no significant changes were found in the cingulate cortex, postcentral gyrus, temporal pole, and superior temporal gyrus. Scatchard analysis showed a reduction in receptor number rather than a change in affinity. Somatostatin-like immunoreactivity was significantly reduced in both the frontal and temporal cortex. Somatostatin-like immunoreactivity was linearly related to somatostatin-receptor binding in the cortices of Alzheimer's patients. These findings may reflect degeneration of postsynaptic neurons or cortical afferents in the patients' cerebral cortices. Alternatively, decreased somatostatin-like immunoreactivity in Alzheimer's disease might indicate increased release of somatostatin and down regulation of postsynaptic receptors.
In the adult brain, cortical neurones that project to other cortical areas have traditionally been classified as either "associational' (having connections with the ipsilateral hemisphere) or "callosal' (projecting to areas in the contralateral hemisphere). Using double-labelling with fluorescent dyes, we have now identified a novel category of mature cortical neurone that has both an "associational' and a "callosal' axon. Such neurones can direct their callosal axons either to a cytoarchitectonic area homotopic to the one in which their cell bodies reside or to an entirely different heterotopic region in the contralateral hemisphere. These cortical neurones with divergent axon collaterals in the adult neocortex differ from recently described neurones that have two axons only transiently during development.
In many cell types an increase in cytosolic calcium is the main signal for the exocytotic release of stored secretory components such as hormones and neurotransmitters. The site of action of calcium in exocytosis is not known, neither are the participating molecules. In the case of the intracellular membrane fusions that occur during transport through early stages of the secretory pathway, several cytosolic and peripheral membrane proteins are necessary. Permeabilized cells have been useful in understanding the requirements for calcium and nucleotides in regulated exocytosis and under certain conditions there is leakage of soluble protein components and run-down of the exocytotic response. This system can be used to identify the soluble proteins involved in exocytosis, one candidate in chromaffin cells being annexin II (calpactin). Here we use this assay to identify two other cytosolic protein factors that regulate exocytosis in permeabilized adrenal chromaffin cells, which we term Exo1 and Exo2. Exo1 from brain cytosol resolves on electrophoresis in SDS-polyacrylamide gels as a group of polypeptides of relative molecular mass approximately 30,000 and shares sequence homology with the 14-3-3 family of proteins. The ability of Exo1 to reactivate exocytosis is potentiated by protein kinase C activation and therefore Exo1 may influence the protein kinase C-mediated control of Ca(2+)-dependent exocytosis.
The concentration gradients of Mg(++) and K(+) in the cerebrospinal fluid system indicate that the (Mg(++)) is higher and the (K(+)) is lower in the extra-cellular fluid of the cerebral cortex than the concentrations of these cations in either plasma-dialysate or cisternal fluid. Such cation distribution demonstrates the existence of an active transport process across the blood-brain barrier.
The decay of excitatory postsynaptic currents in central neurons mediated by alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionate (AMPA) receptors is likely to be shaped either by receptor desensitization or by offset after removal of glutamate from the synaptic cleft. Native AMPA receptors show desensitization time constants of 1 to about 10 milliseconds, but the underlying molecular determinants of these large differences are unknown. Cloned AMPA receptors carrying the "flop" splice variants of glutamate receptor subtype C (GluR-C) and GluR-D are shown to have desensitization time constants of around 1 millisecond, whereas those with the "flip" variants are about four times slower. Cerebellar granule cells switch their expression of GluR-D splice variants from mostly flip forms in early stages to predominantly flop forms in the adult rat brain. These findings suggest that rapid desensitization of AMPA receptors can be regulated by the expression and alternative splicing of GluR-D gene transcripts.
In the mammalian CNS, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors serve prominent roles in many physiological and pathophysiological processes including pain transmission. For full activation, NMDA receptors require the binding of glycine. It is not known whether the brain uses changes in extracellular glycine to modulate synaptic NMDA responses. Here, we show that synaptically released glycine facilitates NMDA receptor currents in the superficial dorsal horn, an area critically involved in pain processing. During high presynaptic activity, glycine released from inhibitory interneurons escapes the synaptic cleft and reaches nearby NMDA receptors by so-called spillover. In vivo, this process may contribute to the development of inflammatory hyperalgesia.
Training was found to improve the performance of humans on a variety of visual perceptual tasks. However, the ability to detect small changes in the contrast of simple visual stimuli could not be improved by repetition. Here we show that the performance of this basic task could be modified after the discrimination of the stimulus contrast was practised in the presence of similar laterally placed stimuli, suggesting a change in the local neuronal circuit involved in the task. On the basis of a combination of hebbian and anti-hebbian synaptic learning rules compatible with our results, we propose a mechanism of plasticity in the visual cortex that is enabled by a change in the context.
Central nervous system myelin is a specialized structure produced by oligodendrocytes that ensheaths axons, allowing rapid and efficient saltatory conduction of action potentials. Many disorders promote damage to and eventual loss of the myelin sheath, which often results in significant neurological morbidity. However, little is known about the fundamental mechanisms that initiate myelin damage, with the assumption being that its fate follows that of the parent oligodendrocyte. Here we show that NMDA (N-methyl-d-aspartate) glutamate receptors mediate Ca2+ accumulation in central myelin in response to chemical ischaemia in vitro. Using two-photon microscopy, we imaged fluorescence of the Ca2+ indicator X-rhod-1 loaded into oligodendrocytes and the cytoplasmic compartment of the myelin sheath in adult rat optic nerves. The AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid)/kainate receptor antagonist NBQX completely blocked the ischaemic Ca2+ increase in oligodendroglial cell bodies, but only modestly reduced the Ca2+ increase in myelin. In contrast, the Ca2+ increase in myelin was abolished by broad-spectrum NMDA receptor antagonists (MK-801, 7-chlorokynurenic acid, d-AP5), but not by more selective blockers of NR2A and NR2B subunit-containing receptors (NVP-AAM077 and ifenprodil). In vitro ischaemia causes ultrastructural damage to both axon cylinders and myelin. NMDA receptor antagonism greatly reduced the damage to myelin. NR1, NR2 and NR3 subunits were detected in myelin by immunohistochemistry and immunoprecipitation, indicating that all necessary subunits are present for the formation of functional NMDA receptors. Our data show that the mature myelin sheath can respond independently to injurious stimuli. Given that axons are known to release glutamate, our finding that the Ca2+ increase was mediated in large part by activation of myelinic NMDA receptors suggests a new mechanism of axo-myelinic signalling. Such a mechanism may represent a potentially important therapeutic target in disorders in which demyelination is a prominent feature, such as multiple sclerosis, neurotrauma, infections (for example, HIV encephalomyelopathy) and aspects of ischaemic brain injury.
Weak inhibition within visual cortex early in life prevents experience-dependent plasticity. Loss of responsiveness to an eye deprived of vision can be initiated prematurely by enhancing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated transmission with benzodiazepines. Here, we use a mouse "knockin" mutation to alpha subunits that renders individual GABA type A (GABA(A)) receptors insensitive to diazepam to show that a particular inhibitory network controls expression of the critical period. Only alpha1-containing circuits were found to drive cortical plasticity, whereas alpha2-enriched connections separately regulated neuronal firing. This dissociation carries implications for models of brain development and the safe design of benzodiazepines for use in infants.
Synapses, the junctions between nerve cells through which they communicate, are formed by the coordinated assembly and tight attachment of pre- and postsynaptic specializations. We now show that SynCAM is a brain-specific, immunoglobulin domain-containing protein that binds to intracellular PDZ-domain proteins and functions as a homophilic cell adhesion molecule at the synapse. Expression of the isolated cytoplasmic tail of SynCAM in neurons inhibited synapse assembly. Conversely, expression of full-length SynCAM in nonneuronal cells induced synapse formation by cocultured hippocampal neurons with normal release properties. Glutamatergic synaptic transmission was reconstituted in these nonneuronal cells by coexpressing glutamate receptors with SynCAM, which suggests that a single type of adhesion molecule and glutamate receptor are sufficient for a functional postsynaptic response.
Children who are adept at any one of the three academic 'R's (reading, writing and arithmetic) tend to be good at the others, and grow into adults who are similarly skilled at diverse intellectually demanding activities. Determining the neuroanatomical correlates of this relatively stable individual trait of general intelligence has proved difficult, particularly in the rapidly developing brains of children and adolescents. Here we demonstrate that the trajectory of change in the thickness of the cerebral cortex, rather than cortical thickness itself, is most closely related to level of intelligence. Using a longitudinal design, we find a marked developmental shift from a predominantly negative correlation between intelligence and cortical thickness in early childhood to a positive correlation in late childhood and beyond. Additionally, level of intelligence is associated with the trajectory of cortical development, primarily in frontal regions implicated in the maturation of intelligent activity. More intelligent children demonstrate a particularly plastic cortex, with an initial accelerated and prolonged phase of cortical increase, which yields to equally vigorous cortical thinning by early adolescence. This study indicates that the neuroanatomical expression of intelligence in children is dynamic.
The human retina carries specialized neurons, the rod and cone photoreceptors, which absorb and transduce light energy and transmit impulses through the optic nerve to the brain. The most prevalent group of inherited retinopathies, affecting approximately 1.5 million people, is collectively termed retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Mutations responsible for RP have now been found in two genes encoding transmembrane proteins of the rod photoreceptor outer segment disc, and a number of additional causative genes have been localized. It is likely that characterization of the majority of such genes over the next few years will lead to a substantial elucidation of the molecular pathology of this debilitating group of hereditary conditions.
A startlingly simple molecule unites neuroscience, physiology, and immunology, and revises scientists' understanding of how cells communicate and defend themselves.
Brain development and function depend on the precise regulation of gene expression. However, our understanding of the complexity and dynamics of the transcriptome of the human brain is incomplete. Here we report the generation and analysis of exon-level transcriptome and associated genotyping data, representing males and females of different ethnicities, from multiple brain regions and neocortical areas of developing and adult post-mortem human brains. We found that 86 per cent of the genes analysed were expressed, and that 90 per cent of these were differentially regulated at the whole-transcript or exon level across brain regions and/or time. The majority of these spatio-temporal differences were detected before birth, with subsequent increases in the similarity among regional transcriptomes. The transcriptome is organized into distinct co-expression networks, and shows sex-biased gene expression and exon usage. We also profiled trajectories of genes associated with neurobiological categories and diseases, and identified associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms and gene expression. This study provides a comprehensive data set on the human brain transcriptome and insights into the transcriptional foundations of human neurodevelopment.
A progressive, fatal spongiform polioencephalopathy was induced in mink intracerebrally inoculated with a suspension of brain from a Suffolk sheep with naturally acquired scrapie. The clinical signs and pathological lesions of the experimental disease were indistinguishable from transmissible mink encephalopathy, a disease of undetermined origin that occurs in mink.
A fish of the genus Eigenmannia responds differently to a neighboring conspecific fish with a slightly higher frequency of the electric organ discharge than its own than to one with a slightly lower such frequency than its own. When the two frequencies are beating against each other the special wave shape of the electric organ discharge leads to asymmetries of the beat pattern which are distinct for the two cases. Midbrain neurons, called "deltaF recoders," sign and magnitude of the frequency difference on the basis of these patterns. that is, in the time rather than the frequency domain.
The decisive role played by adhesive interactions between neuronal processes and the culture substrate in determining the form and extent of neurite outgrowth in vitro has greatly influenced ideas about the mechanisms of axonal growth and guidance in the vertebrate nervous system. These studies have also helped to identify adhesive molecules that might be involved in guiding axonal growth in vivo. One candidate molecule is laminin, a major glycoprotein of basal laminae which has been shown to induce a wide variety of embryonic neurones to extend neurites in culture. Moreover, laminin is found in large amounts in injured nerves that can successfully regenerate but is absent from nerves where regeneration fails. However, it is unclear to what extent the mechanisms that regulate axonal regeneration also operate in the embryo when axon outgrowth is initiated. Here we have examined the substrate requirements for neurite outgrowth in vitro by chick embryo retinal ganglion cells, the only cells in the retina to send axons to the brain. We show that while retinal ganglion cells from embryonic day 6 (E6) chicks extend profuse neurites on laminin, those from E11 do not, although they retain the ability to extend neurites on astrocytes via a laminin-independent mechanism. This represents the first evidence that central nervous system neurones may undergo a change in their substrate requirements for neurite outgrowth as they mature.
Three synaptic proteins, syntaxin, SNAP-25 and synaptobrevin, were recently identified as targets of clostridial neurotoxins that irreversibly inhibit synaptic vesicle fusion. Experiments searching for membrane receptors for N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein (NSF), which has an important role in membrane fusion, revealed an ATP-dependent interaction of the same three synaptic proteins with NSF and its soluble attachment proteins. Thus, two independent approaches identify syntaxin, synaptobrevin and SNAP-25 as components of the synaptic vesicle fusion machinery, but their mode of action is unclear. We have now discovered a brain protein of relative molecular mass 67,000 (67K) which binds stably to syntaxin. Amino-acid sequencing and complementary DNA cloning revealed that the 67K protein is encoded by the mammalian homologue of the Caenorhabditis elegans gene unc-18. In C. elegans, unc-18 belongs to a group of genes defined by mutations with a paralytic phenotype and accumulations of acetylcholine, suggesting a defect in neurotransmitter release. The binding of the mammalian homologue of unc-18 (Munc-18) to syntaxin requires the N terminus of syntaxin whereas that of SNAP-25 involves a more C-terminal sequence. Our data suggest that Munc-18 is a previously unidentified essential component of the synaptic vesicle fusion protein complex.
Humans can accurately perceive the location of a sound source-not only the direction, but also the distance. Sounds near the head, within ducking or reaching distance, have a special saliency. However, little is known about this perception of auditory distance. The direction to a sound source can be determined by interaural differences, and the mechanisms of direction perception have been studied intensively; but except for studies on echolocation in the bat, little is known about how neurons encode information on auditory distance. Here we describe neurons in the brain of macaque monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) that represent the auditory space surrounding the head, within roughly 30 cm. These neurons, which are located in the ventral premotor cortex, have spatial receptive fields that extend a limited distance outward from the head.
Removal of the representation of a specific body part in the postcentral cortex of the macaque resulted in the somatic deactivation of the corresponding body part in the second somatosensory area. In contrast, removal of the entire second somatosensory area had no grossly detectable effect on the somatic responsivity of neurons in the postcentral cortex. This direct electrophysiological evidence for serial cortical processing in somesthesia is similar to that found earlier for vision and, taken together with recent anatomical evidence, suggests that there is a common cortical plan for the processing of sensory information in the various sensory modalities.
A single intraventricular injection of nerve growth factor (NGF). given at the time of brain damage, facilitated the course of recovery from the lateral hypothalamic anorexic syndrome in male rats. In the second and third weeks after the trauma, NGF-treated rats ate more food, regained body weight more rapidly, and fed more vigorously in response to intraventricular administration of norepinephrine than untreated controls. After full recovery, rats that had been treated with NGF were resistant to reinstatement of the hypothalamic syndrome by 6-hydroxydopamine. NGF may facilitate behavioral recovery by promoting the development of supersensitivity to norepinephrine and possibly also by stimulating the growth of regenerating noradrenergic neurons in the brain.
Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) each promote the survival and differentiation of developing motor neurons, but do so through distinct cellular signaling pathways. Administration of either factor alone has been shown to slow, but not to arrest, progression of motor neuron dysfunction in wobbler mice, an animal model of motor neuron disease. Because CNTF and BDNF are known to synergize in vitro and in ovo, the efficacy of CNTF and BDNF cotreatment was tested in the same animal mode. Subcutaneous injection of the two factors on alternate days was found to arrest disease progression in wobbler mice for 1 month, as measured by several behavioral, physiological, and histological criteria.
The implantation of cells genetically modified to express tyrosine hydroxylase has been proposed for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Tyrosine hydroxylase converts tyrosine to L-DOPA and endogenous decarboxylase activity then converts L-DOPA to the neurotransmitter dopamine, which alleviates the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. Immortalized cells have been successfully used as intracerebral vehicles for transgene expression of tyrosine hydroxylase, but the tumorigenic potential of these cells prevents their application in humans. Intracerebral expression of this enzyme has also been achieved using primary cells like skin fibroblasts, but the ameliorating effect on a rat model for Parkinson's disease lasted for only a few weeks. We have found that co-transplantation of cultured myoblasts and myotubes enabled reporter genes to be expressed intracerebrally at high and stable levels. Here we show that the intracerebral transplantation of plasmid-transfected primary muscle cells can substantially reduce for the long-term the asymmetric rotational behaviour in the rat model.
The reduction of glycolysis by hypoglycemia or the glucose analog 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) stimulates compensatory sympathetic alterations of metabolism. Considerable attention has been focused on the hypothalamus as the probable locus of requisite metabolic signal detection. We report, however, that unanesthetized chronically decerebrate rats are capable of exhibiting sympathoadrenal hyperglycemia in response to the metabolic challenge presented by 2DG. This findings demonstrates that the forebrain is not necessary for glucoprivic stimulation of this reflex. Since cervical cord transection has been shown to eliminate hyperglycemia induced by 2DG, we conclude that the caudal brainstem contains an essential part of the neural mechanism which both detects metabolic need and ameliorates that need through the release of stored fuels.
Several mammalian neurotransmitter candidates, for example, serotonin, dopamine and noradrenaline, may exert some of their synaptic effects by regulating protein phosphorylation systems. Comparison of the regional distribution of brain phosphoproteins with neurotransmitter systems may help to identify the specific phosphoproteins involved in the functions of particular neurotransmitters. Here we report the association of one such phosphoprotein with the dopamine pathways in brain. This protein, of apparent molecular weight (MW) 32,000 (32K), seems to be present only in nervous tissue. Its regional distribution within the brain is very similar to the pattern of dopamine-containing nerve terminals; more specifically, the protein appears to be enriched in those dopaminoceptive neurones which possess D-1 receptors (dopamine receptors coupled to adenylate cyclase). The state of phosphorylation of the protein in these dopaminoceptive neurones can be regulated by both dopamine and cyclic AMP. These results suggest that the phosphoprotein may mediate certain of the trans-synaptic effects of dopamine acting on dopaminoceptive neurones.
Interactions with other responsive agents lie at the core of all social exchange. During a social exchange with a partner, one fundamental variable that must be computed correctly is who gets credit for a shared outcome; this assignment is crucial for deciding on an optimal level of cooperation that avoids simple exploitation. We carried out an iterated, two-person economic exchange and made simultaneous hemodynamic measurements from each player's brain. These joint measurements revealed agent-specific responses in the social domain ("me" and "not me") arranged in a systematic spatial pattern along the cingulate cortex. This systematic response pattern did not depend on metrical aspects of the exchange, and it disappeared completely in the absence of a responding partner.
Does literacy improve brain function? Does it also entail losses? Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we measured brain responses to spoken and written language, visual faces, houses, tools, and checkers in adults of variable literacy (10 were illiterate, 22 became literate as adults, and 31 were literate in childhood). As literacy enhanced the left fusiform activation evoked by writing, it induced a small competition with faces at this location, but also broadly enhanced visual responses in fusiform and occipital cortex, extending to area V1. Literacy also enhanced phonological activation to speech in the planum temporale and afforded a top-down activation of orthography from spoken inputs. Most changes occurred even when literacy was acquired in adulthood, emphasizing that both childhood and adult education can profoundly refine cortical organization.
Dendritic spines of pyramidal neurons in the cerebral cortex undergo activity-dependent structural remodelling that has been proposed to be a cellular basis of learning and memory. How structural remodelling supports synaptic plasticity, such as long-term potentiation, and whether such plasticity is input-specific at the level of the individual spine has remained unknown. We investigated the structural basis of long-term potentiation using two-photon photolysis of caged glutamate at single spines of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. Here we show that repetitive quantum-like photorelease (uncaging) of glutamate induces a rapid and selective enlargement of stimulated spines that is transient in large mushroom spines but persistent in small spines. Spine enlargement is associated with an increase in AMPA-receptor-mediated currents at the stimulated synapse and is dependent on NMDA receptors, calmodulin and actin polymerization. Long-lasting spine enlargement also requires Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Our results thus indicate that spines individually follow Hebb's postulate for learning. They further suggest that small spines are preferential sites for long-term potentiation induction, whereas large spines might represent physical traces of long-term memory.
Much available evidence points to a pathological isoform of the prion protein PrP being the infectious agent that causes transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, but the mechanisms controlling the neurotropism of prions are still unclear. We have previously shown that mice that do not express PrP (Prnp[o/o] mice) are resistant to infection by prions, and that if a Prnp(+/+) neurograft is introduced into such animals and these are infected intracerebrally with scrapie, the graft but not the surrounding tissue shows scrapie pathology. Here we show that PrP-expressing neurografts in Prnp(o/o) mice do not develop scrapie histopathology after intraperitoneal or intravenous inoculation with scrapie prions. Prion titres were undetectable in spleens of inoculated Prnp(o/o) mice, but were restored to wild-type levels upon reconstitution of the host lymphohaemopoietic system with PrP-expressing cells. Surprisingly, however, i.p. or i.v. inoculation failed to produce scrapie pathology in the neurografts of 27 out of 28 reconstituted animals, in contrast to intracerebral inoculation. We conclude that transfer of infectivity from the spleen to the central nervous system is crucially dependent on the expression of PrP in a tissue compartment that cannot be reconstituted by bone marrow transfer. Thus the requirement for the normal isoform of PrP in peripheral tissues represents a bottleneck for the spread of prions from peripheral sites to the central nervous system.
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) is the main inhibitory transmitter in the adult brain, and it exerts its fast hyperpolarizing effect through activation of anion (predominantly Cl-)-permeant GABA(A) receptors. However, during early neuronal development, GABA(A)-receptor-mediated responses are often depolarizing, which may be a key factor in the control of several Ca2+-dependent developmental phenomena, including neuronal proliferation, migration and targeting. To date, however, the molecular mechanism underlying this shift in neuronal electrophysiological phenotype is unknown. Here we show that, in pyramidal neurons of the rat hippocampus, the ontogenetic change in GABA(A)-mediated responses from depolarizing to hyperpolarizing is coupled to a developmental induction of the expression of the neuronal (Cl-)-extruding K+/Cl- co-transporter, KCC2. Antisense oligonucleotide inhibition of KCC2 expression produces a marked positive shift in the reversal potential of GABAA responses in functionally mature hippocampal pyramidal neurons. These data support the conclusion that KCC2 is the main Cl- extruder to promote fast hyperpolarizing postsynaptic inhibition in the brain.
The functional organization of the cerebral cortex is modified dramatically by sensory experience during early postnatal life. The basis for these modifications is a type of synaptic plasticity that may also contribute to some forms of adult learning. The question of how synapses modify according to experience has been approached by determining theoretically what is required of a modification mechanism to account for the available experimental data in the developing visual cortex. The resulting theory states precisely how certain variables might influence synaptic modifications. This insight has led to the development of a biologically plausible molecular model for synapse modification in the cerebral cortex.
Dopamine receptors are the principal targets of drugs used in the treatment of schizophrenia. Among the five mammalian dopamine-receptor subtypes, the D4 subtype is of particular interest because of its high affinity for the atypical neuroleptic clozapine. Interest in clozapine stems from its effectiveness in reducing positive and negative symptoms in acutely psychotic and treatment-resistant schizophrenic patients without eliciting extrapyramidal side effects. We have produced a subtype-specific antibody against the D4 receptor and localized it within specific cellular elements and synaptic circuits of the central nervous system. The D4-receptor antibody labelled GABAergic neurons in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, thalamic reticular nucleus, globus pallidus and the substantia nigra (pars reticulata). Labelling was also observed in a subset of cortical pyramidal cells. Our findings suggest that clozapine's beneficial effects in schizophrenia may be achieved, in part, through D4-mediated GABA modulation, possibly implicating disinhibition of excitatory transmission in intrinsic cortical, thalamocortical and extrapyramidal pathways.
The location of neurons generating the rhythm of breathing in mammals is unknown. By microsection of the neonatal rat brainstem in vitro, a limited region of the ventral medulla (the pre-Botzinger Complex) that contains neurons essential for rhythmogenesis was identified. Rhythm generation was eliminated by removal of only this region. Medullary slices containing the pre-Botzinger Complex generated respiratory-related oscillations similar to those generated by the whole brainstem in vitro, and neurons with voltage-dependent pacemaker-like properties were identified in this region. Thus, the respiratory rhythm in the mammalian neonatal nervous system may result from a population of conditional bursting pacemaker neurons in the pre-Botzinger Complex.
Auditory brainstem potentials were recorded from human subjects before and after an intoxicating dose of alcohol. Following alcohol ingestion there were significant, progressive increases in the latencies of brainstem potential peaks III through VII. No changes in peak amplitudes were found. The results indicate that alcohol has a depressive effect on neural transmission within the primary auditory brainstem pathway.
Mammalian ageing is associated with reduced regenerative capacity in tissues that contain stem cells. It has been proposed that this is at least partially caused by the senescence of progenitors with age; however, it has not yet been tested whether genes associated with senescence functionally contribute to physiological declines in progenitor activity. Here we show that progenitor proliferation in the subventricular zone and neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb, as well as multipotent progenitor frequency and self-renewal potential, all decline with age in the mouse forebrain. These declines in progenitor frequency and function correlate with increased expression of p16INK4a, which encodes a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor linked to senescence. Ageing p16INK4a-deficient mice showed a significantly smaller decline in subventricular zone proliferation, olfactory bulb neurogenesis, and the frequency and self-renewal potential of multipotent progenitors. p16INK4a deficiency did not detectably affect progenitor function in the dentate gyrus or enteric nervous system, indicating regional differences in the response of neural progenitors to increased p16INK4a expression during ageing. Declining subventricular zone progenitor function and olfactory bulb neurogenesis during ageing are thus caused partly by increasing p16INK4a expression.
To interpret the activity of living human brains, their neuroanatomy must be known in detail. New techniques to do this are urgently needed, since most of the methods now used on monkeys cannot be used on humans.
Neurons in the visual cortex respond selectively to perceptually salient features of the visual scene, such as the direction and speed of moving objects, the orientation of local contours, or the colour or relative depth of a visual pattern. It is commonly assumed that the brain constructs its percept of the visual scene from information encoded in the selective responses of such neurons. We have now tested this hypothesis directly by measuring the effect on psychophysical performance of modifying the firing rates of physiologically characterized neurons. We required rhesus monkeys to report the direction of motion in a visual display while we electrically stimulated clusters of directionally selective neurons in the middle temporal visual area (MT, or V5), an extrastriate area that plays a prominent role in the analysis of visual motion information. Microstimulation biased the animals' judgements towards the direction of motion encoded by the stimulated neurons. This result indicates that physiological properties measured at the neuronal level can be causally related to a specific aspect of perceptual performance.
A sudden enhancement in virulence of a mild Plasmodium berghei yoelii 17 x strain resulted in fulminating and fatal infections in CF1 and A/J mice. The virulent strain has maintained its characteristics after ten cyclical transmissions through Anopheles stephensi. The visible expression of virulence of the mutated strain is its ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and cause intravascular sequestration of injected erythrocytes and blockage of brain capillaries. We, therfore, believe that the virulent line of Plasmodium berghei yoelii 17 x could serve as a useful laboratory model for the study of "cerebral malaria."
Cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the beta- and gamma-secretases generates the amino and carboxy termini, respectively, of the A beta amyloidogenic peptides A beta40 and A beta42--the major constituents of the amyloid plaques in the brain parenchyma of Alzheimer's disease patients. There is evidence that the polytopic membrane-spanning proteins, presenilin 1 and 2 (PS1 and PS2), are important determinants of gamma-secretase activity: mutations in PS1 and PS2 that are associated with early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease increase the production of A beta42 (refs 4-6), the more amyloidogenic peptide; gamma-secretase activity is reduced in neuronal cultures derived from PS1-deficient mouse embryos; and directed mutagenesis of two conserved aspartates in transmembrane segments of PS1 inactivates the ability of gamma-secretase to catalyse processing of APP within its transmembrane domain. It is unknown, however, whether PS1 (which has little or no homology to any known aspartyl protease) is itself a transmembrane aspartyl protease or a gamma-secretase cofactor, or helps to colocalize gamma-secretase and APP. Here we report photoaffinity labelling of PS1 (and PS2) by potent gamma-secretase inhibitors that were designed to function as transition state analogue inhibitors directed to the active site of an aspartyl protease. This observation indicates that PS1 (and PS2) may contain the active site of gamma-secretase. Interestingly, the intact, single-chain form of wild-type PS1 is not labelled by an active-site-directed photoaffinity probe, suggesting that intact wild-type PS1 may be an aspartyl protease zymogen.
The biogenic monoamine neurotransmitters octopamine, dopamine and serotonin have been detected in nervous tissue from many insects. We report here that intact Drosophila melanogaster brains, when incubated with the radioactive amino acids tyrosine and tryptophan, synthesized and accumulated labelled monoamines. In two mutant strains monoamine synthesis was abnormal. The per o mutation abolishes the normal circadian rhythm. Brains from per o flies, when incubated in tritiated tyrosine, accumulated one-third as much labelled octopamine as did brains from wild-type flies, but had normal dopamine and serotonin synthesis. In contrast, dopa decarboxylase (Ddc) mutations decreased dopamine and serotonin synthesis but did not affect octopamine synthesis. These results suggest that there are two different aromatic amino acid decarboxylases in Drosophila brains, one that decarboxylates L-dopa and 5-hydroxytryptophan and another that decarboxylates tyrosine. Direct measurement of L-dopa, 5-hydroxytryptophan and tyrosine decarboxylase activities in the different strains confirmed this suggestion.
In an associative learning paradigm, human subjects could be divided based on whether they were aware that one tone predicted a visual event and another did not. Only aware subjects acquired a differential behavioral response to the tones. Regional cerebral blood flow in left prefrontal cortex showed learning-related changes only in aware subjects. Left prefrontal cortex also showed changes in functional connectivity with contralateral prefrontal cortex, sensory association cortices, and cerebellum. Several of the interacting areas correlated with aware subjects' behavior. These results suggest cerebral processes underlying awareness are mediated through interactions of large-scale neurocognitive systems.
The isolated toad brain accumulates L-glutamate against strong concentration gradients until a tissue-to-medium concentration ratio of about 3000 : 1 is attained. The accumulated glutamate does not equilibrate with most of the endogenous tissue glutamate but is converted rapidly to glutamine and released into the medium. This mechanism may be involved in the preservation of low extracellular levels of cerebral glutamate.
The neurons of layer 4 in the adult cerebral cortex receive their major ascending inputs from the thalamus. In development, however, thalamic axons arrive at the appropriate cortical area long before their target layer 4 neurons have migrated into the cortical plate. The axons accumulate and wait in the zone below the cortical plate, the subplate, for several weeks before invading the cortical plate. The subplate is a transient zone that contains the first postmitotic neurons of the telencephalon. These neurons mature well before other cortical neurons, and disappear by cell death after the thalamic axons have grown into the overlying cortical plate. The close proximity of growing thalamocortical axons and subplate neurons suggests that they might be involved in interactions important for normal thalamocortical development. Here we show that early in development the deletion of subplate neurons located beneath visual cortex prevents axons from the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus from recognizing and innervating visual cortex, their normal target. In the absence of subplate neurons, lateral geniculate nucleus axons continue to grow in the white matter past visual cortex despite the presence of their target layer 4 neurons. Thus the transient subplate neurons are necessary for appropriate cortical target selection by thalamocortical axons.
The cause of neurodegeneration in Huntington's disease (HD) is unknown. Patients with HD have an expanded NH2-terminal polyglutamine region in huntingtin. An NH2-terminal fragment of mutant huntingtin was localized to neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NIIs) and dystrophic neurites (DNs) in the HD cortex and striatum, which are affected in HD, and polyglutamine length influenced the extent of huntingtin accumulation in these structures. Ubiquitin was also found in NIIs and DNs, which suggests that abnormal huntingtin is targeted for proteolysis but is resistant to removal. The aggregation of mutant huntingtin may be part of the pathogenic mechanism in HD.
The human brain is found to produce a magnetic field near the scalp which varies in synchrony with periodic electrical stimulation applied to a finger. Use of a highly sensitive superconducting quantum interference device as a magnetic field detector reveals that the brain's field is sharply localized over the primary projection area of the sensory cortex contralateral to the digit being stimulated. The phase of the response at the stimulus frequency varies monotonically with the repetition rate and at intermediate frequencies yields a latency of approximately 70 milliseconds for cortical response.
The decline in the high incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, parkinsonism, and Alzheimer-type dementia among the Chamorro population of the western Pacific islands of Guam and Rota, coupled with the absence of demonstrable viral and hereditable factors in this disease, suggests the gradual disappearance of an environmental factor selectively associated with this culture. One candidate is seed of the neurotoxic plant Cycas circinalis L., a traditional source of food and medicine which has been used less with the Americanization of the Chamorro people after World War II. Macaques were fed the Cycas amino acid beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine, a low-potency convulsant that has excitotoxic activity in mouse brain, which is attenuated by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists. These animals developed corticomoto-neuronal dysfunction, parkinsonian features, and behavioral anomalies, with chromatolytic and degenerative changes of motor neurons in cerebral cortex and spinal cord. In concert with existing epidemiological and animal data, these findings support the hypothesis that cycad exposure plays an important role in the etiology of the Guam disease.
An extra eye primordium was implanted into the forebrain region of embryonic Rana pipiens. During development both normal and supernumerary optic tracts terminated within a single, previously uninnervated tectal lobe. Autoradiographic tracing of either the normal or supernumerary eye's projection revealed distinct, eye-specific bands of radioactivity running rostrocaudally through the dually innervated tectum. Interactions among axons of retinal ganglion cells, possibly mediated through tectal neurons, must be invoked to explain this stereotyped disruption of the normally continuous retinal termination pattern.
The emergence of memory, a trace of things past, into human consciousness is one of the greatest mysteries of the human mind. Whereas the neuronal basis of recognition memory can be probed experimentally in human and nonhuman primates, the study of free recall requires that the mind declare the occurrence of a recalled memory (an event intrinsic to the organism and invisible to an observer). Here, we report the activity of single neurons in the human hippocampus and surrounding areas when subjects first view cinematic episodes consisting of audiovisual sequences and again later when they freely recall these episodes. A subset of these neurons exhibited selective firing, which often persisted throughout and following specific episodes for as long as 12 seconds. Verbal reports of memories of these specific episodes at the time of free recall were preceded by selective reactivation of the same hippocampal and entorhinal cortex neurons. We suggest that this reactivation is an internally generated neuronal correlate for the subjective experience of spontaneous emergence of human recollection.
When the visual cortex of a newborn kitten is removed, most neurons in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus degenerate, but a small population of large cells is spared. Electrophysiological recording revealed that detailed visual topography in the nucleus is abnormal and that single cells have unusually large receptive fields. These results suggest that optic axons deprived of their normal synaptic targets rearrange their connections to converge on local surviving neurons.
Long-term potentiation (LTP) in the hippocampus is thought to contribute to memory formation. In the Ca1 region, LTP requires the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor-dependent influx of Ca2+ and activation of serine and threonine protein kinases. Because of the high amount of protein tyrosine kinases in hippocampus and cerebellum, two regions implicated in learning and memory, we examined the possible additional requirement of tyrosine kinase activity in LTP. We first examined the specificity in brain of five inhibitors of tyrosine kinase and found that two of them, lavendustin A and genistein, showed substantially greater specificity for tyrosine kinase from hippocampus than for three serine-threonine kinases: protein kinase A, protein kinase C, and Ca2+/calmodulin kinase II. Lavendustin A and genistein selectively blocked the induction of LTP when applied in the bath or injected into the postsynaptic cell. By contrast, the inhibitors had no effect on the established LTP, on normal synaptic transmission, or on the neurotransmitter actions attributable to the actions of protein kinase A or protein kinase C. These data suggest that tyrosine kinase activity could be required postsynaptically for long-term synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus. As Ca2+ calmodulin kinase II or protein kinase C seem also to be required, the tyrosine kinases could participate postsynaptically in a kinase network together with serine and threonine kinases.
Mate calling by South African clawed frogs, Xenopus laevis, is under the control of androgens. Autoradiographic studies demonstrate androgen-concentrating neurons in a motor nucleus that controls mate calling and a midbrain nucleus that is stimulated by sound. Hormone concentration by laryngeal motor neurons suggests that steroids regulate the final common path for vocal behavior. Modulation of auditory sensitivity by hormones could explain seasonal variations in behavioral responsiveness to conspecific vocalizations.
Synaptojanin is a nerve terminal protein of relative molecular mass 145,000 which appears to participate with dynamin in synaptic vesicle recycling. The central region of synaptojanin defines it as a member of the inositol-5-phosphatase family, which includes the product of the gene that is defective in the oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe. Synaptojanin has 5-phosphatase activity and its amino-terminal domain is homologous with the yeast protein Sac1 (Rsd1), which is genetically implicated in phospholipid metabolism and in the function of the actin cytoskeleton. The carboxy terminus, which is of different lengths in adult and developing neurons owing to the alternative use of two termination sites, is proline-rich, consistent with the reported interaction of synaptojanin with the SH3 domains of Grb2 (refs 1, 2). Synaptojanin is the only other major brain protein besides dynamin that binds the SH3 domain of amphiphysin, a presynaptic protein with a putative function in endocytosis. Our results suggest a link between phosphoinositide metabolism and synaptic vesicle recycling.
Microinfusion of 5-thioglucose into either the lateral or fourth cerebral ventricle caused increased feeding and hyperglycemia in rats when the cerebral aqueduct was unobstructed. If the aqueduct was obstructed and 5-thioglucose was infused into the fourth ventricle, increased feeding and hyperglycemia persisted, whereas feeding and hyperglycemia in response to lateral ventricle infusion were abolished. Drinking in response to infusion of angiotensin II into the lateral ventricle was not diminished by aqueduct obstruction. These results indicate that glucoreceptors that mediate feeding and hyperglycemia in response to cerebral glucoprivation are located in the caudal hindbrain and not in the hypothalamus where they have previously been sought.
The molecular diversity of voltage-activated calcium channels was established by studies showing that channels could be distinguished by their voltage-dependence, deactivation and single-channel conductance. Low-voltage-activated channels are called 'T' type because their currents are both transient (owing to fast inactivation) and tiny (owing to small conductance). T-type channels are thought to be involved in pacemaker activity, low-threshold calcium spikes, neuronal oscillations and resonance, and rebound burst firing. Here we report the identification of a neuronal T-type channel. Our cloning strategy began with an analysis of Genbank sequences defined as sharing homology with calcium channels. We sequenced an expressed sequence tag (EST), then used it to clone a full-length complementary DNA from rat brain. Northern blot analysis indicated that this gene is expressed predominantly in brain, in particular the amygdala, cerebellum and thalamus. We mapped the human gene to chromosome 17q22, and the mouse gene to chromosome 11. Functional expression of the channel was measured in Xenopus oocytes. Based on the channel's distinctive voltage dependence, slow deactivation kinetics, and 7.5-pS single-channel conductance, we conclude that this channel is a low-voltage-activated T-type calcium channel.
Amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta) seems to have a central role in the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Familial forms of the disease have been linked to mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the presenilin genes. Disease-linked mutations in these genes result in increased production of the 42-amino-acid form of the peptide (Abeta42), which is the predominant form found in the amyloid plaques of Alzheimer's disease. The PDAPP transgenic mouse, which overexpresses mutant human APP (in which the amino acid at position 717 is phenylalanine instead of the normal valine), progressively develops many of the neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease in an age- and brain-region-dependent manner. In the present study, transgenic animals were immunized with Abeta42, either before the onset of AD-type neuropathologies (at 6 weeks of age) or at an older age (11 months), when amyloid-beta deposition and several of the subsequent neuropathological changes were well established. We report that immunization of the young animals essentially prevented the development of beta-amyloid-plaque formation, neuritic dystrophy and astrogliosis. Treatment of the older animals also markedly reduced the extent and progression of these AD-like neuropathologies. Our results raise the possibility that immunization with amyloid-beta may be effective in preventing and treating Alzheimer's disease.
Cellular diversity during development arises in part from asymmetric divisions, which generate two distinct cells by transmitting localized determinants from a progenitor cell into one daughter cell. In Drosophila, neuroblasts undergo typical asymmetric divisions to produce another neuroblast and a ganglion mother cell. At mitosis, neural fate determinants, including Prospero and Numb, localize to the basal cortex, from which the ganglion mother cell buds off; Inscuteable and Bazooka, which regulate spindle orientation, localize apically. Here we show that a tumour-suppressor protein, Lethal giant larvae (Lgl), is essential for asymmetric cortical localization of all basal determinants in mitotic neuroblasts, and is therefore indispensable for neural fate decisions. Lgl, which itself is uniformly cortical, interacts with several types of Myosin to localize the determinants. Another tumour-suppressor protein, Lethal discs large (Dlg), participates in this process by regulating the localization of Lgl. The localization of the apical components is unaffected in lgl or dlg mutants. Thus, Lgl and Dlg act in a common process that differentially mediates cortical protein targeting in mitotic neuroblasts, and that creates intrinsic differences between daughter cells.
The pattern of connections between the retina and midbrain has been determined with electrophysiological and neuroanatomical methods in bats representing the two major subdivisions of the Chiroptera. Megachiropteran fruit bats (megabats), Pteropus spp., were found to have an advanced retinotectal pathway with a vertical hemidecussation of the kind previously found only in primates. In contrast, the microchiropteran bat Macroderma gigas has the "ancestral" or symplesiomorphous pattern of retinotectal connections so far found in all vertebrates except primates. In addition to linking primates and megachiropteran bats, these findings suggest that flight may have evolved twice among the mammals.
(+/-)-3,4-Methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), an amphetamine analog with hallucinogenic activity, produced selective long-lasting reductions in the level of serotonin, the number of serotonin uptake sites, and the concentration of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid in rat brain. Morphological studies suggested that these neurochemical deficits were due to serotonin nerve terminal degeneration. These results show that MDA has toxic activity for serotonin neurons in rats and raise the question of whether exposure to MDA and related hallucinogenic amphetamines can produce serotonin neurotoxicity in the human brain.
The ultimate aim of computational neuroscience is to explain how electrical and chemical signals are used in the brain to represent and process information. This goal is not new, but much has changed in the last decade. More is known now about the brain because of advances in neuroscience, more computing power is available for performing realistic simulations of neural systems, and new insights are available from the study of simplifying models of large networks of neurons. Brain models are being used to connect the microscopic level accessible by molecular and cellular techniques with the systems level accessible by the study of behavior.
Several decades of psychophysical and neurophysiological studies have established that visual signals are enhanced at the locus of attention. What remains a mystery is the mechanism that initiates biases in the strength of visual representations. Recent evidence argues that, during spatial attention, these biases reflect nascent saccadic eye movement commands. We examined the functional interaction of saccade preparation and visual coding by electrically stimulating sites within the frontal eye fields (FEF) and measuring its effect on the activity of neurons in extrastriate visual cortex. Here we show that visual responses in area V4 could be enhanced after brief stimulation of retinotopically corresponding sites within the FEF using currents below that needed to evoke saccades. The magnitude of the enhancement depended on the effectiveness of receptive field stimuli as well as on the presence of competing stimuli outside the receptive field. Stimulation of non-corresponding FEF representations could suppress V4 responses. The results suggest that the gain of visual signals is modified according to the strength of spatially corresponding eye movement commands.
Golgi-stained dendrites of single randomly chosen layer-II pyramidal neurons in the human parahippocampal gyrus were quantified with a computer-microscope system. In nondemented aged cases (average age, 79.6 years), dendritic trees were more extensive than in adult cases (average age, 51.2), with most of the difference resulting from increases in the number and average length of terminal segments of the dendritic tree. These results provide morphological evidence for plasticity in the mature and aged human brain. In senile dementia (average age, 76.0), dendritic trees were less extensive than in adult brains, largely because their terminal segments were fewer and shorter. Cells with shrunken dendritic trees were found in all brains. These data suggest a model of aging in the central nervous system in which one population of neurons dies and regresses and the other survives and grows. The latter appears to be the dominant population in aging without dementia.
Arginine vasopressin influences male reproductive and social behaviours in several vertebrate taxa through its actions at the V1a receptor in the brain. The neuroanatomical distribution of vasopressin V1a receptors varies greatly between species with different forms of social organization. Here we show that centrally administered arginine vasopressin increases affiliative behaviour in the highly social, monogamous prairie vole, but not in the relatively asocial, promiscuous montane vole. Molecular analyses indicate that gene duplication and/or changes in promoter structure of the prairie vole receptor gene may contribute to the species differences in vasopressin-receptor expression. We further show that mice that are transgenic for the prairie vole receptor gene have a neuroanatomical pattern of receptor binding that is similar to that of the prairie vole, and exhibit increased affiliative behaviour after injection with arginine vasopressin. These data indicate that the pattern of V1a-receptor gene expression in the brain may be functionally associated with species-typical social behaviours in male vertebrates.
The immunosuppressive action of the drug FK506 involves inhibition of calcineurin in T-lymphocytes by a complex of FK506 and an FK506 binding protein, FKBP12, a member of the immunophilin protein family. The functional role of brain immunophilins is, however, unclear. We show here that FK506 is a powerful neuroprotective agent in an in vivo model of focal cerebral ischaemia when administered up to 60 min post-occlusion. The minimum effective neuroprotective dose is comparable with the immunosuppressant dose in humans, suggesting that FK506 may have clinical potential for the treatment of stroke. Although the related immunosuppressants rapamycin and cyclosporin failed to reduce brain damage, the finding that rapamycin pretreatment blocked the effect of FK506 confirms a role for immunophilins in the neuroprotective mechanism.
A recent assertion that new neurons are continually added to the neocortex of adult macaque monkeys has profound implications for understanding the cellular mechanisms of higher cognitive functions. Here we searched for neurogenesis in adult macaques by using immunofluorescent triple labeling for the DNA-replication indicator, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), and neuronal and glial cell markers. Although numerous BrdU-labeled cells were distributed throughout the cerebral wall, including the neocortex, these were identified as nonneuronal cells; evidence for newly generated neurons was limited to the hippocampus and olfactory bulb. Thus, our results do not substantiate the claim of neurogenesis in normal adult primate neocortex.
Single cells were recorded in the visual cortex of monkeys trained to attend to stimuli at one location in the visual field and ignore stimuli at another. When both locations were within the receptive field of a cell in prestriate area V4 or the inferior temporal cortex, the response to the unattended stimulus was dramatically reduced. Cells in the striate cortex were unaffected by attention. The filtering of irrelevant information from the receptive fields of extrastriate neurons may underlie the ability to identify and remember the properties of a particular object out of the many that may be represented on the retina.
The hippocampus in the mammalian brain is required for the encoding of current and the retention of past experience. Previous studies have shown that the hippocampus contains neurons that encode information required to perform spatial and nonspatial short-term memory tasks. A more detailed understanding of the functional anatomy of the hippocampus would provide important insight into how such encoding occurs. Here we show that hippocampal neurons in the rat are distributed anatomically in distinct segments along the length of the hippocampus. Each longitudinal segment contains clusters of neurons that become active when the animal performs a task with spatial attributes. Within these same segments are ordered arrangements of neurons that encode the nonspatial aspects of the task appropriate to those spatial features. Thus, anatomical segregation of spatial information, together with the interleaved representation of nonspatial information, represents a structural framework that may help to resolve conflicting views of hippocampal function.
The number of neurotrophic factors found in the central nervous system is rapidly growing, but their functions in vivo are largely unknown. In the peripheral nervous system they promote the survival of developing and lesioned neurons and enhance nerve fibre growth and regeneration. Here we study the effects of nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) on the largest tract system leading from the brain to the spinal cord, the corticospinal tract (CST). The developing CST grows down the spinal cord during the first postnatal days and innervates its targets after a waiting period by collateral sprouting. We find that NT-3 injected locally specifically enhances this sprouting, whereas BDNF has no effect. In adult rats, injection of NT-3 (but not BDNF) into the lesioned spinal cord increases the regenerative sprouting of the transected CST. The distance of growth of the sprouts is very restricted, but application of an antibody that neutralizes myelin-associated neurite growth inhibitory proteins results in long-distance regeneration of CST fibres.
Experience can alter synaptic connectivity throughout life, but the degree of plasticity present at each age is regulated by mechanisms that remain largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that Paired-immunoglobulin-like receptor B (PirB), a major histocompatibility complex class I (MHCI) receptor, is expressed in subsets of neurons throughout the brain. Neuronal PirB protein is associated with synapses and forms complexes with the phosphatases Shp-1 and Shp-2. Soluble PirB fusion protein binds to cortical neurons in an MHCI-dependent manner. In mutant mice lacking functional PirB, cortical ocular-dominance plasticity is more robust at all ages. Thus, an MHCI receptor is expressed in central nervous system neurons and functions to limit the extent of experience-dependent plasticity in the visual cortex throughout life. PirB is also expressed in many other regions of the central nervous system, suggesting that it may function broadly to stabilize neural circuits.
Neurons in the primary visual cortex of the cat are selectively activated by stimuli with particular orientations. This selectivity can be disrupted by the application of antagonists of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) to a local region of the cortex. In order to determine whether inhibitory inputs are necessary for a single cortical neuron to show orientation selectivity, GABA receptors were blocked intracellularly during whole cell recording. Although the membrane potential, spontaneous activity, subfield antagonism, and directional selectivity of neurons were altered after they were perfused internally with the blocking solution, 18 out of 18 neurons remained selective for stimulus orientation. These results indicate that excitatory inputs are sufficient to generate orientation selectivity.
Single neurons in the kitten visual cortex can be induced to increase their responsiveness to a repeated stimulus applied while the neurons are under observation. These short-term changes are in the same direction as the permanent modifications produced in whole populations of neurons following environmental manipulations during the "critical period" of cortical development, but are less pronounced and probably transient.
The amplitude of auditory evoked potentials recorded from the cerebral hemispheres to pairs of task-irrelevant tones was related to differential hemispheric engagement in ongoing cognitive activity (for example, verbal versus musical). The hemisphere hypothesized to be most engaged in the ongoing cognitive task, as compared to the unengaged hemisphere, produced a greater potential difference between the temporal and reference electrode to the second of the tone pairs. These findings are related to "fast habituation" and "recovery cycle.".
A basic difficulty for the nervous system is integrating locally ambiguous sensory information to form accurate perceptions about the outside world. This local-to-global problem is also fundamental to motor control of the arm, because complex mechanical interactions between shoulder and elbow allow a particular amount of motion at one joint to arise from an infinite combination of shoulder and elbow torques. Here we show, in humans and rhesus monkeys, that a transcortical pathway through primary motor cortex (M1) resolves this ambiguity during fast feedback control. We demonstrate that single M1 neurons of behaving monkeys can integrate shoulder and elbow motion information into motor commands that appropriately counter the underlying torque within about 50 milliseconds of a mechanical perturbation. Moreover, we reveal a causal link between M1 processing and multi-joint integration in humans by showing that shoulder muscle responses occurring ~50 milliseconds after pure elbow displacement can be potentiated by transcranial magnetic stimulation. Taken together, our results show that transcortical processing through M1 permits feedback responses to express a level of sophistication that rivals voluntary control; this provides neurophysiological support for influential theories positing that voluntary movement is generated by the intelligent manipulation of sensory feedback.
Some features of the visual cortex develop postnatally in mammals. For example, geniculocortical axons that initially overlap throughout cortical layer IV segregate postnatally into two sets of interleaved eye-specific bands. NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors are necessary for eye-specific axon-segregation in the frog tectum, and as NMDA receptors play a greater part in synaptic transmission in early life and decrease in function during the period of axon segregation, they may be involved in the segregation of geniculocortical axons: they are well placed to do so as they transduce retinally derived signals essential for segregation. Rearing animals in the dark in early life delays segregation and prolongs the critical period for plasticity. We now report that dark-rearing of kittens also delays the loss of NMDA receptor function in the visual cortex, supporting the view that they play an important part in neuronal development and plasticity.
The neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) has been implicated in morphogenetic events during formation of the nervous system. Three forms of N-CAM exist, all glycoprotein chains, of relative molecular masses 180,000 (180K), 140K and 120K (N-CAM180, N-CAM140 and N-CAM120) which are differentially expressed on neural cell types and during development. The three chains are thought to carry similar if not identical amino-acid sequences on their extracellular amino-terminal domains, but differ in the length of their carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic region. They occur in highly sialylated embryonic and less sialylated adult forms. N-CAM180 is selectively expressed in more differentiated neural cells and may play a role in the stabilization of cell contacts. To investigate this, we have studied in the surface membrane of a mouse neuroblastoma cell line N2A the lateral mobility of the two predominant forms of N-CAM, N-CAM180 and N-CAM140, as a function of differentiation. Here we report that as judged by fringe pattern photobleaching, the surface mobility of N-CAM140 is higher than that of N-CAM180, suggesting an association of N-CAM180 with the cytoskeleton or other stabilizing factors. We also show that brain spectrin, a membrane-cytoskeleton linker protein, binds only to N-CAM180. The immobilization of N-CAM in differentiated N2A cells is achieved by a shift in expression from N-CAM140 to N-CAM180.
The gene tailless is a member of the superfamily of genes that encode transcription factors of the ligand-activated nuclear receptor type, and is expressed in the invertebrate and vertebrate brain. In mice, its transcripts are restricted to the periventricular zone of the forebrain, the site of origin of neurons and glia. Here we use homologous recombination to generate mice that lack a functional tailless protein. Homozygous mutant mice are viable at birth, indicating that tailless is not required for prenatal survival; however, adult mutant mice show a reduction in the size of rhinencephalic and limbic structures, including the olfactory, infrarhinal and entorhinal cortex, amygdala and dentate gyrus. Both male and female mice are more aggressive than usual and females lack normal maternal instincts. These animals therefore enable a molecular approach to be taken towards understanding the genetic architecture and morphogenesis of the forebrain.
Surgical, pharmacological and genetic lesion studies have revealed distinct anatomical sites involved with different forms of learning. Studies of patients with localized brain damage and work in rodent model systems, for example, have shown that the hippocampal formation participates in acquisition of declarative tasks but is not the site of their long-term storage. Such lesions are usually irreversible, however, which has limited their use for dissecting the temporal processes of acquisition, storage and retrieval of memories. Studies in bees and flies have similarly revealed a distinct anatomical region of the insect brain, the mushroom body, that is involved specifically in olfactory associative learning. We have used a temperature-sensitive dynamin transgene, which disrupts synaptic transmission reversibly and on the time-scale of minutes, to investigate the temporal requirements for ongoing neural activity during memory formation. Here we show that synaptic transmission from mushroom body neurons is required during memory retrieval but not during acquisition or storage. We propose that the hebbian processes underlying olfactory associative learning reside in mushroom body dendrites or upstream of the mushroom body and that the resulting alterations in synaptic strength modulate mushroom body output during memory retrieval.
Comparison of mammalian brain parts has often focused on differences in absolute size, revealing only a general tendency for all parts to grow together. Attempts to find size-independent effects using body weight as a reference variable obscure size relationships owing to independent variation of body size and give phylogenies of questionable significance. Here we use the brain itself as a size reference to define the cerebrotype, a species-by-species measure of brain composition. With this measure, across many mammalian taxa the cerebellum occupies a constant fraction of the total brain volume (0.13 +/- 0.02), arguing against the hypothesis that the cerebellum acts as a computational engine principally serving the neocortex. Mammalian taxa can be well separated by cerebrotype, thus allowing the use of quantitative neuroanatomical data to test evolutionary relationships. Primate cerebrotypes have progressively shifted and neocortical volume fractions have become successively larger in lemurs and lorises, New World monkeys, Old World monkeys, and hominoids, lending support to the idea that primate brain architecture has been driven by directed selection pressure. At the same time, absolute brain size can vary over 100-fold within a taxon, while maintaining a relatively uniform cerebrotype. Brains therefore constitute a scalable architecture.
The principles that the auditory cortex uses to decipher a stream of acoustic information have remained elusive. Neural responses in the animal auditory cortex can be broadly classified into transient and sustained activity. We examined the existence of similar principles in the human brain. Sound-evoked, blood oxygen level-dependent signal response was decomposed temporally into independent transient and sustained constituents, which predominated in different portions-core and belt-of the auditory cortex. Converging with unit recordings, our data suggest that this spatiotemporal pattern in the auditory cortex may represent a fundamental principle of analyzing sound information.
Little is known about the factors which regulate the growth and development of the mammalian brain. Although proliferation of neuronal cells ceases relatively early in development, certain types of glial cells proliferate and differentiate mainly perinatally. In the perinatal period, the ability of acetylcholine to stimulate phosphoinositide (PI) hydrolysis in brain reaches peak levels, and indeed the stable acetylcholine analogue carbachol can stimulate PI hydrolysis of primary neonatal astroglial cells. As PI hydrolysis is thought to be important in the regulation of cell proliferation, we investigated whether cellular DNA synthesis can be induced by carbachol. Our results show that carbachol stimulates DNA synthesis via muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs), in primary astrocytes derived from perinatal rat brain, in an age-dependent fashion. Carbachol is also mitogenic in certain brain-derived astrocytoma and neuroblastoma cell lines, as well as in chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells expressing recombinant muscarinic receptors. DNA synthesis is strongly activated by carbachol in those brain-derived cell lines and transfected CHO cells that express mAChR subtypes which activate PI hydrolysis efficiently, and poorly activated in cells expressing mAChR subtypes which only weakly activate PI hydrolysis. These results strongly support a role for acetylcholine in regulating astroglial cell growth in the developing brain, and indicate that the specificity of acetylcholine-induced cell proliferation may be determined by the expression of those mAChR subtypes which activate PI hydrolysis.
Music, like other forms of expression, requires specific skills for its production, and the organization and representation of these skills in the human brain are not well understood. With the use of positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, the functional neuroanatomy of musical sight-reading and keyboard performance was studied in ten professional pianists. Reading musical notations and translating these notations into movement patterns on a keyboard resulted in activation of cortical areas distinct from, but adjacent to, those underlying similar verbal operations. These findings help explain why brain damage in musicians may or may not affect both verbal and musical functions depending on the size and location of the damaged area.
At synapses throughout the brain and spinal cord, the amino-acid glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter. During evolution, a family of glutamate-receptor ion channels seems to have been assembled from a kit consisting of discrete ligand-binding, ion-channel, modulatory and cytoplasmic domains. Crystallographic studies that exploit this unique architecture have greatly aided structural analysis of the ligand-binding core, but the results also pose a formidable challenge, namely that of resolving the allosteric mechanisms by which individual domains communicate and function in an intact receptor.
In postmortem studies of patients with schizophrenia, D2 dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia have been observed to be more numerous than in patients with no history of neurological or psychiatric disease. Because most patients with schizophrenia are treated with neuroleptic drugs that block D2 dopamine receptors in the caudate nucleus, it has been suggested that this increase in the number of receptors is a result of adaptation to these drugs rather than a biochemical abnormality intrinsic to schizophrenia. With positron emission tomography (PET), the D2 dopamine receptor density in the caudate nucleus of living human beings was measured in normal volunteers and in two groups of patients with schizophrenia--one group that had never been treated with neuroleptics and another group that had been treated with these drugs. D2 dopamine receptor densities in the caudate nucleus were higher in both groups of patients than in the normal volunteers. Thus, schizophrenia itself is associated with an increase in brain D2 dopamine receptor density.
Blood flow in the brain is regulated by neurons and astrocytes. Knowledge of how these cells control blood flow is crucial for understanding how neural computation is powered, for interpreting functional imaging scans of brains, and for developing treatments for neurological disorders. It is now recognized that neurotransmitter-mediated signalling has a key role in regulating cerebral blood flow, that much of this control is mediated by astrocytes, that oxygen modulates blood flow regulation, and that blood flow may be controlled by capillaries as well as by arterioles. These conceptual shifts in our understanding of cerebral blood flow control have important implications for the development of new therapeutic approaches.
Poets have long waxed lyrical about the pain of a broken heart. Now, as Panksepp explains in his Perspective, this metaphor may reflect real events in the mammalian brain. A new brain neuroimaging study (Eisenberger et al.) reveals that the brain areas that are activated during the distress caused by social exclusion are also those activated during physical pain. Thus, we now have an explanation for the feeling of physical pain that accompanies emotional loss-whether that be the loss of a loved one, rejection by one's social group, or the distress of separation experienced by young animals.
2,5-Hexanedione, the principal neurotoxic metabolite of the industrial solvents n-hexane and methyl n-butyl ketone causes axonal degeneration in the mammillary body and visual nuclei of cats. Prolonged, low-level exposure to hydrocarbons in the environment may cause premature deterioration in areas of the human brain vital for perception and behavior.
Diseases of the extrapyramidal systems like Parkinson's disease and Huntington's chorea have been closely associated with the basal ganglia. In particular, the prominent symmetrical nigrostriatal dopaminergic systems play an important role in pathogenesis and symptomatology of motor disorders. Biochemical and electrophysiological data indicate a functional relationship between the nigrostriatal pathways on the two brain hemispheres. Unilateral pharmacological manipulations result in short-term changes in contralateral dopamine (DA) release, and surgical lesions on one side lead to long-term alterations in the firing rate of contralateral dopaminergic neurones. We report here the effects of unilateral kainic acid-induced lesions of striatal cell bodies on ipsi- and contralateral striatal DA turnover. We present evidence that morphologically intact dopaminergic neurones on both sides possess compensatory mechanisms which can counteract striatal synaptic asymmetries. Such mechanisms could be responsible at least in part for the maintenance of symmetrical motor behaviour in unilaterally lesioned animals.
The horizontal separation of the eyes means that objects nearer or farther than the fixation point project to different locations on the two retinae, differing principally in their horizontal coordinates (horizontal binocular disparity). Disparity-selective neurons have generally been studied with disparities applied in only one direction (often horizontal), which cannot determine whether the encoding is specialized for processing disparities along the horizontal axis. It is therefore unclear if disparity selectivity represents a specialization for naturally occurring disparities. I used random dot stereograms to study disparity-selective neurons from the primary visual cortex (V1) of awake fixating monkeys. Many combinations of vertical and horizontal disparity were used, characterizing the surface of responses as a function of two-dimensional disparity. Here I report that the response surface usually showed elongation along the horizontal disparity axis, despite the isotropic stimulus. Thus these neurons modulated their firing rate over a wider range of horizontal disparity than vertical disparity. This demonstrates that disparity-selective cells are specialized for processing horizontal disparity, and that existing models of disparity selectivity require substantial revision.
Alterations in neuronal gene expression have been proposed to account for permanent changes in brain function such as learning and memory. In particular, it has been suggested that protooncogenes such as c-fos may be rapidly induced in conditions that lead to neuronal plasticity and evoke permanent changes in the expression of effector genes. Concentrations of the c-fos proto-oncogene increase rapidly following depolarization-induced calcium influx in non-dividing neuronally differentiated PC 12 cells. Recently, the presence and induction of c-fos in the adult brain and spinal cord has been observed. Here we report that electrically-induced seizure activity, which leads to a permanent increase in the response of the brain to future seizures (kindling), rapidly and transiently increases c-fos protein-like immunoreactivity in the nuclei of granule cells in the rat dentate gyrus. These results suggest that c-fos protein is present within the nuclei of adult mammalian neurons, and could be involved in plastic changes in the nervous system associated with seizure activity.
Peripheral sensory deprivation induces reorganization within the somatosensory cortex of adult animals. Although most studies have focused on the somatosensory cortex, changes at subcortical levels (for example the thalamus) could also play a fundamental role in sensory plasticity. To investigate this, we made chronic simultaneous recordings of large numbers of single neurons across the ventral posterior medial thalamus (VPM) in adult rats. This allowed a continuous and quantitative evaluation of the receptive fields of the same sample of single VPM neurons per animal, before and after sensory deprivation. Local anaesthesia in the face induced an immediate and reversible reorganization of a large portion of the VPM map. This differentially affected the short latency (4-6 ms) responses (SLRs) and long latency (15-25 ms) responses (LLRs) of single VPM neurons. The SLRs and LLRs normally define spatiotemporally complex receptive fields in the VPM. Here we report that 73% of single neurons whose original receptive fields included the anaesthetized zone showed immediate unmasking of SLRs in response to stimulation of adjacent cutaneous regions, and/or loss of SLRs with preservation or enhancement of LLRs in response to stimulation of regions just surrounding the anaesthetized zone. This thalamic reorganization demonstrates that peripheral sensory deprivation may induce immediate plastic changes at multiple levels of the somatosensory system. Further, its spatiotemporally complex character suggests a disruption of the normal dynamic equilibrium between multiple ascending and descending influences on the VPM.
Stroke is a leading cause of disability, but no pharmacological therapy is currently available for promoting recovery. The brain region adjacent to stroke damage-the peri-infarct zone-is critical for rehabilitation, as it shows heightened neuroplasticity, allowing sensorimotor functions to re-map from damaged areas. Thus, understanding the neuronal properties constraining this plasticity is important for the development of new treatments. Here we show that after a stroke in mice, tonic neuronal inhibition is increased in the peri-infarct zone. This increased tonic inhibition is mediated by extrasynaptic GABA(A) receptors and is caused by an impairment in GABA (g-aminobutyric acid) transporter (GAT-3/GAT-4) function. To counteract the heightened inhibition, we administered in vivo a benzodiazepine inverse agonist specific for a5-subunit-containing extrasynaptic GABA(A) receptors at a delay after stroke. This treatment produced an early and sustained recovery of motor function. Genetically lowering the number of a5- or d-subunit-containing GABA(A) receptors responsible for tonic inhibition also proved beneficial for recovery after stroke, consistent with the therapeutic potential of diminishing extrasynaptic GABA(A) receptor function. Together, our results identify new pharmacological targets and provide the rationale for a novel strategy to promote recovery after stroke and possibly other brain injuries.
Humans are able to classify novel items correctly by category; some other animals have also been shown to do this. During category learning, humans group perceptual stimuli by abstracting qualities from similarity relationships of their physical properties. Forming categories is fundamental to cognition and can be independent of a 'memory store' of information about the items or a prototype. The neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the formation of categories are unknown. Using an animal model of category learning, in which frequency-modulated tones are distinguished into the categories of 'rising' and 'falling' modulation, we demonstrate here that the sorting of stimuli into these categories emerges as a sudden change in an animal's learning strategy. Electro-corticographical recording from the auditory cortex shows that the transition is accompanied by a change in the dynamics of cortical stimulus representation. We suggest that this dynamic change represents a mechanism underlying the recognition of the abstract quality (or qualities) that defines the categories.
The accessory optic system (AOS), which was described as early as 1870 by Gudden, constitutes a distinct midbrain visual pathway in all classes of vertebrates. In non-primate mammals, retinal fibres of this system project to a set of three nuclei: the dorsal (DTN), the lateral (LTN) and the medial (MTN) terminal nuclei. Whereas all AOS cells respond to the slow motion of large visual stimuli, the neurons are tuned to complementary directions of movement: horizontal temporo-nasal direction for the DTN, vertical up and down for the LTN and vertical down for the MTN. It has thus been suggested that these nuclei establish a system of retinal coordinates for the detection of whole field motion. As the AOS provides direct and indirect pathways to both oculomotor and vestibular structures, each of these nuclei is thought to be an essential link in the co-ordination of eye and head movements in relation to movement within the visual-field. One problem for the generalization of this theory is that the medial terminal nucleus has never been found in primates. In this report we establish both the existence of this nucleus and its afferent input from the retina in all major groups of primates (prosimians, New and Old World monkeys and apes), indicating a common anatomical plan of organization of the AOS in mammals.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an X-linked disease affecting 1/20,000 males either as cerebral ALD in childhood or as adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) in adults. Childhood ALD is the more severe form, with onset of neurological symptoms between 5-12 years of age. Central nervous system demyelination progresses rapidly and death occurs within a few years. AMN is a milder form of the disease with onset at 15-30 years of age and a more progressive course. Adrenal insufficiency (Addison's disease) may remain the only clinical manifestation of ALD. The principal biochemical abnormality of ALD is the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) because of impaired beta-oxidation in peroxisomes. The normal oxidation of VLCFA-CoA in patients' fibroblasts suggested that the gene coding for the VLCFA-CoA synthetase could be a candidate gene for ALD. Here we use positional cloning to identify a gene partially deleted in 6 of 85 independent patients with ALD. In familial cases, the deletions segregated with the disease. An identical deletion was detected in two brothers presenting with different clinical ALD phenotypes. Candidate exons were identified by computer analysis of genomic sequences and used to isolate complementary DNAs by exon connection and screening of cDNA libraries. The deduced protein sequence shows significant sequence identity to a peroxisomal membrane protein of M(r) 70K that is involved in peroxisome biogenesis and belongs to the 'ATP-binding cassette' superfamily of transporters.
Higher-order dendritic branching is considerably greater in Golgistained neurons from the occipital cortex of rats reared in groups in a complex environment than in similar neurons of littermates reared individually in laboratory cages have intermediate amounts of branching, while lower-order branching did not appear to be affected by any rearing environment.
In humans the hippocampal region of the brain is crucial for declarative or episodic memory for a broad range of materials. In contrast, there has been controversy over whether the hippocampus mediates a similarly general memory function in other species, or whether it is dedicated to spatial memory processing. Evidence for the spatial view is derived principally from the observations of 'place cells'-hippocampal neurons that fire whenever the animal is in a particular location in its environment, or when it perceives a specific stimulus or performs a specific behaviour in a particular place. We trained rats to perform the same recognition memory task in several distinct locations in a rich spatial environment and found that the activity of many hippocampal neurons was related consistently to perceptual, behavioural or cognitive events, regardless of the location where these events occurred. These results indicate that nonspatial events are fundamental elements of hippocampal representation, and support the view that, across species, the hippocampus has a broad role in information processing associated with memory.
The elemental content of neurons of the hippocampus was studied by a combination of scanning electron microscopy and x-ray spectrometry in autopsy-derived brain tissue from three cases of senile dementia (Alzheimer type) and three nondemented elderly controls. Foci of aluminum were detected within the nuclear region of a high percentage of neurons containing neurofibrillary tangles from the cases of senile dementia as well as the elderly controls. The adjacent normal-appearing neurons from both groups of patients were virtually free of detectable aluminum. These findings suggest that the association of aluminum to Alzheimer's disease extends to the neuronal level.
Correlated trial-to-trial variability in the activity of cortical neurons is thought to reflect the functional connectivity of the circuit. Many cortical areas are organized into functional columns, in which neurons are believed to be densely connected and to share common input. Numerous studies report a high degree of correlated variability between nearby cells. We developed chronically implanted multitetrode arrays offering unprecedented recording quality to reexamine this question in the primary visual cortex of awake macaques. We found that even nearby neurons with similar orientation tuning show virtually no correlated variability. Our findings suggest a refinement of current models of cortical microcircuit architecture and function: Either adjacent neurons share only a few percent of their inputs or, alternatively, their activity is actively decorrelated.
Mice deficient for the gene encoding alpha-calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase II (alpha-CaMKII knockout mice) provide a promising tool to link behavioral and cellular abnormalities with a specific molecular lesion. The heterozygous mouse exhibited a well-circumscribed syndrome of behavioral abnormalities, consisting primarily of a decreased fear response and an increase in defensive aggression, in the absence of any measured cognitive deficits. Unlike the heterozygote, the homozygote displayed abnormal behavior in all paradigms tested. At the cellular level, both extracellular and whole-cell patch clamp recordings indicated that serotonin release in putative serotonergic neurons of the dorsal raphe was reduced. Thus, alpha-CaMKII knockout mice, in particular the heterozygote, may provide a model for studying the molecular and cellular basis underlying emotional disorders involving fear and aggression.
Abundant evidence now indicates that atypical visual exposure early in the life of cats and primates can cause profound alterations in cortical organization. In particular, it has been shown that preventing the use of one eye for vision early in life results in a marked shift of ocular preference among neurones of kitten visual cortex in favour of the exposed eye. The cellular mechanisms underlying these alterations remain uncertain, but much recent attention has focused on the possible role of pharmacological agents in modifying cortical plasticity, with particular reference to catecholamines. These experiments, which have shown that agents which modify cortical noradrenaline levels can alter the degree of cortical plasticity, do not specify the mechanism of action, and leave open the possibility that other neurotransmitter systems may also be involved in cortical modifiability. We now report that chronic intracortical administration of L-glutamate during a period of monocular vision imposed on young kittens largely prevents the ocular dominance shift which normally occurs under these circumstances.
Human hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis of the Dutch type (HCHWA-D), an autosomal dominant form of cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), is characterized by extensive amyloid deposition in the small leptomeningeal arteries and cortical arterioles, which lead to an early death of those afflicted in their fifth or sixth decade. Immunohistochemical and biochemical studies have indicated that the amyloid subunit in HCHWA-D is antigenically related to and homologous in sequence with the amyloid beta protein isolated from brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease and Down syndrome. The amyloid beta protein is encoded by the amyloid beta protein precursor (APP) gene located on chromosome 21. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms detected by the APP gene were used to examine whether this gene is a candidate for the genetic defect in HCHWA-D. The data indicate that the APP gene is tightly linked to HCHWA-D and therefore, in contrast to familial Alzheimer's disease, cannot be excluded as the site of mutation in HCHWA-D.
The majority of synapses in the mammalian cortex originate from cortical neurons. Indeed, the largest input to cortical cells comes from neighboring excitatory cells. However, most models of cortical development and processing do not reflect the anatomy and physiology of feedback excitation and are restricted to serial feedforward excitation. This report describes how populations of neurons in cat visual cortex can use excitatory feedback, characterized as an effective "network conductance", to amplify their feedforward input signals and demonstrates how neuronal discharge can be kept proportional to stimulus strength despite strong, recurrent connections that threaten to cause runaway excitation. These principles are incorporated into models of cortical direction and orientation selectivity that emphasize the basic design principles of cortical architectures.
The template activity of DNA with calf thymus DNA polymerase has been studied in sections of fixed brain, liver, and heart tissues from young and senescent mice. The enzyme catalyzed greater incorporation of deoxyribonucleotide monophosphates into nuclei of old mouse neurons, astrocytes, Kupffer cells, and heart muscle fibers. The results are interpreted as the accumulation of DNA strand breaks with aging.
Working memory refers to a system for temporary storage and manipulation of information in the brain, a function critical for a wide range of cognitive operations. It has been proposed that working memory includes a central executive system (CES) to control attention and information flow to and from verbal and spatial short-term memory buffers. Although the prefrontal cortex is activated during both verbal and spatial passive working memory tasks, the brain regions involved in the CES component of working memory have not been identified. We have used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine brain activation during the concurrent performance of two tasks, which is expected to engage the CES. Activation of the prefrontal cortex was observed when both tasks are performed together, but not when they are performed separately. These results support the view that the prefrontal cortex is involved in human working memory.
In Deborah M. Barnes's Research News article "Drug may protect brains of heart attack victims" (6 Feb., p. 632), William A. Pulsinelli (whose name was misspelled) was incorrectly included in the statement, "because rodents are more susceptible to ischemic brain damage than primates, the Cornell researchers stress the importance of testing potential neuroprotective drugs in nonhuman primates before giving them to humans."
The highly ordered wiring of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) neurons in the eye to their synaptic targets in the superior colliculus of the midbrain has long served as the dominant experimental system for the analysis of topographic neural maps. Here we describe a quantitative model for the development of one arm of this map--the wiring of the nasal-temporal axis of the retina to the caudal-rostral axis of the superior colliculus. The model is based on RGC-RGC competition that is governed by comparisons of EphA receptor signalling intensity, which are made using ratios of, rather than absolute differences in, EphA signalling between RGCs. Molecular genetic experiments, exploiting a combinatorial series of EphA receptor knock-in and knockout mice, confirm the salient predictions of the model, and show that it both describes and predicts topographic mapping.
Individual neurons in the brain send their axons over considerable distances to multiple targets, but the mechanisms governing this process are unresolved. An amenable system for studying axon outgrowth, branching, and target selection is the mammalian corticopontine projection. This major connection develops from parent corticospinal axons that have already grown past the pons, by a delayed interstitial budding of collateral branches that then grow directly into their target, the basilar pons. When cocultured with explants of developing cortex in three-dimensional collagen matrices, the basilar pons elicits the formation and directional growth of cortical axon collaterals across the intervening matrix. This effect appears to be target-specific and selectively influences neurons in the appropriate cortical layer. These in vitro findings provide evidence that the basilar pons becomes innervated by controlling at a distance the budding and directed ingrowth of cortical axon collaterals through the release of a diffusible, chemotropic molecule.
Batrachotoxin has been shown to be a pyrrolecarboxylic ester of a novel steroidal base with unique and selective actions on a variety of electrogenic membranes. The effects of batrachotoxin in neuromuscular preparations both pre- and postsynaptically, in nerve axons, in superior cervical ganglion, in heart Purkinje fibers, and in brain slices appear to be due to the selective and irreversible increase in permeability of membranes to sodium ions. The subsequent effects of this increase in Na(+) permeability evoked by batrachotoxin-such as membrane depolarization, enhanced spontaneous transmitter release, muscle contracture, and enhanced formation of cyclic AMP in brain slices-may be blocked reversibly by tetrodotoxin.
One marvels at a batter's ability to hit a baseball traveling at 150 kilometers per hour or a monkey's skill in snatching a flying insect. Indeed, the ability of many animals to reach out, grasp, and manipulate objects is a feat of biological engineering unmatched by even state-of-the-art robots. But how are the objects of our attention chosen and how are the eyes and hands directed to it? Recent progress in behavioral neurophysiology has clarified some of the brain mechanisms at work.
Consensus is emerging that the medial frontal lobe of the brain is involved in monitoring performance, but precisely what is monitored remains unclear. A saccade-countermanding task affords an experimental dissociation of neural signals of error, reinforcement, and conflict. Single-unit activity was monitored in the anterior cingulate cortex of monkeys performing this task. Neurons that signaled errors were found, half of which responded to the omission of earned reinforcement. A further diversity of neurons signaled earned or unexpected reinforcement. No neurons signaled the form of conflict engendered by interruption of saccade preparation produced in this task. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the anterior cingulate cortex monitors the consequences of actions.
The neuroanatomical architecture is considered to be the basis for understanding brain function and dysfunction. However, existing imaging tools have limitations for brainwide mapping of neural circuits at a mesoscale level. We developed a micro-optical sectioning tomography (MOST) system that can provide micrometer-scale tomography of a centimeter-sized whole mouse brain. Using MOST, we obtained a three-dimensional structural data set of a Golgi-stained whole mouse brain at the neurite level. The morphology and spatial locations of neurons and traces of neurites could be clearly distinguished. We found that neighboring Purkinje cells stick to each other.
The ability to introspect about self-performance is key to human subjective experience, but the neuroanatomical basis of this ability is unknown. Such accurate introspection requires discriminating correct decisions from incorrect ones, a capacity that varies substantially across individuals. We dissociated variation in introspective ability from objective performance in a simple perceptual-decision task, allowing us to determine whether this interindividual variability was associated with a distinct neural basis. We show that introspective ability is correlated with gray matter volume in the anterior prefrontal cortex, a region that shows marked evolutionary development in humans. Moreover, interindividual variation in introspective ability is also correlated with white-matter microstructure connected with this area of the prefrontal cortex. Our findings point to a focal neuroanatomical substrate for introspective ability, a substrate distinct from that supporting primary perception.
It has been more than 10 years since it was first proposed that the neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease (AD) may be caused by deposition of amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) in plaques in brain tissue. According to the amyloid hypothesis, accumulation of Abeta in the brain is the primary influence driving AD pathogenesis. The rest of the disease process, including formation of neurofibrillary tangles containing tau protein, is proposed to result from an imbalance between Abeta production and Abeta clearance.
The term working memory refers to a brain system that provides temporary storage and manipulation of the information necessary for such complex cognitive tasks as language comprehension, learning, and reasoning. This definition has evolved from the concept of a unitary short-term memory system. Working memory has been found to require the simultaneous storage and processing of information. It can be divided into the following three subcomponents: (i) the central executive, which is assumed to be an attentional-controlling system, is important in skills such as chess playing and is particularly susceptible to the effects of Alzheimer's disease; and two slave systems, namely (ii) the visuospatial sketch pad, which manipulates visual images and (iii) the phonological loop, which stores and rehearses speech-based information and is necessary for the acquisition of both native and second-language vocabulary.
Neurotrophic factors support the differentiation and survival of neurons and influence properties of synaptic transmission. The neurotrophic hypothesis postulates a retrograde action of trophic factors: their production and release by target cells and their uptake by innervating axons. Besides the retrograde route of trophic messengers, the survival of neurons and the development of synapses is thought to be also regulated by anterograde, afferent trophic signals. We now show that exogenous neurotrophins are transported in the anterograde direction, from cell bodies to the axon terminals, and that the intact neurotrophin is released after anterograde transport, taken up and utilized by second-order visual neurons in the developing chick brain. These results suggest that anterogradely transported neurotrophins may play a role in synaptic plasticity and may have effects at more than one synapse beyond the initial release site.
Synaptic plasticity is a key mechanism for chronic pain. It occurs at different levels of the central nervous system, including spinal cord and cortex. Studies have mainly focused on signaling proteins that trigger these plastic changes, whereas few have addressed the maintenance of plastic changes related to chronic pain. We found that protein kinase M zeta (PKMz) maintains pain-induced persistent changes in the mouse anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Peripheral nerve injury caused activation of PKMz in the ACC, and inhibiting PKMz by a selective inhibitor, z-pseudosubstrate inhibitory peptide (ZIP), erased synaptic potentiation. Microinjection of ZIP into the ACC blocked behavioral sensitization. These results suggest that PKMz in the ACC acts to maintain neuropathic pain. PKMz could thus be a new therapeutic target for treating chronic pain.
High-frequency (tetanic) stimulation of presynaptic nerve tracts in the hippocampal region of the brain can lead to long-term synaptic potentiation (LTP). Pertussis toxin prevented the development of tetanus-induced LTP in the stratum radiatum-CA1 synaptic system of rat hippocampal slices, indicating that a guanosine triphosphate-binding protein (G protein) may be required for the initiation of LTP. This G protein may be located at a site distinct from the postsynaptic neuron (that is, in presynaptic terminals or glial cells) since maximal activation of CA1 neuronal G proteins by intracellular injection of guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate), a nonhydrolyzable analog of guanosine 5'-triphosphate, did not occlude LTP.
In an insect, the tobacco hornworm Manduca sexta, the cerebral neuropeptide prothoracicotropic hormone (PTTH), the primary effector of postembryonic development, exists as two molecular forms. These two PTTH's elicit characteristic in vitro dose responses of activation of prothoracic glands from different developmental stages, an indication that during development the glands change in their sensitivity to the neurohormones. Both PTTH's are active in a specific in situ bioassay. Since they may be released in situ at stage-specific times to evoke distinctly different developmental responses, the PTTH neuroendocrine axis appears to be an effective system for determining the functions of molecular forms of a neurohormone in the regulation of growth and development.
The lethal yellow (AY/a) mouse has a defect in proopiomelanocortin (POMC) signaling in the brain that leads to obesity, and is resistant to the anorexigenic effects of the hormone leptin. It has been proposed that the weight-reducing effects of leptin are thus transmitted primarily by way of POMC neurons. However, the central effects of defective POMC signaling, and the absence of leptin, on weight gain in double-mutant lethal yellow (AY/a) leptin-deficient (lepob/lepob) mice were shown to be independent and additive. Furthermore, deletion of the leptin gene restored leptin sensitivity to AY/a mice. This result implies that in the AY/a mouse, obesity is independent of leptin action, and resistance to leptin results from desensitization of leptin signaling.
Photoreceptors are the first in the chain of neurons that process visual information. In lateral eyes of vertebrates, light hyperpolarizes rod and cone photoreceptors that synapse onto bipolar and horizontal cells in the first synaptic layer of the retina. The sign of the photoreceptor signal is either conserved or inverted in bipolar cells, resulting in chromatically dependent depolarizing and hyperpolarizing responses to visual stimuli. Visual information is then conveyed to the second synaptic layer for encoding and transmission to the brain by ganglion cells. The parietal (third) eye of lizards does not contain bipolar cells or other interneurons. Photoreceptors synapse directly onto ganglion cells and yet, even in the absence of interneurons, antagonistic chromatic mechanisms modulate the ganglion cell responses. We report here that chromatic antagonism in the third eye originates in the chromatically dependent hyperpolarizing and depolarizing response of the photoreceptors to light. We also suggest that the antagonistic nature of these photoresponses may provide lizards with a mechanism for the enhanced detection of dawn and dusk.
The microcircuitry of the mammalian neocortex remains largely unknown. Although the neocortex could be composed of scores of precise circuits, an alternative possibility is that local connectivity is probabilistic or even random. To examine the precision and degree of determinism in the neocortical microcircuitry, we used optical probing to reconstruct microcircuits in layer 5 from mouse primary visual cortex. We stimulated "trigger" cells, isolated from a homogenous population of corticotectal pyramidal neurons, while optically detecting "follower" neurons directly driven by the triggers. Followers belonged to a few selective anatomical classes with stereotyped physiological and synaptic responses. Moreover, even the position of the followers appeared determined across animals. Our data reveal precisely organized cortical microcircuits.
The biochemical machinery that underlies circadian rhythms is conserved among animal species and drives self-sustained molecular oscillations and functions, even within individual asynchronous tissue-culture cells. Yet the rhythm-generating neural centres of higher eukaryotes are usually composed of interconnected cellular networks, which contribute to robustness and synchrony as well as other complex features of rhythmic behaviour. In mammals, little is known about how individual brain oscillators are organized to orchestrate a complex behavioural pattern. Drosophila is arguably more advanced from this point of view: we and others have recently shown that a group of adult brain clock neurons expresses the neuropeptide PDF and controls morning activity (small LN(v) cells; M-cells), whereas another group of clock neurons controls evening activity (CRY+, PDF- cells; E-cells). We have generated transgenic mosaic animals with different circadian periods in morning and evening cells. Here we show, by behavioural and molecular assays, that the six canonical groups of clock neurons are organized into two separate neuronal circuits. One has no apparent effect on locomotor rhythmicity in darkness, but within the second circuit the molecular and behavioural timing of the evening cells is determined by morning-cell properties. This is due to a daily resetting signal from the morning to the evening cells, which run at their genetically programmed pace between consecutive signals. This neural circuit and oscillator-coupling mechanism ensures a proper relationship between the timing of morning and evening locomotor activity.
When we are anesthetized, we expect consciousness to vanish. But does it always? Although anesthesia undoubtedly induces unresponsiveness and amnesia, the extent to which it causes unconsciousness is harder to establish. For instance, certain anesthetics act on areas of the brain's cortex near the midline and abolish behavioral responsiveness, but not necessarily consciousness. Unconsciousness is likely to ensue when a complex of brain regions in the posterior parietal area is inactivated. Consciousness vanishes when anesthetics produce functional disconnection in this posterior complex, interrupting cortical communication and causing a loss of integration; or when they lead to bistable, stereotypic responses, causing a loss of information capacity. Thus, anesthetics seem to cause unconsciousness when they block the brain's ability to integrate information.
One of the common neurological complications in patients with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a subacute encephalopathy with progressive dementia. By using the techniques of cocultivation for virus isolation, in situ hybridization, immunocytochemistry, and transmission electron microscopy, the identity of an important cell type that supports replication of the AIDS retrovirus in brain tissue was determined in two affected individuals. These cells were mononucleated and multinucleated macrophages that actively synthesized viral RNA and produced progeny virions in the brains of the patients. Infected brain macrophages may serve as a reservoir for virus and as a vehicle for viral dissemination in the infected host.
The mammalian visual cortex is organized into columns. Here, we examine cortical influences upon developing visual afferents in the cat by altering intrinsic gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated inhibition with benzodiazepines. Local enhancement by agonist (diazepam) infusion did not perturb visual responsiveness, but did widen column spacing. An inverse agonist (DMCM) produced the opposite effect. Thus, intracortical inhibitory circuits shape the geometry of incoming thalamic arbors, suggesting that cortical columnar architecture depends on neuronal activity.
NERVE GROWTH FACTOR (NGF) is a polypeptide trophic factor for peripheral sympathetic and sensory neurones(1,2). Apparent NGF(3-5) and NGF receptors(6,7) have also been identified in the brain, and intracerebral administration of NGF in the adult rat produces marked biochemical(8) and morphologica(9,10) changes in brain tissue. These findings, taken together with the observations that central injections of NGF facilitate behavioural recovery from brain damage(11,12), indicate that this polypeptide may have an important role in brain function. It has been observed that rats given intraventricular injections of up to 2.3 microg NGF drink copiously (M.E.L. and G. Guroff, unpublished observations). Perkins et al.(13) reported that diencephalic application of crystalline NGF (1-15 microg) resulted in an intense polydipsia. The present report confirms the observations of M.E.L. and Guroff, and extends the findings of Perkins et al.(13) by using solutions of NGF instead of crystals. It also describes for the first time a second phenomenon produced by intracranial administration of NGF, namely an intense appetite for aversive concentrations of sodium solutions.
Recent studies have shown that gamma-interferon (IFN-gamma) induces the expression of Ia antigen on astrocytes. This observation is of immunological significance because such activated astrocytes can act as antigen-presenting cells, as demonstrated with myelin basic protein for antigen-specific encephalitogenic T-cell lines. However, the lack of lymphatic drainage in brain and the presence of the so-called blood-brain barrier restricting traffic of cells and macromolecules suggests that IFN-gamma may not be readily available, at least during the initial phases of viral infections. The question therefore arises as to whether astrocytes can be induced to express Ia antigens by other signals directly related to viral infection and possibly independent of IFN-gamma. In the present report we demonstrate that a neurotropic murine hepatitis virus induces expression of Ia antigen on astrocytes in tissue culture without infection, rendering these brain cells competent to participate directly in the immune response to a viral infection.
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors serve as modulators of synaptic transmission in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS) with both short-term and long-lasting effects. Divalent cations are pivotal in determining this behaviour in that Mg2+ blocks the ion channel in a voltage-dependent manner, and Ca2+ permeates NMDA channels. Zn2+ could also modulate neuronal excitability because it is present at high concentrations in brain, especially the synaptic vesicles of mossy fibers in the hippocampus and is released with neuronal activity. Both proconvulsant and depressant actions of Zn2+ have been reported. We have found that zinc is a potent non-competitive antagonist of NMDA responses on cultured hippocampal neurons. Unlike Mg2+, the effect of Zn2+ is not voltage-sensitive between -40 and +60 mV, suggesting that Zn2+ and Mg2+ act at distinct sites. In addition, we have found that Zn2+ antagonizes responses to the inhibitory transmitter GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid). Our results provide evidence for an additional metal-binding site on the NMDA receptor channel, and suggest that Zn2+ may regulate both excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission in the hippocampus.
The possibility that calcium is elevated in brain neurons during aging was examined by quantifying afterhyperpolarizations induced by spike bursts in CAl neurons of hippocampal slices from young and aged rats. The afterhyperpolarizations result from Ca2+-dependent K+ conductance increases and are blocked in medium low in Ca2+ and prolonged in medium high in Ca2+. The afterhyperpolarization and associated conductance increases were considerably prolonged in cells from aged rats, although inhibitory postsynaptic potentials did not differ with age. Since elevated intracellular Ca2+ can exert deleterious effects on neurons, the data suggest that altered Ca2+ homeostasis may play a significant role in normal brain aging.
In the primary visual cortex (V1), nearby neurons are tuned to similar stimulus features, and, depending on the manner and time scale over which neuronal signals are analyzed, the resulting redundancy may mitigate deleterious effects of response variability. We estimated information rates in the short-time scale responses of clusters of up to six simultaneously recorded nearby neurons in monkey V1. Responses were almost independent if we kept track of which neuron fired each spike but were redundant if we summed responses over the cluster. Redundancy was independent of cluster size. Summing neuronal responses to reduce variability discards potentially useful information, and the discarded information increases with cluster size.
The visual system is constantly inundated with information received by the eyes, only a fraction of which seems to reach visual awareness. This selection process is one of the functions ascribed to visual attention. Although many studies have investigated the role of attention in shaping neuronal representations in the visual cortex, few have focused on attentional modulation of neuronal signals related to visual motion. Here we report that the responses of direction-selective neurons in monkey visual cortex are greatly influenced by attention, and that this modulation occurs as early in the cortical hierarchy as the level of the middle temporal visual area (MT). Our finding demonstrates a stronger and earlier influence of attention on motion processing along the dorsal visual pathway than previously recognized.
Transplantation of dopaminergic neurons can potentially improve the clinical outcome of Parkinson's disease, a neurological disorder resulting from degeneration of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. In particular, transplantation of embryonic-stem-cell-derived dopaminergic neurons has been shown to be efficient in restoring motor symptoms in conditions of dopamine deficiency. However, the use of pluripotent-derived cells might lead to the development of tumours if not properly controlled. Here we identified a minimal set of three transcription factors--Mash1 (also known as Ascl1), Nurr1 (also known as Nr4a2) and Lmx1a--that are able to generate directly functional dopaminergic neurons from mouse and human fibroblasts without reverting to a progenitor cell stage. Induced dopaminergic (iDA) cells release dopamine and show spontaneous electrical activity organized in regular spikes consistent with the pacemaker activity featured by brain dopaminergic neurons. The three factors were able to elicit dopaminergic neuronal conversion in prenatal and adult fibroblasts from healthy donors and Parkinson's disease patients. Direct generation of iDA cells from somatic cells might have significant implications for understanding critical processes for neuronal development, in vitro disease modelling and cell replacement therapies.
Extracts of the cerebral cortes of genetically obese (ob/ob) mice with hyperphagia contain 0.05 +/- 0.02 microgram (mean +/- standard error) of cholecystokinin octapeptide equivalent per gram of wet weight compared to 0.15 +/- 0.01 microgram per gram for their nonobese littermates and 0.20 +/- 0.01 microgram per gram for normal LAF1 mice. These findings are suggestive of a causal relation between the diminished brain immunoreactive cholecystokinin content and the unrestrained appetite of the obese mice.
Drosophila neuroblasts are a model system for studying asymmetric cell division: they divide unequally to produce an apical neuroblast and a basal ganglion mother cell that differ in size, mitotic activity and developmental potential. During neuroblast mitosis, an apical protein complex orients the mitotic spindle and targets determinants of cell fate to the basal cortex, but the mechanism of each process is unknown. Here we show that the tumour-suppressor genes lethal giant larvae (lgl) and discs large (dlg) regulate basal protein targeting, but not apical complex formation or spindle orientation, in both embryonic and larval neuroblasts. Dlg protein is apically enriched and is required for maintaining cortical localization of Lgl protein. Basal protein targeting requires microfilament and myosin function, yet the lgl phenotype is strongly suppressed by reducing levels of myosin II. We conclude that Dlg and Lgl promote, and myosin II inhibits, actomyosin-dependent basal protein targeting in neuroblasts.
In the cerebral cortex of the opossum and the wallaby there Is a complete and coincident overlap of the sensory and the motor representations of the body. Within this sensorimotor area It is not possible to draw the line which in other mammals separates a primarily sensory area from a primarily motor area.
Representations of sensory stimuli in the cerebral cortex can undergo progressive remodelling according to the behavioural importance of the stimuli. The cortex receives widespread projections from dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA), which are activated by new stimuli or unpredicted rewards, and are believed to provide a reinforcement signal for such learning-related cortical reorganization. In the primary auditory cortex (AI) dopamine release has been observed during auditory learning that remodels the sound-frequency representations. Furthermore, dopamine modulates long-term potentiation, a putative cellular mechanism underlying plasticity. Here we show that stimulating the VTA together with an auditory stimulus of a particular tone increases the cortical area and selectivity of the neural responses to that sound stimulus in AI. Conversely, the AI representations of nearby sound frequencies are selectively decreased. Strong, sharply tuned responses to the paired tones also emerge in a second cortical area, whereas the same stimuli evoke only poor or non-selective responses in this second cortical field in naive animals. In addition, we found that strong long-range coherence of neuronal discharge emerges between AI and this secondary auditory cortical area.
It is widely held that conscious recall of past experiences involves a specific system--episodic memory. Patients with amnesia have gross impairments of episodic memory while other kinds of memory remain intact, suggesting that a separable brain system underlies episodic memory. We have used positron emission tomography (PET) to identify components of this system in normal volunteers. A dual-task interference paradigm was used to isolate brain areas associated with acquisition, and a cueing paradigm to isolate the areas concerned with retrieval from verbal episodic memory. Acquisition was associated with activity in the left prefrontal cortex and the retrosplenial area, whereas retrieval was associated with activity in right prefrontal cortex and the precuneus. Our results provide clear evidence that episodic memory involves a network of specific prefrontal and posterior structures which can be fractionated into different component processes.
Electrophysiologically identified pyramidal tract neurons in the rat cerebral cortex were tested with norepinephrine, acetylcholine, adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP), and guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic GMP) applied by microiontophoresis. The neurons were usually inhibited by norepinephrine and cyclic AMP, but excited by acetylcholine and cyclic GMP. These opposing responses of pyramidal tract neurons to cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP suggests that these two nucleotides could function as reciprocal intracellular second messengers for norepinephrine and acetylcholine, respectively.
It takes a fraction of a second to recognize a person or an object even when seen under strikingly different conditions. How such a robust, high-level representation is achieved by neurons in the human brain is still unclear. In monkeys, neurons in the upper stages of the ventral visual pathway respond to complex images such as faces and objects and show some degree of invariance to metric properties such as the stimulus size, position and viewing angle. We have previously shown that neurons in the human medial temporal lobe (MTL) fire selectively to images of faces, animals, objects or scenes. Here we report on a remarkable subset of MTL neurons that are selectively activated by strikingly different pictures of given individuals, landmarks or objects and in some cases even by letter strings with their names. These results suggest an invariant, sparse and explicit code, which might be important in the transformation of complex visual percepts into long-term and more abstract memories.
Activation of adenylate cyclase by a stable guanosine 5'-triphosphate analog was augmented in brain membrane preparations from rats treated on a long-term basis with tricyclic antidepressants or electroconvulsive shock. These treatments may facilitate cyclase activation by promoting the interaction of the regulatory and catalytic subunits of the enzyme. This finding suggests a possible mechanism for the changes in sensitivity to various neurotransmitters seen after antidepressant administration.
The effects of long-term lithium administration on pre- and postsynaptic processes involved in serotonergic neurotransmission were measured in rat hippocampus and cerebral cortex. Long-term lithium administration increased both basal and potassium chloride-stimulated release of endogenous serotonin from the hippocampus but not from the cortex. Serotonergic receptor binding was reduced in the hippocampus but not in the cortex. These results suggest a mechanism by which lithium may stabilize serotonin neurotransmission.
The striatum (caudate-putamen) of the basal ganglia in the mammalian forebrain is a mosaic of two interdigitating, neurochemically distinct compartments. One type, the 'patch' compartment, is identified by patches of dense opiate receptor binding, and is enriched in enkephalin- and substance P-like immunoreactivity. The other compartment, the 'matrix', has a high acetylcholinesterase activity, and is shown here to have a dense plexus of fibres displaying somatostatin-like immunoreactivity. The present study demonstrates the two compartments have distinct connections, using a method that concurrently reveals striatal input, output and neurochemical systems in the rat. Patches receive inputs from the prelimbic cortex (a medial frontal cortical area with direct 'limbic' inputs from the amygdala and hippocampus); they also project to the substantia nigra pars compacta (the source of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system). Conversely, the matrix receives inputs from sensory and motor cortical areas; here it is shown to project to the substantia nigra pars reticulata (the source of the non-dopaminergic nigrothalamic and nigrotectal system). Also, an intrinsic striatal somatostatin-immunoreactive system is described that may provide a link between the two compartments. The striatal patch and matrix compartments thus appear to be functionally distinct and interactive parallel input-output processing channels.
The entorhinal cortex provides the major cortical input to the hippocampus, and both structures have been implicated in memory processes. The dynamics of neuronal circuits in the entorhinal-hippocampal system were studied in slices by optical imaging with high spatial and temporal resolution. Reverberation of neural activity was detected in the entorhinal cortex and was more prominent when the inhibition due to gamma-aminobutyric acid was slightly suppressed. Neural activity was transferred in a frequency-dependent way from the entorhinal cortex to the hippocampus. The entorhinal neuronal circuit could contribute to memory processes by holding information and selectively gating the entry of information into the hippocampus.
Following the discovery of the growth hormone release-inhibiting factor somatostatin from extracts of ovine hypothalamus, an N-terminally extended somatostatin of 28 amino acids has been identified in mammalian tissue. The original peptide, somatostatin-14 (SS14), corresponds to the C-terminus of somatostatin-28 (SS28). Both SS28 and SS14 have biological activity, occur in several rat brain regions, are present in cell bodies and nerve terminals and can be released in vitro upon depolarization in a calcium-dependent manner. Further, high-affinity binding sites were described for SS14, which also bind SS28 (refs 20-23). Recently, a dodecapeptide which corresponds to the N-terminus of somatostatin-28, somatostatin-28(1-12), has been characterized in rat hypothalamus. Radioimmunological and immunohistochemical studies have indicated the presence of SS28(1-12)-like immunoreactivity in several cortical and subcortical regions of the rat brain. This peptide was found to be unevenly distributed with the highest concentration in the hypothalamus, and preferentially localized to dendritic and axonal processes and terminals. These observations suggest that SS28(1-12) may be a neurotransmitter. In this study, we describe a calcium-dependent release of a SS28(1-12)-like peptide from hypothalamic slices in vitro. This finding supports a neurotransmitter function for this peptide.
The effects of diffuse cerebral dysfunction on oculomotor reaction time were assessed in patients with dementia of presumed Alzheimer's etiology and in normal age-matched control subjects. Patients were classified into mild, moderate, and severe groups on the basis of independent neurological, neuropsychological, and neuroradiological ratings for disease severity. Saccadic latencies to targets appearing in parafoveal and near peripheral vision showed significant increases from the normal controls to dementia groups, with each severity subdivision clearly differentiated from the others in terms of mean oculomotor reaction time. These data offer strong evidence for a direct relationship between degree of cortical structural integrity and simple oculomotor reaction time and suggest a higher cortical regulatory role in sensory-motor integration.
Substance P produces analgesia when administered to mice in very small doses by the intraventricular route (1.25 to 5 nanograms per mouse). The analgesic effect can be blocked by naloxone. At higher doses (greater than 50 nanograms per mouse), this activity is lost. At these higher doses, however, substance P produced hyperalgesia when combined with naloxone and analgesia when combined with baclofen [beta-(4-chlorophenyl)-gamma-aminobutyric acid]. Substance P may have dual actions in brain, releasing endorphins at very low doses and directly exciting neuronal activity in nociceptive pathways at higher doses.
An autoradiographic study of the subcortical projections of the rat hippocampal formation shows that the efferent fibers of the hippocampus proper (fields CA1-4 OF Ammon's horn) do not project to the hypothalamus but are confined to the precommissural fornix, ending primarily in the septum. The fibers that are distributed by way of the fornix system to the hypothalamus (principally the arcuate-ventromedial region and the mammillary nuclei) and the anterior thalamus arise from the subicular region of the cerebral cortex (that is, the subiculum, presubiculum, and parasubiculum).
During the development of the visual system of higher mammals, axons from the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) become segregated into eye-specific patches (the ocular dominance columns) within their target, layer 4 of the primary visual cortex. This occurs as a consequence of activity-dependent synaptic competition between axons representing the two eyes. The possibility that this competition could be mediated through neurotrophin-receptor interactions was tested. Infusion of neurotrophin-4/5 (NT-4/5) or brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) into cat primary visual cortex inhibited column formation within the immediate vicinity of the infusion site but not elsewhere in the visual cortex. Infusion of nerve growth factor, neurotrophin 3 (NT-3), or vehicle solution did not affect column formation. These observations implicate TrkB, the common receptor for BDNF and NT-4/5, in the segregation of LGN axons into ocular dominance columns in layer 4. Moreover, they suggest that in addition to their better known roles in the prevention of cell death, neurotrophins may also mediate the activity-dependent control of axonal branching during development of the central nervous system.
Visual information from the retina is transmitted to the cerebral cortex by way of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) in the thalamus. In primates, most of the retinal ganglion cells that project to the LGN belong to one of two classes, P and M, whose axons terminate in the parvocellular or magnocellular subdivisions of the LGN. These cell classes give rise to two channels that have been distinguished anatomically, physiologically and behaviourally. The visual cortex also can be subdivided into two pathways, one specialized for motion processing and the other for colour and form information. Several lines of indirect evidence have suggested a close correspondence between the subcortical and cortical pathways, such that the M channel provides input to the motion pathway and the P channel drives the colour/form pathway. This hypothesis was tested directly by selectively inactivating either the magnocellular or parvocellular subdivision of the LGN and recording the effects on visual responses in the cortex. We have previously reported that, in accordance with the hypothesis, responses in the motion pathway in the cortex depend primarily on magnocellular LGN. We now report that in the colour/form pathway, visual responses depend on both P and M input. These results argue against a simple correspondence between the subcortical and cortical pathways.
Insulin and related peptides are key hormonal integrators of growth and metabolism in vertebrates. There is little biochemical evidence for insulin-related peptides in invertebrates, apart from insects for which definitive structural information on these peptides (prothoracicotropic hormone, PTTH) has recently been obtained. We report here the first complete complementary DNA-derived primary structure of a preproinsulin-related protein from identified neurons in an invertebrate, the mollusc Lymnaea stagnalis. We have demonstrated by in situ hybridization that transcription of the gene for this molluscan insulin-related peptide (MIP) occurs in the cerebral light-green cells, giant neuroendocrine cells involved in the control of growth, as well as in a pair of neuroendocrine cells called the canopy cells. The insulin-related peptide precursor has the same overall structure as its vertebrate counterparts. The discovery of insulin-related peptides in invertebrates substantiates the evidence for a widespread and early evolutionary origin of the insulin superfamily.
At early stages of the mammalian visual cortex, neurons with similar stimulus selectivities are vertically arrayed through the thickness of the cortical sheet and clustered in patches or bands across the surface. This organization, referred to as a 'column', has been found with respect to one-dimensional stimulus parameters such as orientation of stimulus contours, eye dominance of visual inputs, and direction of stimulus motion. It is unclear, however, whether information with extremely high dimensions, such as visual shape, is organized in a similar columnar fashion or in a different manner in the brain. Here we report that the anterior inferotemporal area of the monkey cortex, the final station of the visual cortical stream crucial for object recognition, consists of columns, each containing cells responsive to similar visual features of objects.
Modern neuroimaging techniques use signals originating from microcirculation to map brain function. In this study, activity-dependent changes in oxyhemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin, and light scattering were characterized by an imaging spectroscopy approach that offers high spatial, temporal, and spectral resolution. Sensory stimulation of cortical columns initiates tissue hypoxia and vascular responses that occur within the first 3 seconds and are highly localized to individual cortical columns. However, the later phase of the vascular response is less localized, spreading over distances of 3 to 5 millimeters.
The function of voltage-gated sodium channels that are responsible for action potential generation in mammalian brain neurons is modulated by phosphorylation by adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (cA-PK) and by protein kinase C (PKC). Reduction of peak sodium currents by cA-PK in intact cells required concurrent activation of PKC and was prevented by blocking phosphorylation of serine 1506, a site in the inactivation gate of the channel that is phosphorylated by PKC but not by cA-PK. Replacement of serine 1506 with negatively charged amino acids mimicked the effect of phosphorylation. Conversion of the consensus sequence surrounding serine 1506 to one more favorable for cA-PK enhanced modulation of sodium currents by cA-PK. Convergent modulation of sodium channels required phosphorylation of serine 1506 by PKC accompanied by phosphorylation of additional sites by cA-PK. This regulatory mechanism may serve to integrate neuronal signals mediated through these parallel signaling pathways.
The dendrites of neurons in the mammalian central nervous system have been considered as electrically passive structures which funnel synaptic potentials to the soma and axon initial segment, the site of action potential initiation. More recent studies, however, have shown that the dendrites of many neurons are not passive, but contain active conductances. The role of these dendritic voltage-activated channels in the initiation of action potentials in neurons is largely unknown. To assess this directly, patch-clamp recordings were made from the dendrites of neocortical pyramidal cells in brain slices. Voltage-activated sodium currents were observed in dendritic outside-out patches, while action potentials could be evoked by depolarizing current pulses or by synaptic stimulation during dendritic whole-cell recordings. To determine the site of initiation of these action potentials, simultaneous whole-cell recordings were made from the soma and the apical dendrite or axon of the same cell. These experiments showed that action potentials are initiated first in the axon and then actively propagate back into the dendritic tree.
Humans and cats can localize a sound source accurately if its spectrum is fairly broad and flat, as is typical of most natural sounds. However, if sounds are filtered to reduce the width of the spectrum, they result in illusions of sources that are very different from the actual locations, particularly in the up/down and front/back dimensions. Such illusions reveal that the auditory system relies on specific characteristics of sound spectra to obtain cues for localization. In the auditory cortex of cats, temporal firing patterns of neurons can signal the locations of broad-band sounds. Here we show that such spike patterns systematically mislocalize sounds that have been passed through a narrow-band filter. Both correct and incorrect locations signalled by neurons can be predicted quantitatively by a model of spectral processing that also predicts correct and incorrect localization judgements by human listeners. Similar cortical mechanisms, if present in humans, could underlie human auditory spatial perception.
Incoming sensory information is often ambiguous, and the brain has to make decisions during perception. "Predictive coding" proposes that the brain resolves perceptual ambiguity by anticipating the forthcoming sensory environment, generating a template against which to match observed sensory evidence. We observed a neural representation of predicted perception in the medial frontal cortex, while human subjects decided whether visual objects were faces or not. Moreover, perceptual decisions about faces were associated with an increase in top-down connectivity from the frontal cortex to face-sensitive visual areas, consistent with the matching of predicted and observed evidence for the presence of faces.
Mice experiencing repeated aggression develop a long-lasting aversion to social contact, which can be normalized by chronic, but not acute, administration of antidepressant. Using viral-mediated, mesolimbic dopamine pathway-specific knockdown of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), we showed that BDNF is required for the development of this experience-dependent social aversion. Gene profiling in the nucleus accumbens indicates that local knockdown of BDNF obliterates most of the effects of repeated aggression on gene expression within this circuit, with similar effects being produced by chronic treatment with antidepressant. These results establish an essential role for BDNF in mediating long-term neural and behavioral plasticity in response to aversive social experiences.
In response to visual stimulation, a subset of neurons in the striate and prestriate cortex displays synchronous rhythmic firing in the gamma frequency band (20 to 70 hertz). This finding has raised two fundamental questions: What is the functional significance of synchronous gamma-band activity and how is it generated? This report addresses the second of these two questions. By means of intracellular recording and staining of single cells in the cat striate cortex in vivo, a biophysically distinct class of pyramidal neuron termed "chattering cells" is described. These neurons are located in the superficial layers of the cortex, intrinsically generate 20- to 70-hertz repetitive burst firing in response to suprathreshold depolarizing current injection, and exhibit pronounced oscillations in membrane potential during visual stimulation that are largely absent during periods of spontaneous activity. These properties suggest that chattering cells may make a substantial intracortical contribution to the generation of synchronous cortical oscillations and thus participate in the recruitment of large populations of cells into synchronously firing assemblies.
Whether neuropsychological impairment occurs in children with increased lead absorption who are without clinical symptoms is of current concern. This tissue, which involves potentially large numbers of children, remains unresolved, in part because of the lack of sensitive biochemical indicators of the effects of lead on the nervous system. In experimental subclinical lead poisoning in mice, significant increases in homovanillic acid and vanillylmandelic acid have been found in brain and urine. In children with increased lead absorption, these acids were meaured in urine collected quantitatively under controlled dietary conditions; preliminary results show fivefold increases in the daily output of these compounds. These data suggest that the altered catecholamine metabolism also occurs in children.
Failure of normal brain development leads to mental retardation or autism in about 3% of children. Many genes integral to pathways by which synaptic modification and the remodelling of neuronal networks mediate cognitive and social development have been identified, usually through loss of function. Evidence is accumulating, however, that either loss or gain of molecular functions can be deleterious to the nervous system. Copy-number variation, regulation of gene expression by non-coding RNAs and epigenetic changes are all mechanisms by which altered gene dosage can cause the failure of neuronal homeostasis.
Memories for habits and skills ("implicit or procedural memory") and memories for facts ("explicit or episodic memory") are built up in different brain systems and are vulnerable to different neurodegenerative disorders in humans. So that the striatum-based mechanisms underlying habit formation could be studied, chronic recordings from ensembles of striatal neurons were made with multiple tetrodes as rats learned a T-maze procedural task. Large and widely distributed changes in the neuronal activity patterns occurred in the sensorimotor striatum during behavioral acquisition, culminating in task-related activity emphasizing the beginning and end of the automatized procedure. The new ensemble patterns remained stable during weeks of subsequent performance of the same task. These results suggest that the encoding of action in the sensorimotor striatum undergoes dynamic reorganization as habit learning proceeds.
The activity of monoamine oxidase was estimated in the hypothalamus, amygdala, and frontal cortex of adult female rats during the estrous cycle. Enzymatic activity in all three areas of brain was at its lowest during the diestrus phase of the estrous cycle and progressively increased to its highest during estrus. Throughout the estrous cycle the greatest activity of monoamine oxidase was found in the hypothalamus, as compared with the other brain areas. The significance of the activity is discussed.
The importance of the dopaminergic system in brain function has been emphasized by its association with neurological and psychiatric disorders such as Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. On the basis of their biochemical and pharmacological characteristics, dopamine receptors are classified into D1 and D2 subtypes. As the most abundant dopamine receptor in the central nervous system, D1 receptors seem to mediate some behavioural responses, modulate activity of D2 dopamine receptors, and regulate neuron growth and differentiation. The D dopamine receptor has been cloned by low-stringency screening. We report here the cloning of human and rat D1 dopamine receptors by applying an approach based on the polymerase chain reaction. The cloned human D1 dopamine receptor has been characterized on the basis of four criteria: the deduced amino-acid sequence, which reveals that it is a G protein-coupled receptor; the tissue distribution of its messenger RNA, which is compatible with that of the D1 dopamine receptor; its pharmacological profile when transfected into COS-7 cells; and its ability to stimulate the accumulation of cyclic AMP in human 293 cells.
In rats, an environmental manipulation occurring early in life resulted in changes in the adrenocortical axis that persisted throughout the entire life of the animals and attenuated certain deficits associated with aging. Rats handled during infancy had a permanent increase in concentrations of receptors for glucocorticoids in the hippocampus, a critical region in the negative-feedback inhibition of adrenocortical activity. Increased receptor concentrations led to greater hippocampal sensitivity to glucocorticoids and enhanced negative-feedback efficacy in the handled rats. Thus, at all ages tested, rats that were not handled secreted more glucocorticoids in response to stress than did handled rats. At later ages, nonhandled rats also showed elevated basal glucocorticoid levels, with the result that there was a greater cumulative exposure to glucocorticoids in nonhandled rats. Increased exposure to adrenal glucocorticoids can accelerate hippocampal neuron loss and cognitive impairments in aging. Hippocampal cell loss and pronounced spatial memory deficits emerged with age in the nonhandled rats, but were almost absent in the handled rats. Previous work showed that glucocorticoid hypersecretion, hippocampal neuron death, and cognitive impairments form a complex degenerative cascade of aging in the rat. The present study shows that a subtle manipulation early in life can retard the emergence of this cascade.
Animal behavior is synchronized to the 24-hour light:dark (LD) cycle by regulatory programs that produce circadian fluctuations in gene expression throughout the body. In mammals, the transcription factor CLOCK controls circadian oscillation in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the brain; its paralog, neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2), performs a similar function in other forebrain sites. To investigate the role of NPAS2 in behavioral manifestations of circadian rhythm, we studied locomotor activity, sleep patterns, and adaptability to both light- and restricted food-driven entrainment in NPAS2-deficient mice. Our results indicate that NPAS2 plays a substantive role in maintaining circadian behaviors in normal LD and feeding conditions and that NPAS2 is critical for adaptability to food restriction.
Neurons in many regions of the mammalian nervous system generate action potentials in two distinct modes: rhythmic oscillations in which spikes cluster together in a cyclical manner, and single spike firing in which action potentials occur relatively independently of one another. Which mode of action potential generation a neuron displays often varies with the behavioural state of the animal. For example, the shift from slow-wave sleep to waking and attentiveness is associated with a change in thalamic neurons from rhythmic burst firing to repetitive single spike activity, and a greatly increased responsiveness to excitatory synaptic inputs. This marked change in firing pattern and excitability is controlled in part by ascending noradrenergic and serotonergic inputs from the brainstem, although the cellular mechanisms of this effect have remained largely unknown. Here we report that noradrenaline and serotonin enhance a mixed Na+/K+ current which is activated by hyperpolarization (Ih) and that this enhancement may be mediated by increases in intracellular concentration of cyclic AMP. This novel action of noradrenaline and serotonin reduces the ability of thalamic neurons to generate rhythmic burst firing and promotes a state of excitability that is conducive to the thalamocortical synaptic processing associated with cognition.
There is now evidence that the immune system, during times of infectious challenge, can stimulate the secretion of glucocorticoids, the adrenal steroids that mediate important aspects of the response to stress. Specifically, secretion of interleukin-1 (IL-1), a monocyte lymphokine secreted after infection, appears at least in part responsible for this effect. Glucocorticoids are secreted in response to a neuroendocrine cascade involving, first, the brain, then the pituitary, and finally the adrenal gland. In this report, human IL-1 is shown to activate the adrenocortical axis at the level of the brain, stimulating the release of the controlling hormone corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) from the hypothalamus. Infusion of IL-1 induced a significant secretion of CRF into the circulation exiting the hypothalamus, whereas immunoneutralization of CRF blocked the stimulatory effect of IL-1 on glucocorticoid secretion. IL-1 appeared to have no acute direct stimulatory effects on the pituitary or adrenal components of this system. Furthermore, IL-1 did not cause a nonspecific release of other hypothalamic hormones. Thus, the lymphokine acts in a specific manner to activate the adrenocortical axis at the level of the brain; this effect appears to be unrelated to the known pyrogenic effects of IL-1 within the hypothalamus.
Single-cell recordings were taken with electrodes permanently implanted in unrestrained rats during normal sleep, paradoxical sleep, quiet awake, and highly motivated awake periods. In most areas, neuronal activity increased when normal sleep changed to paradoxical sleep. The hypothalamus showed a significantly greater increase than most other areas. The hippocampus differed strikingly from all other areas by showing a decrement in all cases. The average firing rates in paradoxical sleep exceeded those of the quiet awake state as well as those of normal sleep. Comparison of paradoxical sleep with motivated behavior illustrated that changes in brain activity during paradoxical sleep were related to anatomically specifiable groupings, but no such differentiation appeared in motivated behavior.
The eye functions effectively over an enormous range of ambient illumination, because retinal sensitivity can be adapted to prevailing light levels. Higher order neurones in the visual pathway are presumably more concerned with relative changes in illumination, that is, contrast, because a great deal of information concerning absolute light level is processed at the retinal level. It would therefore be of considerable functional value if cells in the visual cortex could adapt their response levels to a steady-state ambient contrast, in a manner analogous to the sensitivity control mechanism of the retina. We have examined here the idea that adaptation of neurones in the visual cortex to ambient contrast is similar to adaptation in the retina to ambient illumination. The experiments were performed by measuring contrast response functions (response amplitude as a function of contrast) of striate neurones, while systematically adapting them to different contrast levels. Our results show that, for the majority of cortical neurones, response-contrast curves are laterally shifted along a log-contrast axis so that the effective domains of neurones are adjusted to match prevailing contrast levels. This contrast gain control mechanism, which was not observed for lateral geniculate (LGN) fibres, must be of prime importance to visual function.
Gastrin-cholecystokinin (CCK)-like immunoreactivity has been visualized by immunohistochemistry in the vasopressin-oxytocin neurosecretory system comprising the posterior lobe of the pituitary, the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus. This CCK-like substance has not been chemically identified in the rat, but has been reported to be gastrin 17 in the swine pituitary. We report here that this CCK-like immunoreactive substance co-chromatographs with CCK8 sulphate on Sephadex G-50 and two HPLC chromatographic systems. No gastrin 17 was detected in rat pituitary or brain. We further report that about 60% of the CCK in posterior lobe originates in cell bodies in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. The CCK content of posterior pituitary is dramatically decreased by physiological perturbations which stimulate vasopressin or oxytocin release. We propose that CCK may either be co-secreted with vasopressin and oxytocin to act on peripheral targets or may be involved in the regulation of vasopressin or oxytocin neurosecretion.
Complex problem-solving and planning involve the most anterior part of the frontal lobes including the fronto-polar prefrontal cortex (FPPC), which is especially well developed in humans compared with other primates. The specific role of this region in human cognition, however, is poorly understood. Here we show, using functional magnetic resonance imaging, that bilateral regions in the FPPC alone are selectively activated when subjects have to keep in mind a main goal while performing concurrent (sub)goals. Neither keeping in mind a goal over time (working memory) nor successively allocating attentional resources between alternative goals (dual-task performance) could by themselves activate these regions. Our results indicate that the FPPC selectively mediates the human ability to hold in mind goals while exploring and processing secondary goals, a process generally required in planning and reasoning.
The neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine produced a permanent loss of endogenous norepinephrine and of 3H-labeled norepinephrine uptake sites in the hippocampus within 5 days. These losses were initially accompanied by parallel decreases in tyrosine hydroxylase activity and synaptosomal norepinephrine synthesis. Within 21 days, however, hippocampal tyrosine hydroxylase activity and norepinephrine synthesis rate increased three- to fivefold. These data suggest a novel form of plasticity in brain-damaged animals characterized by an increase in the capacity for transmitter biosynthesis in residual neurons.
Olfactory signals are transduced by a large family of odorant receptor proteins, each of which corresponds to a unique glomerulus in the first olfactory relay of the brain. Crosstalk between glomeruli has been proposed to be important in olfactory processing, but it is not clear how these interactions shape the odour responses of second-order neurons. In the Drosophila antennal lobe (a region analogous to the vertebrate olfactory bulb), we selectively removed most interglomerular input to genetically identified second-order olfactory neurons. Here we show that this broadens the odour tuning of these neurons, implying that interglomerular inhibition dominates over interglomerular excitation. The strength of this inhibitory signal scales with total feedforward input to the entire antennal lobe, and has similar tuning in different glomeruli. A substantial portion of this interglomerular inhibition acts at a presynaptic locus, and our results imply that this is mediated by both ionotropic and metabotropic receptors on the same nerve terminal.
Dopamine modulates movement, cognition, and emotion through activation of dopamine G protein-coupled receptors in the brain. The crystal structure of the human dopamine D3 receptor (D3R) in complex with the small molecule D2R/D3R-specific antagonist eticlopride reveals important features of the ligand binding pocket and extracellular loops. On the intracellular side of the receptor, a locked conformation of the ionic lock and two distinctly different conformations of intracellular loop 2 are observed. Docking of R-22, a D3R-selective antagonist, reveals an extracellular extension of the eticlopride binding site that comprises a second binding pocket for the aryl amide of R-22, which differs between the highly homologous D2R and D3R. This difference provides direction to the design of D3R-selective agents for treating drug abuse and other neuropsychiatric indications.
The ability to grow neurons in culture has made possible great strides in the field of neuroscience. Advances in optical microscopy, together with techniques involving the retroviral transformation of neuronal precursors and cell fusion, will pave the way for further developments.
Bilateral ablation of dorsolateral frontal cortex in the newborn animal failed to produce the frontal lobe syndrome typical of the adolescent and adult stages. The crucial tests (delayed response, string tests, and discrimination learning) were performed 3 to 4 months postoperatively. At this time, no significant differences between normal animals and animals with prefrontal lesions were found.
During mammalian brain development, immature neurons migrate radially from the neuroectoderm to defined locations, giving rise to characteristic cell layers. Here we show that targeted disruption of the mouse disabled1 (mdab1) gene disturbs neuronal layering in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum. The gene encodes a cytoplasmic protein, mDab1 p80, which is expressed and tyrosine-phosphorylated in the developing nervous system. It is likely to be an adaptor protein, docking to others through its phosphotyrosine residues and protein-interacting domain. The mdab1 mutant phenotype is very similar to that of the reeler mouse. The product of the reeler gene, Reelin, is a secreted protein that has been proposed to act as an extracellular signpost for migrating neurons. Because mDab1 is expressed in wild-type cortical neurons, and Reelin expression is normal in mdab1 mutants, mDab1 may be part of a Reelin-regulated or parallel pathway that controls the final positioning of neurons.
Naturally occurring peptides with biological actions have in most cases been detected by observing their biological activities in crude extracts and their isolation has been followed using bioassays. As a complement to the classical biological detection systems, we have proposed a chemical detection system based on fragmentation of peptides in tissue extracts followed by identification of certain of these peptide fragments having distinct chemical features. One such chemical feature is the C-terminal amide structure which is characteristic of many biologically active peptides. We have devised a chemical assay method for peptides having such a structure and have found several previously unknown peptide amides in procine upper small intestinal tissues. We report here the isolation and characterization of two of them, designated PHI and PYY. PHI is related to secretin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP, glucagon and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP); PYY is related to the pancreatic polypeptide and to neurotensin. Both peptides exhibit biological activities and appear to be present not only in the intestine but also in brain.
Digital circuits such as the flip-flop use feedback to achieve multistability and nonlinearity to restore signals to logical levels, for example 0 and 1. Analogue feedback circuits are generally designed to operate linearly, so that signals are over a range, and the response is unique. By contrast, the response of cortical circuits to sensory stimulation can be both multistable and graded. We propose that the neocortex combines digital selection of an active set of neurons with analogue response by dynamically varying the positive feedback inherent in its recurrent connections. Strong positive feedback causes differential instabilities that drive the selection of a set of active neurons under the constraints embedded in the synaptic weights. Once selected, the active neurons generate weaker, stable feedback that provides analogue amplification of the input. Here we present our model of cortical processing as an electronic circuit that emulates this hybrid operation, and so is able to perform computations that are similar to stimulus selection, gain modulation and spatiotemporal pattern generation in the neocortex.
Many potential treatments for Alzheimer's disease target amyloid-beta peptides (Abeta), which are widely presumed to cause the disease. The microtubule-associated protein tau is also involved in the disease, but it is unclear whether treatments aimed at tau could block Abeta-induced cognitive impairments. Here, we found that reducing endogenous tau levels prevented behavioral deficits in transgenic mice expressing human amyloid precursor protein, without altering their high Abeta levels. Tau reduction also protected both transgenic and nontransgenic mice against excitotoxicity. Thus, tau reduction can block Abeta- and excitotoxin-induced neuronal dysfunction and may represent an effective strategy for treating Alzheimer's disease and related conditions.
Preparatory changes in neural activity before the execution of a movement have been documented in tasks that involve an instructed delay period (an interval between a transient instruction cue and a subsequently triggered movement). Such preparatory activity occurs in many motor centres in the brain, including the primary motor cortex, premotor cortex, supplementary motor area and basal ganglia. Activity during the instructed delay period reflects movement planning, as it correlates with parameters of the cue and the subsequent movement (such as direction and extent), although it occurs well before muscle activity. How such delay-period activity shapes the ensuing motor action remains unknown. Here we show that spinal interneurons also exhibit early pre-movement delay activity that often differs from their responses during the subsequent muscle activity. This delay activity resembles the set-related activity found in various supraspinal areas, indicating that movement preparation may occur simultaneously over widely distributed regions, including spinal levels. Our results also suggest that two processes occur in the spinal circuitry during this delay period: the motor network is primed with rate changes in the same direction as subsequent movement-related activity; and a superimposed global inhibition suppresses the expression of this activity in muscles.
The deleterious effects of ethanol on the developing human brain are poorly understood. Here it is reported that ethanol, acting by a dual mechanism [blockade of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors and excessive activation of GABA(A) receptors], triggers widespread apoptotic neurodegeneration in the developing rat forebrain. Vulnerability coincides with the period of synaptogenesis, which in humans extends from the sixth month of gestation to several years after birth. During this period, transient ethanol exposure can delete millions of neurons from the developing brain. This can explain the reduced brain mass and neurobehavioral disturbances associated with human fetal alcohol syndrome.
Positron emission tomography (PET) can be used to map brain regions that are active when a visual object (for example, a hand) is discriminated from its mirror form. Chronometric studies suggest that viewers 'solve' this visual shape task by mentally modelling it as a reaching task, implicitly moving their left hand into the orientation of any left-hand stimulus (and conversely for a right-hand stimulus). Here we describe an experiment in which visual and somatic processing are dissociated by presenting right hands to the left visual field and vice versa. Frontal (motor), parietal (somatosensory) and cerebellar (sensorimotor) regions similar to those activated by actual and imagined movement are strongly activated, whereas primary somatosensory and motor cortices are not. We conclude that mental imagery is realized at intermediate-to-high order, modality-specific cortical systems, but does not require primary cortex and is not constrained to the perceptual systems of the presented stimuli.
It has been suggested that arginine vasopressin (AVP) is involved in the retention of learned responses, in addition to its classical physiological functions of water retention and modulation of blood pressure. AVP administered subcutaneously (s.c.), intraventricularly or intracerebrally can prolong extinction of active avoidance behaviour and can enhance retention in inhibitory (passive) avoidance. These effects have been interpreted as a direct action of AVP on the central nervous system to facilitate memory consolidation. AVP also has facilitatory effects on cognitive function in humans, and marked deficits in AVP function have been associated with certain types of psychopathology. Alternative hypotheses for the behavioural actions of AVP have involved motivational constructs such as arousal, and our recent work has focused on the role of arousal resulting from the activation of peripheral visceral signals in the behavioural effects of peripherally administered AVP. The development of a specific antagonist for AVP, 1-deaminopenicillamine-2-O-methyl tyrosine arginine vasopressin (dPTyr(Me)AVP), which can reverse the behavioural effects of exogenously administered AVP, has provided a powerful tool for examining the role of AVP in the behavioural responses produced by physiological challenges known to release vasopressin. However, the relationship between the behavioural effects of exogenously administered AVP and the behavioural function of endogenously released AVP has not been evaluated. We report here that a potent peripheral osmotic stimulus, the intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of hypertonic saline, at doses known to release AVP both centrally and peripherally, will produce behavioural effects similar to those of exogenously administered AVP. Furthermore, the prolongation of active avoidance induced by this osmotic stimulus is reversed by pretreatment with dPTyr(Me)AVP, suggesting that endogenously released AVP may also produce behavioural effects.
One hundred years ago a small group of psychiatrists described the abnormal protein deposits in the brain that define the most common neurodegenerative diseases. Over the past 25 years, it has become clear that the proteins forming the deposits are central to the disease process. Amyloid-beta and tau make up the plaques and tangles of Alzheimer's disease, where these normally soluble proteins assemble into amyloid-like filaments. Tau inclusions are also found in a number of related disorders. Genetic studies have shown that dysfunction of amyloid-beta or tau is sufficient to cause dementia. The ongoing molecular dissection of the neurodegenerative pathways is expected to lead to a true understanding of disease pathogenesis.
The brain's visual cortex processes information concerning form, pattern, and motion within functional maps that reflect the layout of neuronal circuits. We analyzed functional maps of orientation preference in the ferret, tree shrew, and galago--three species separated since the basal radiation of placental mammals more than 65 million years ago--and found a common organizing principle. A symmetry-based class of models for the self-organization of cortical networks predicts all essential features of the layout of these neuronal circuits, but only if suppressive long-range interactions dominate development. We show mathematically that orientation-selective long-range connectivity can mediate the required interactions. Our results suggest that self-organization has canalized the evolution of the neuronal circuitry underlying orientation preference maps into a single common design.
The intraventricular administration of 6-hydroxydopamine, a procedure which destroys noradrenergic nerve terminals in the central nervous system, caused an increase in the density of beta-adrenergic receptors in rat cerebral cortex, without affecting their affinity for isoproterenol. The results suggest that changes in the density of adrenergic receptors are involved in 6-hydroxydopamine-induced supersensitivity at central noradrenergic synapses.
Excitatory amino-acid carrier 1 (EAAC1) is a high-affinity Na+-dependent L-glutamate/D,L-aspartate cell-membrane transport protein. It is expressed in brain as well as several non-nervous tissues. In brain, EAAC1 is the primary neuronal glutamate transporter. It has a polarized distribution in cells and mainly functions perisynaptically to transport glutamate from the extracellular environment. In the kidney it is involved in renal acidic amino-acid re-absorption and amino-acid metabolism. Here we describe the identification and characterization of an EAAC1-associated protein, GTRAP3-18. Like EAAC1, GTRAP3-18 is expressed in numerous tissues. It localizes to the cell membrane and cytoplasm, and specifically interacts with carboxy-terminal intracellular domain of EAAC1. Increasing the expression of GTRAP3-18 in cells reduces EAAC1-mediated glutamate transport by lowering substrate affinity. The expression of GTRAP3-18 can be upregulated by retinoic acid, which results in a specific reduction of EAAC1-mediated glutamate transport. These studies show that glutamate transport proteins can be regulated potently and that GTRAP can modulate the transport functions ascribed to EAAC1. GTRAP3-18 may be important in regulating the metabolic function of EAAC1.
Synaptic transmission is mediated by calcium entry through voltage-dependent calcium channels in presynaptic nerve terminals. Various types of calcium channel have been characterized in neuronal somata, but it is not clear which subtypes induce transmitter release at central synapses. The N-type Ca2+ channel blocker omega-conotoxin GVIA (omega-CgTx) suppresses the excitatory postsynaptic responses only partially, whereas potassium-induced release of glutamate from brain synaptosomes can be blocked by omega-Aga-VIA (ref. 9), a blocker of P-type calcium channels and possibly of other types of calcium channels. Here we test type-specific calcium-channel blockers on postsynaptic currents recorded from neurons in thin slices of rat central nervous system. Inhibitory postsynaptic currents in cerebellar and spinal neurons and excitatory postsynaptic currents in hippocampal neurons are markedly suppressed by omega-Aga-IVA and reduced to a lesser extent by omega-CgTx. The L-type calcium channel blocker nicardipine had no effect. Our results indicate that at least two types of calcium channel mediate synaptic transmission in the mammalian central nervous system.
Mouse models are useful for studying genes involved in behavior, but whether they are relevant to human behavior is unclear. Here, we identified parallel phenotypes in mice and humans resulting from a common single-nucleotide polymorphism in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene, which is involved in anxiety-related behavior. An inbred genetic knock-in mouse strain expressing the variant BDNF recapitulated the phenotypic effects of the human polymorphism. Both were impaired in extinguishing a conditioned fear response, which was paralleled by atypical frontoamygdala activity in humans. Thus, this variant BDNF allele may play a role in anxiety disorders showing impaired learning of cues that signal safety versus threat and in the efficacy of treatments that rely on extinction mechanisms, such as exposure therapy.
It has been suggested that placebo analgesia involves both higher order cognitive networks and endogenous opioid systems. The rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC) and the brainstem are implicated in opioid analgesia, suggesting a similar role for these structures in placebo analgesia. Using positron emission tomography, we confirmed that both opioid and placebo analgesia are associated with increased activity in the rACC. We also observed a covariation between the activity in the rACC and the brainstem during both opioid and placebo analgesia, but not during the pain-only condition. These findings indicate a related neural mechanism in placebo and opioid analgesia.
At most synapses, chemical signalling is terminated by a rapid reaccumulation of neurotransmitter into presynaptic terminals. Uptake systems for the biogenic amines are the initial site of action for therapeutic antidepressants and drugs such as cocaine and the amphetamines. We have isolated a complementary DNA clone encoding a human noradrenaline transporter. The cDNA sequence predicts a protein of 617 amino acids, with 12-13 highly hydrophobic regions compatible with membrane-spanning domains. Expression of the cDNA clone in transfected HeLa cells indicates that noradrenaline transport activity is sodium-dependent and sensitive to selective noradrenaline transport inhibitors. Transporter RNA is localized to the brainstem and the adrenal gland. The predicted protein sequence demonstrates significant amino-acid identity with the Na+/gamma-aminobutyric acid transporter, thus identifying a new gene family for neurotransmitter transporter proteins. Analysis of its structure and function may lead to structure-based drug design for the treatment of human depression and could help determine whether transporter abnormalities underlie affective disorders.
Since the enkephalins were first isolated a number of opioid peptides have been discovered, including a heptapeptide with the sequence Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met-Arg-Phe (Met-enkephalin-Arg6-Phe7). The heptapeptide was first isolated from chromaffin granules in bovine adrenal medulla, but using immunochemical techniques it has now been identified in human, rat and bovine brains. The C-terminal tetrapeptide of this molecule (Phe-Met-Arg-Phe) occurs in amidated form as the molluscan peptide FMRFamide. Antisera raised against FMRFamide have revealed immunoreactive material in the brains of several vertebrate species, including the rat where it occurs in nerve cell bodies and terminals. I now report that ionophoretically applied FMRFamide has an excitatory effect on rat medullary neurones which is unaffected by the opiate antagonist naloxone. In contrast, Met-enkephalin-Arg6-Phe7 and leucine-enkephalin (Leu-enkephalin) have predominantly depressant effects, which suggests that FMRFamide acts at a separate receptor.
A critical step in self-motion perception and spatial awareness is the integration of motion cues from multiple sensory organs that individually do not provide an accurate representation of the physical world. One of the best-studied sensory ambiguities is found in visual processing, and arises because of the inherent uncertainty in detecting the motion direction of an untextured contour moving within a small aperture. A similar sensory ambiguity arises in identifying the actual motion associated with linear accelerations sensed by the otolith organs in the inner ear. These internal linear accelerometers respond identically during translational motion (for example, running forward) and gravitational accelerations experienced as we reorient the head relative to gravity (that is, head tilt). Using new stimulus combinations, we identify here cerebellar and brainstem motion-sensitive neurons that compute a solution to the inertial motion detection problem. We show that the firing rates of these populations of neurons reflect the computations necessary to construct an internal model representation of the physical equations of motion.
Plasticity of the developing visual system has been regarded as the best model for changes of neuronal connections under the influence of the environment. N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors are crucial for experience-dependent synaptic modifications that occur in the developing visual cortex. NMDA-mediated excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) in layer IV neurons of the visual cortex lasted longer in young rats than in adult rats, and the duration of the EPSCs became progressively shorter, in parallel with the developmental reduction in synaptic plasticity. This decrease in NMDA receptor-mediated EPSC duration is delayed when the animals are reared in the dark, a condition that prolongs developmental plasticity, and is prevented by treatment with tetrodotoxin, a procedure that inhibits neural activity. Application of L-glutamate to outside-out patches excised from layer IV neurons of young, but not of adult, rats activated prolonged bursts of NMDA channel openings. A modification of the NMDA receptor gating properties may therefore account for the age-dependent decline of visual cortical plasticity.
The basal ganglia are an interconnected set of subcortical regions whose established role in cognition and motor control remains poorly understood. An important nucleus within the basal ganglia, the striatum, receives cortical afferents that convey sensorimotor, limbic and cognitive information. The activity of medium-sized spiny neurons in the striatum seems to depend on convergent input within these information channels. To determine the degree of correlated input, both below and at threshold for the generation of action potentials, we recorded intracellularly from pairs of spiny neurons in vivo. Here we report that the transitions between depolarized and hyperpolarized states were highly correlated among neurons. Within individual depolarized states, some significant synchronous fluctuations in membrane potential occurred, but action potentials were not synchronized. Therefore, although the mean afferent signal across fibres is highly correlated among striatal neurons, the moment-to-moment variations around the mean, which determine the timing of action potentials, are not. We propose that the precisely timed, synchronous component of the membrane potential signals activation of cell assemblies and enables firing to occur. The asynchronous component, with low redundancy, determines the fine temporal pattern of spikes.
Experiences are remembered or forgotten, but the neural determinants for the mnemonic fate of experience are unknown. Event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to identify specific brain activations that differentiated between visual experiences that were later remembered well, remembered less well, or forgotten. During scanning of medial temporal lobe and frontal lobe regions, subjects viewed complex, color photographs. Subjects later received a test of memory for the photographs. The magnitudes of focal activations in right prefrontal cortex and in bilateral parahippocampal cortex predicted which photographs were later remembered well, remembered less well, or forgotten.
When pyramidal tract axons are cut in the adult hamster, fibers degenerate in both anterograde and retrograde directions from the lesion. If the same operation is performed on infant hamsters, however, there is massive regrowth of the severed axons via a new brainstem pathway to their appropriate terminal sites in the medulla and spinal cord. In contrast to previous studies, these results suggest that axons in the mammalian central nervous system damaged early in life may regenerate in a functionally useful way.
A single injection of amphetamine given to rats treated concurrently with iprindole so that they could not metabolize the amphetamine by para-hydroxylation resulted in a decrease in the concentration of striatal dopamine 1 week later. The decrease was antagonized by amfonelic acid, an inhibitor of uptake into dopamine neurons. The long-lasting depletion of cerebral dopamine by amphetamine may be analogous to the depletion of cerebral serotonin by halogenated derivatives of amphetamine.
A fraction containing capillaries and rich in gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase was isolated from homogenates of bovine brain cortex by density gradient centrifugation. The enzyme was localized in the endothelial cells by a histochemical procedure. gamma-Glutantyl transpeptidase may function in the transfer of some amino acids across the blood-brain barrier.
Kindling is an experimental model of epilepsy in which periodic brain stimulation induces the progressive development of electrical and behavioral seizures. A kindling-induced electrical seizure (afterdischarge) in the rat hippocampus produces prolonged neuronal supersensitivity to microiontophoretically applied acetylcholine after a latency of 40 to 60 minutes. Neuronal acetylcholine supersensitivity is correlated with the further progression of kindling. A larger hippocampal after-discharge is elicited by a subsequent kindling stimulus delivered in the presence of acetylcholine supersensitivity, but not by one delivered before the onset of the supersensitivity. The results suggest that alteration of synaptic sensitivity to acetylcholine may contribute to kindling and epileptogenesis.
Nogo has been identified as a component of the central nervous system (CNS) myelin that prevents axonal regeneration in the adult vertebrate CNS. Analysis of Nogo-A has shown that an axon-inhibiting domain of 66 amino acids is expressed at the extracellular surface and at the endoplasmic reticulum lumen of transfected cells and oligodendrocytes. The acidic amino terminus of Nogo-A is detected at the cytosolic face of cellular membranes and may contribute to inhibition of axon regeneration at sites of oligodendrocyte injury. Here we show that the extracellular domain of Nogo (Nogo-66) inhibits axonal extension, but does not alter non-neuronal cell morphology. In contrast, a multivalent form of the N terminus of Nogo-A affects the morphology of both neurons and other cell types. Here we identify a brain-specific, leucine-rich-repeat protein with high affinity for soluble Nogo-66. Cleavage of the Nogo-66 receptor and other glycophosphatidylinositol-linked proteins from axonal surfaces renders neurons insensitive to Nogo-66. Nogo-66 receptor expression is sufficient to impart Nogo-66 axonal inhibition to unresponsive neurons. Disruption of the interaction between Nogo-66 and its receptor provides the potential for enhanced recovery after human CNS injury.
Recent work with positron emission and single photon emission computed tomography has demonstrated the feasibility of studying striatal dopamine receptors in the living human brain. For the proper interpretation of these studies in normal and diseased states, the cellular localization of these receptors must be definitively established. It has been claimed, on the basis of receptor binding studies with tissue homogenates in rats, that 30-50% of striatal D-2 dopamine receptors are located on axons or terminals of the corticostriatal pathway. This finding has been incorporated into major reviews and classifications of dopamine receptors. The recent development of quantitative autoradiographic methods for diffusible ligands has facilitated the study of neurotransmitter receptors in cytoarchitechtonically intact tissue. Because this technique provides the necessary anatomic resolution that is lacking in homogenate binding studies, we have used it to re-examine the localization of striatal dopamine receptors. Here we present evidence that D-2 receptors are located exclusively on kainic acid-sensitive intrinsic neuronal elements in the striatum. We report that discrete cortical ablation does not alter 3H-spiperone binding to rat striatum and thus our results do not support the existence of D-2 dopamine receptors on the terminals of the corticostriatal pathway.
Membrane-bound phosphoinositides are signalling molecules that have a key role in vesicle trafficking in eukaryotic cells. Proteins that bind specific phosphoinositides mediate interactions between membrane-bounded compartments whose identity is partially encoded by cytoplasmic phospholipid tags. Little is known about the localization and regulation of mammalian phosphatidylinositol-3,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(3,5)P2), a phospholipid present in small quantities that regulates membrane trafficking in the endosome-lysosome axis in yeast. Here we describe a multi-organ disorder with neuronal degeneration in the central nervous system, peripheral neuronopathy and diluted pigmentation in the 'pale tremor' mouse. Positional cloning identified insertion of ETn2beta (early transposon 2beta) into intron 18 of Fig4 (A530089I17Rik), the homologue of a yeast SAC (suppressor of actin) domain PtdIns(3,5)P2 5-phosphatase located in the vacuolar membrane. The abnormal concentration of PtdIns(3,5)P2 in cultured fibroblasts from pale tremor mice demonstrates the conserved biochemical function of mammalian Fig4. The cytoplasm of fibroblasts from pale tremor mice is filled with large vacuoles that are immunoreactive for LAMP-2 (lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2), consistent with dysfunction of the late endosome-lysosome axis. Neonatal neurodegeneration in sensory and autonomic ganglia is followed by loss of neurons from layers four and five of the cortex, deep cerebellar nuclei and other localized brain regions. The sciatic nerve exhibits reduced numbers of large-diameter myelinated axons, slowed nerve conduction velocity and reduced amplitude of compound muscle action potentials. We identified pathogenic mutations of human FIG4 (KIAA0274) on chromosome 6q21 in four unrelated patients with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy. This novel form of autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disorder is designated CMT4J.
To investigate the functional organization of object recognition, the technique of optical imaging was applied to the primate inferotemporal cortex, which is thought to be essential for object recognition. The features critical for the activation of single cells were first determined in unit recordings with electrodes. In the subsequent optical imaging, presentation of the critical features activated patchy regions around 0.5 millimeters in diameter, covering the site of the electrode penetration at which the critical feature had been determined. Because signals in optical imaging reflect average neuronal activities in the regions, the result directly indicates the regional clustering of cells responding to similar features.
Endogenous opiate-like peptides (endorphins) are putative neuroregulators located throughout the mammalian brainstem. There is some evidence for their role in pain, stress, and affect. We report that the opiate antagonist, naloxone, alters some schizophrenic symptoms. In a double-blind, cross-over study, naloxone produced decreases in auditory hallucinations in some schizophrenic patients. This finding supports the hypothesis that the endorphins may play a roll in modulating hallucinations in a highly selected subgroup of chronically hallucinating schizophrenic patients.
Glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) promotes survival of embryonic dopaminergic neurons in culture, and its expression pattern suggests a role as a transient target-derived trophic factor for dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra. These neurons participate in the control of motor activity, emotional status and cognition, and they degenerate in Parkinson's disease for unknown reasons. To test whether GDNF has a trophic effect on dopaminergic neurons in the adult brain, we used a rat model in which these neurons are induced to degenerate by transecting their axons within the medial forebrain bundle. We report here that axotomy resulted in loss of half the tyrosine hydroxylase-expressing neurons in the substantia nigra. This loss was largely prevented by repeated injections of GDNF adjacent to the substantia nigra. Our findings suggest that GDNF or related molecules may be useful for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Hepatic porphyrias are disorders of heme synthesis characterized by genetically determined lesions of one of the key enzymes of heme synthesis. In carriers of such lesions, several factors (drugs, environmental chemicals, or diet) precipitate acute and often fatal attacks of neurologic dysfunction, which are promptly relieved by intravenous infusion of heme. However, the mechanism of such heme-induced amelioration remains elusive. To probe this mechanism, the biochemical events triggered by acute hepatic heme deficiency were examined in an animal model of chemically induced porphyria. Acute hepatic heme depletion in porphyric rats was found to impair hepatic tryptophan pyrrolase activity which, in turn, elevated tryptophan and 5-hydroxytryptamine turnover in the brain. These alterations in porphyric rats were dramatically reversed by parenteral heme administration. These findings suggest that increased tryptophan and 5-hydroxytryptamine in the nervous system may be responsible for the neurologic dysfunctions observed in humans with acute attacks of hepatic porphyria.
Human infants begin to acquire their native language in the first months of life. To determine which brain regions support language processing at this young age, we measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging the brain activity evoked by normal and reversed speech in awake and sleeping 3-month-old infants. Left-lateralized brain regions similar to those of adults, including the superior temporal and angular gyri, were already active in infants. Additional activation in right prefrontal cortex was seen only in awake infants processing normal speech. Thus, precursors of adult cortical language areas are already active in infants, well before the onset of speech production.
The differential brain development induced by sensory enrichment or deprivation is most apparent in rats with low brain weights. These differences are hypothesized to represent the retarded development of environment-dependent neurons in the isolated animals.
Modulation of neuronal excitability by regulation of K+ channels potentially plays a part in short-term memory but has not yet been studied at the molecular level. Regulation of K+ channels by protein phosphorylation and oxygen has been described for various tissues and cell types; regulation of fast-inactivating K+ channels mediating IK(A) currents has not yet been described. Functional expression of cloned mammalian K+ channels has provided a tool for studying their regulation at the molecular level. We report here that fast-inactivating K+ currents mediated by cloned K+ channel subunits derived from mammalian brain expressed in Xenopus oocytes are regulated by the reducing agent glutathione. This type of regulation may have a role in vivo to link metabolism to excitability and to regulate excitability in specific membrane areas of mammalian neurons.
Our ability to have an experience of another's pain is characteristic of empathy. Using functional imaging, we assessed brain activity while volunteers experienced a painful stimulus and compared it to that elicited when they observed a signal indicating that their loved one--present in the same room--was receiving a similar pain stimulus. Bilateral anterior insula (AI), rostral anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), brainstem, and cerebellum were activated when subjects received pain and also by a signal that a loved one experienced pain. AI and ACC activation correlated with individual empathy scores. Activity in the posterior insula/secondary somatosensory cortex, the sensorimotor cortex (SI/MI), and the caudal ACC was specific to receiving pain. Thus, a neural response in AI and rostral ACC, activated in common for "self" and "other" conditions, suggests that the neural substrate for empathic experience does not involve the entire "pain matrix." We conclude that only that part of the pain network associated with its affective qualities, but not its sensory qualities, mediates empathy.
Axonal elongation and the transformation of growth cones to synaptic terminals are major steps of brain development and the molecular mechanisms involved form the basis of the correct wiring of the nervous system. The same mechanisms may also contribute to the remodelling of nerve terminals that occurs in the adult brain, as a morphological substrate to memory and learning. We have investigated the function of the nerve terminal protein SNAP-25 (ref. 2) during development. We report here that SNAP-25 is expressed in axonal growth cones during late stages of elongation and that selective inhibition of SNAP-25 expression prevents neurite elongation by rat cortical neurons and PC-12 cells in vitro and by amacrine cells of the developing chick retina in vivo. These results demonstrate that SNAP-25 plays a key role in axonal growth. They also suggest that high levels of SNAP-25 expression in specific areas of the adult brain may contribute to nerve terminal plasticity.
The major excitatory amino acids, glutamate (Glu) and aspartate (Asp), are thought to act at three receptor subtypes in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS). These are termed quisqualate (QA), N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and kainate (KA) receptors according to the specific agonist properties of these compounds revealed by electrophysiological studies. Although Glu has been shown to stimulate cyclic GMP formation in brain slices, direct regulation of second messenger systems (cyclic AMP, Ca2+ or inositol phosphates) subsequent to activation of excitatory amino-acid receptors, has not been extensively studied. Here we demonstrate that in striatal neurones, excitatory amino acids, but not inhibitory or non-neuroactive amino acids, induce a three- to fourfold increase in inositol mono-, di- and triphosphate (IP, IP, IP) formation with the relative potency QA greater than Glu greater than NMDA, KA. The Glu-evoked formation of inositol phosphates appears to result principally from actions at QA as well as NMDA receptors on striatal neurones. Our results suggest that excitatory amino acids stimulate inositol phosphate formation directly, rather than indirectly by the evoked release and subsequent actions of adenosine or acetylcholine.
A 4-base pair deletion in the neuronal serine protease neurotrypsin gene was associated with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic mental retardation (MR). In situ hybridization experiments on human fetal brains showed that neurotrypsin was highly expressed in brain structures involved in learning and memory. Immuno-electron microscopy on adult human brain sections revealed that neurotrypsin is located in presynaptic nerve endings, particularly over the presynaptic membrane lining the synaptic cleft. These findings suggest that neurotrypsin-mediated proteolysis is required for normal synaptic function and suggest potential insights into the pathophysiological bases of mental retardation.
Activity-driven modifications in synaptic connections between neurons in the neocortex may occur during development and learning. In dual whole-cell voltage recordings from pyramidal neurons, the coincidence of postsynaptic action potentials (APs) and unitary excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) was found to induce changes in EPSPs. Their average amplitudes were differentially up- or down-regulated, depending on the precise timing of postsynaptic APs relative to EPSPs. These observations suggest that APs propagating back into dendrites serve to modify single active synaptic connections, depending on the pattern of electrical activity in the pre- and postsynaptic neurons.
Although most proto-oncogenes such as c-myc are involved in cell proliferation, being expressed in a wide range of tissues as well as in progenitors of transformed cells, others may normally function in cellular differentiation. We now report on a gene on human chromosome 11, at the junction of the T-cell tumour-associated chromosomal translocation t(11; 14) (p15; q11) and known as the 11p15 gene or Ttg, which is believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of the tumour. It has two transcriptional promoters (both retained by the translocated allele) and is expressed in tumour cells with neuro-endocrine properties, suggesting that normal expression may occur in nerve cells. Using fusion constructs of one 11p15 promoter and lacZ in transgenic mice, we found that the gene is expressed in a segment-specific manner in rhombomeres of the developing mouse hind-brain. During subsequent development, the gene is more widely expressed, again in precisely defined regional patterns, but in post-mitotic neurons confined to the central nervous system. Thus, this presumptive T-cell oncogene is both developmentally regulated and segmentally restricted in a tissue different from that in which the original tumour arose.
The distribution of cyclic 3',5'-nucleotide phosphodiesterase activity in rat cerebral cortex was determined by cytochemical methods. The detectable phosphodiesterase activity was localized in postsynaptic (dendritic) nerve endings, most of it immediately adjacent to the synaptic membrane. Most of the postsynaptic nerve endings showed phosphodiesterase activity.
Reading words and naming pictures involves the association of visual stimuli with phonological and semantic knowledge. Damage to a region of the brain in the left basal posterior temporal lobe (BA37), which is strategically situated between the visual cortex and the more anterior temporal cortex, leads to reading and naming deficits. Additional evidence implicating this region in linguistic processing comes from functional neuroimaging studies of reading in normal subjects and subjects with developmental dyslexia. Here we test whether the visual component of reading is essential for activation of BA37 by comparing cortical activations elicited by word processing in congenitally blind, late-blind and sighted subjects using functional neuroimaging. Despite the different modalities used (visual and tactile), all groups of subjects showed a common activation of BA37 by words relative to non-word letter-strings. These findings agree with the proposal that BA37 is an association area that integrates converging inputs from many regions. Our study confirms a prediction of theories of brain function that depend on convergence zones; the absence of one input (that is, visual) does not alter the response properties of such a convergence region.
Behavioural studies widely implicate sleep in memory consolidation in the learning of a broad range of behaviours. During sleep, brain regions are reactivated, and specific patterns of neural activity are replayed, consistent with patterns observed in previous waking behaviour. Birdsong learning is a paradigmatic model system for skill learning. Song development in juvenile zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) is characterized by sleep-dependent circadian fluctuations in singing behaviour, with immediate post-sleep deterioration in song structure followed by recovery later in the day. In sleeping adult birds, spontaneous bursting activity of forebrain premotor neurons in the robust nucleus of the arcopallium (RA) carries information about daytime singing. Here we show that, in juvenile zebra finches, playback during the day of an adult 'tutor' song induced profound and tutor-song-specific changes in bursting activity of RA neurons during the following night of sleep. The night-time neuronal changes preceded tutor-song-induced changes in singing, first observed the following day. Interruption of auditory feedback greatly reduced sleep bursting and prevented the tutor-song-specific neuronal remodelling. Thus, night-time neuronal activity is shaped by the interaction of the song model (sensory template) and auditory feedback, with changes in night-time activity preceding the onset of practice associated with vocal learning. We hypothesize that night-time bursting induces adaptive changes in premotor networks during sleep as part of vocal learning. By this hypothesis, adaptive changes driven by replay of sensory information at night and by evaluation of sensory feedback during the day interact to produce the complex circadian patterns seen early in vocal development.
An RNA virus population does not consist of a single genotype; rather, it is an ensemble of related sequences, termed quasispecies. Quasispecies arise from rapid genomic evolution powered by the high mutation rate of RNA viral replication. Although a high mutation rate is dangerous for a virus because it results in nonviable individuals, it has been hypothesized that high mutation rates create a 'cloud' of potentially beneficial mutations at the population level, which afford the viral quasispecies a greater probability to evolve and adapt to new environments and challenges during infection. Mathematical models predict that viral quasispecies are not simply a collection of diverse mutants but a group of interactive variants, which together contribute to the characteristics of the population. According to this view, viral populations, rather than individual variants, are the target of evolutionary selection. Here we test this hypothesis by examining the consequences of limiting genomic diversity on viral populations. We find that poliovirus carrying a high-fidelity polymerase replicates at wild-type levels but generates less genomic diversity and is unable to adapt to adverse growth conditions. In infected animals, the reduced viral diversity leads to loss of neurotropism and an attenuated pathogenic phenotype. Notably, using chemical mutagenesis to expand quasispecies diversity of the high-fidelity virus before infection restores neurotropism and pathogenesis. Analysis of viruses isolated from brain provides direct evidence for complementation between members in the quasispecies, indicating that selection indeed occurs at the population level rather than on individual variants. Our study provides direct evidence for a fundamental prediction of the quasispecies theory and establishes a link between mutation rate, population dynamics and pathogenesis.
Migration of neurons from proliferative zones to their functional sites is fundamental to the normal development of the central nervous system. Mice homozygous for the spontaneous rostral cerebellar malformation mutation (rcm(s)) or a newly identified transgenic insertion allele (rcm(tg)) exhibit cerebellar and midbrain defects, apparently as a result of abnormal neuronal migration. Laminar structure abnormalities in lateral regions of the rostral cerebellar cortex have been described in homozygous rcm(s) mice. We now demonstrate that the cerebellum of both rcm(s) and rcm(tg) homozygotes is smaller and has fewer folia than in the wild-type, ectopic cerebellar cells are present in midbrain regions by three days after birth, and there are abnormalities in postnatal cerebellar neuronal migration. We have cloned the rcm complementary DNA, which encodes a transmembrane receptor of the immunoglobulin superfamily. The sequence of the rcm protein (Rcm) is highly similar to that of UNC-5, a Caenorhabditis elegans protein that is essential for dorsal guidance of pioneer axons and for the movement of cells away from the netrin ligand, which is encoded by the unc-6 gene. As Rcm is a member of a newly described family of vertebrate homologues of UNC-5 which are netrin-binding proteins, our results indicate that UNC-5-like proteins may have a conserved function in mediating netrin-guided migration.
Human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) are a promising source of cells for applications in regenerative medicine. Directed differentiation of PSCs into specialized cells such as spinal motoneurons or midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons has been achieved. However, the effective use of PSCs for cell therapy has lagged behind. Whereas mouse PSC-derived DA neurons have shown efficacy in models of Parkinson's disease, DA neurons from human PSCs generally show poor in vivo performance. There are also considerable safety concerns for PSCs related to their potential for teratoma formation or neural overgrowth. Here we present a novel floor-plate-based strategy for the derivation of human DA neurons that efficiently engraft in vivo, suggesting that past failures were due to incomplete specification rather than a specific vulnerability of the cells. Midbrain floor-plate precursors are derived from PSCs 11 days after exposure to small molecule activators of sonic hedgehog (SHH) and canonical WNT signalling. Engraftable midbrain DA neurons are obtained by day 25 and can be maintained in vitro for several months. Extensive molecular profiling, biochemical and electrophysiological data define developmental progression and confirm identity of PSC-derived midbrain DA neurons. In vivo survival and function is demonstrated in Parkinson's disease models using three host species. Long-term engraftment in 6-hydroxy-dopamine-lesioned mice and rats demonstrates robust survival of midbrain DA neurons derived from human embryonic stem (ES) cells, complete restoration of amphetamine-induced rotation behaviour and improvements in tests of forelimb use and akinesia. Finally, scalability is demonstrated by transplantation into parkinsonian monkeys. Excellent DA neuron survival, function and lack of neural overgrowth in the three animal models indicate promise for the development of cell-based therapies in Parkinson's disease.
Two metabolites of the steroid hormones progesterone and deoxycorticosterone, 3 alpha-hydroxy-5 alpha-dihydroprogesterone and 3 alpha, 5 alpha-tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone, are potent barbiturate-like ligands of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor-chloride ion channel complex. At concentrations between 10(-7) and 10(-5)M both steroids inhibited binding of the convulsant t-butylbicyclophosphorothionate to the GABA-receptor complex and increased the binding of the benzodiazepine flunitrazepam; they also stimulated chloride uptake (as measured by uptake of 36Cl-) into isolated brain vesicles, and potentiated the inhibitory actions of GABA in cultured rat hippocampal and spinal cord neurons. These data may explain the ability of certain steroid hormones to rapidly alter neuronal excitability and may provide a mechanism for the anesthetic and hypnotic actions of naturally occurring and synthetic anesthetic steroids.
The mammalian olfactory system mediates various responses, including aversive behaviours to spoiled foods and fear responses to predator odours. In the olfactory bulb, each glomerulus represents a single species of odorant receptor. Because a single odorant can interact with several different receptor species, the odour information received in the olfactory epithelium is converted to a topographical map of multiple glomeruli activated in distinct areas in the olfactory bulb. To study how the odour map is interpreted in the brain, we generated mutant mice in which olfactory sensory neurons in a specific area of the olfactory epithelium are ablated by targeted expression of the diphtheria toxin gene. Here we show that, in dorsal-zone-depleted mice, the dorsal domain of the olfactory bulb was devoid of glomerular structures, although second-order neurons were present in the vacant areas. The mutant mice lacked innate responses to aversive odorants, even though they were capable of detecting them and could be conditioned for aversion with the remaining glomeruli. These results indicate that, in mice, aversive information is received in the olfactory bulb by separate sets of glomeruli, those dedicated for innate and those for learned responses.
One of the molecular mechanisms capable of regulating the physiological properties of neurones is the phosphorylation of ion channels and other cellular components by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. Another protein kinase present in high concentrations in the mammalian brain is protein kinase C (a calcium/phosphatidylserine/diacylglycerol-dependent protein kinase), but there is no direct evidence, as yet, for the involvement of this enzyme in the control of neuronal excitability. We now present evidence that activation of endogenous protein kinase C by the tumour-promoting phorbol ester TPA (12-O-tetradecanoyl- phorbol-13-acetate), or intracellular injection of the purified enzyme, enhances the voltage-sensitive calcium current in bag cell neurones of the mollusc Aplysia.
During visual stimulation, the elevated metabolism rate will couple with increase of blood flow velocity(BFV) in posterior cerebral artery(PCA). This study with TCD was aimed to investigate whether the coupling might change according to the different vasoneuronal conditions.
We report here the use of positron emission tomography (PET) to reveal that the primary visual cortex is activated when subjects close their eyes and visualize objects. The size of the image is systematically related to the location of maximal activity, which is as expected because the earliest visual areas are spatially organized. These results were only evident, however, when imagery conditions were compared to a non-imagery baseline in which the same auditory cues were presented (and hence the stimuli were controlled); when a resting baseline was used (and hence brain activation was uncontrolled), imagery activation was obscured because of activation in visual cortex during the baseline condition. These findings resolve a debate in the literature about whether imagery activates early visual cortex and indicate that visual mental imagery involves 'depictive' representations, not solely language-like descriptions. Moreover, the fact that stored visual information can affect processing in even the earliest visual areas suggests that knowledge can fundamentally bias what one sees.
The histochemical fluorescence of those neurons in brainstem raphe nuclei which are presumed to contain serotonin is selectively and stereospecifically enhanced by L-tryptophan at doses that also produce an elevation in the concentration of serotonin. However, contrary to our assumptions, the increase in raphe fluorescence is not prevented by p-chlorophenylalanine, an inhibitor of serotonin synthesis. These results suggest that under some conditions derivatives of tryptophan other than, or in addition to, serotonin may be of significance in raphe neurons.
Many peptides, when released as chemical messengers within the brain, have powerful influences on complex behaviours. Most strikingly, vasopressin and oxytocin, once thought of as circulating hormones whose actions were confined to peripheral organs, are now known to be released in the brain, where they have fundamentally important roles in social behaviours. In humans, disruptions of these peptide systems have been linked to several neurobehavioural disorders, including Prader-Willi syndrome, affective disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder, and polymorphisms of V1a vasopressin receptor have been linked to autism. Here we report that the rat olfactory bulb contains a large population of interneurons which express vasopressin, that blocking the actions of vasopressin in the olfactory bulb impairs the social recognition abilities of rats and that vasopressin agonists and antagonists can modulate the processing of information by olfactory bulb neurons. The findings indicate that social information is processed in part by a vasopressin system intrinsic to the olfactory system.
Activation of protein kinase C (PKC) can mimic the biophysical effects of associative learning on neurons. Furthermore, classical conditioning of the rabbit nictitating membrane (a form of associative learning) produces translocation of PKC activity from the cytosolic to the membrane compartments of the CA1 region of the hippocampus. Evidence is provided here for a significant change in the amount and distribution of PKC within the CA1 cell field of the rabbit hippocampus that is specific to learning. This change is seen at 1 day after learning as focal increments of [3H]phorbol-12,13-dibutyrate binding to PKC in computer-generated images produced from coronal autoradiographs of rabbit brain. In addition, 3 days after learning, the autoradiographs suggest a redistribution of PKC within CA1 from the cell soma to the dendrites.
Developing vertebrate neurons are thought to depend for their survival on specific neurotrophic proteins present in their target fields. The limited availability of these proteins does not allow the survival of all neurons initially innervating a target, resulting in the widely observed phenomenon of naturally occurring neuronal death. Although a variety of proteins have been reported to promote the survival of neurons in tissue culture, the demonstration that these proteins increase neuronal numbers and/or decrease neuronal death in vivo has only been possible with nerve growth factor (NGF). The generalization of the concept that neurotrophic proteins regulate neuronal survival during normal development critically depends on the demonstration that the survival of neurons in vivo can be increased by the administration of a neurotrophic protein different from NGF. We report here that this is the case with brain-derived neurotrophic factor, a protein of extremely low abundance purified from the central nervous system.
The rat hippocampus receives a strong cholinergic innervation from the medial septum; information about the development and function of this pathway could help to elucidate the mechanisms of memory functions. Previous electrophysiological studies have shown that septal stimulation in vivo facilitates commissural and perforant path inputs and that stimulation of intrahippocampal cholinergic fibres in vitro produces a slow depolarization of rat hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurones and increases their excitability. We describe here a different approach to the investigation of this system, by co-culturing slices of young rat hippocampus and septum, then recording the effects of septal nucleus stimulation on single voltage-clamped hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurones. Under these conditions acetylcholinesterase-staining (presumed cholinergic) fibres grow out from the septum into the hippocampus. Single septal stimuli produce a short-latency non-cholinergic fast excitatory postsynaptic current, whereas trains of stimuli produce a slow inward current augmented by neostigmine and suppressed by atropine; hence this has a cholinergic origin. Our experiments provide both the first demonstration that functional synapses can be established between explanted cholinergic and cholinoceptive neuronal systems from the mammalian brain in organotypic culture and the first description of cholinergic slow excitatory postsynaptic currents in the mammalian central nervous system.
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is a unique form of neural circuit plasticity that results in the generation of new neurons in the dentate gyrus throughout life. Neurons that arise in adults (adult-born neurons) show heightened synaptic plasticity during their maturation and can account for up to ten per cent of the entire granule cell population. Moreover, levels of adult hippocampal neurogenesis are increased by interventions that are associated with beneficial effects on cognition and mood, such as learning, environmental enrichment, exercise and chronic treatment with antidepressants. Together, these properties of adult neurogenesis indicate that this process could be harnessed to improve hippocampal functions. However, despite a substantial number of studies demonstrating that adult-born neurons are necessary for mediating specific cognitive functions, as well as some of the behavioural effects of antidepressants, it is unknown whether an increase in adult hippocampal neurogenesis is sufficient to improve cognition and mood. Here we show that inducible genetic expansion of the population of adult-born neurons through enhancing their survival improves performance in a specific cognitive task in which two similar contexts need to be distinguished. Mice with increased adult hippocampal neurogenesis show normal object recognition, spatial learning, contextual fear conditioning and extinction learning but are more efficient in differentiating between overlapping contextual representations, which is indicative of enhanced pattern separation. Furthermore, stimulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis, when combined with an intervention such as voluntary exercise, produces a robust increase in exploratory behaviour. However, increasing adult hippocampal neurogenesis alone does not produce a behavioural response like that induced by anxiolytic agents or antidepressants. Together, our findings suggest that strategies that are designed to increase adult hippocampal neurogenesis specifically, by targeting the cell death of adult-born neurons or by other mechanisms, may have therapeutic potential for reversing impairments in pattern separation and dentate gyrus dysfunction such as those seen during normal ageing.
The lateral hypothalamic area is considered the classic 'feeding centre', regulating food intake, arousal and motivated behaviour through the actions of orexin and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH). These neuropeptides are inhibited in response to feeding-related signals and are released during fasting. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate and integrate these signals remain poorly understood. Here we show that the forkhead box transcription factor Foxa2, a downstream target of insulin signalling, regulates the expression of orexin and MCH. During fasting, Foxa2 binds to MCH and orexin promoters and stimulates their expression. In fed and in hyperinsulinemic obese mice, insulin signalling leads to nuclear exclusion of Foxa2 and reduced expression of MCH and orexin. Constitutive activation of Foxa2 in the brain (Nes-Cre/+;Foxa2T156A(flox/flox) genotype) results in increased neuronal MCH and orexin expression and increased food consumption, metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Spontaneous physical activity of these animals in the fed state is significantly increased and is similar to that in fasted mice. Conditional activation of Foxa2 through the T156A mutation expression in the brain of obese mice also resulted in improved glucose homeostasis, decreased fat and increased lean body mass. Our results demonstrate that Foxa2 can act as a metabolic sensor in neurons of the lateral hypothalamic area to integrate metabolic signals, adaptive behaviour and physiological responses.
The mutation cribriform degeneration (cri) occurred in the DBA/2J strain; it is in linkage group VIII, 31 recombination units from b. Homozygotes show severe vacuolar degeneration in white and gray matter of the spinal cord and brainstem, normocytic anemia at birth which decreases in severity with age, and abnormalities of electrolyte distribution.
How do we perceive the visual motion of objects that are accelerated by gravity? We propose that, because vision is poorly sensitive to accelerations, an internal model that calculates the effects of gravity is derived from graviceptive information, is stored in the vestibular cortex, and is activated by visual motion that appears to be coherent with natural gravity. The acceleration of visual targets was manipulated while brain activity was measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging. In agreement with the internal model hypothesis, we found that the vestibular network was selectively engaged when acceleration was consistent with natural gravity. These findings demonstrate that predictive mechanisms of physical laws of motion are represented in the human brain.
Clonidine and L-alpha-methylnoradrenaline (but not D-alpha-methylnoradrenaline) increase the release of a substance with beta-endorphin immunoreactivity from slices of brainstem of spontaneously hypertensive rats, but not that of normotensive rats. It was reported earlier that opiate antagonists inhibit the hypotensive action of clonidine and alpha-methyldopa in spontaneously hypertensive but not in normotensive rats and that beta-endorphin has hypotensive effects of its own. Together, these findings indicate that release of beta-endorphin by central alpha-receptor agonists may contribute to the antihypertensive action of these drugs.
Voltage-gated sodium channels, which are responsible for the generation of action potentials in the brain, are phosphorylated by protein kinase C (PKC) in purified form. Activation of PKC decreases peak sodium current up to 80 percent and slows its inactivation for sodium channels in rat brain neurons and for rat brain type IIA sodium channel alpha subunits heterologously expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells. These effects are specific for PKC because they can be blocked by specific peptide inhibitors of PKC and can be reproduced by direct application of PKC to the cytoplasmic surface of sodium channels in excised inside-out membrane patches. Modulation of brain sodium channels by PKC is likely to have important effects on signal transduction and synaptic transmission in the central nervous system.
The lasting effects of neuronal activity on brain development involve calcium-dependent gene expression. Using a strategy called transactivator trap, we cloned a calcium-responsive transactivator called CREST (for calcium-responsive transactivator). CREST is a SYT-related nuclear protein that interacts with adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) and is expressed in the developing brain. Mice that have a targeted disruption of the crest gene are viable but display defects in cortical and hippocampal dendrite development. Cortical neurons from crest mutant mice are compromised in calcium-dependent dendritic growth. Thus, calcium activation of CREST-mediated transcription helps regulate neuronal morphogenesis.
Although objects in visual mental images may seem to appear all of a piece, when the time to form images is measured this introspection is revealed to be incorrect; objects in images are constructed a part at a time. Studies with split-brain patients and normal subjects reveal that two classes of processes are used to form images--ones that activate stored memories of the appearances of parts and ones that arrange parts into the proper configuration. Some of the processes used to arrange parts are more effective in the left cerebral hemisphere and some are more effective in the right cerebral hemisphere; the notion that mental images are the product of right hemisphere activity is an oversimplification.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is an increasingly common technique used to selectively modify neural processing. However, application of TMS is limited by uncertainty concerning its physiological effects. We applied TMS to the cat visual cortex and evaluated the neural and hemodynamic consequences. Short TMS pulse trains elicited initial activation (approximately 1 minute) and prolonged suppression (5 to 10 minutes) of neural responses. Furthermore, TMS disrupted the temporal structure of activity by altering phase relationships between neural signals. Despite the complexity of this response, neural changes were faithfully reflected in hemodynamic signals; quantitative coupling was present over a range of stimulation parameters. These results demonstrate long-lasting neural responses to TMS and support the use of hemodynamic-based neuroimaging to effectively monitor these changes over time.
Mature cortical pyramidal neurons receive excitatory inputs onto small protrusions emanating from their dendrites called spines. Spines undergo activity-dependent remodelling, stabilization and pruning during development, and similar structural changes can be triggered by learning and changes in sensory experiences. However, the biochemical triggers and mechanisms of de novo spine formation in the developing brain and the functional significance of new spines to neuronal connectivity are largely unknown. Here we develop an approach to induce and monitor de novo spine formation in real time using combined two-photon laser-scanning microscopy and two-photon laser uncaging of glutamate. Our data demonstrate that, in mouse cortical layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons, glutamate is sufficient to trigger de novo spine growth from the dendrite shaft in a location-specific manner. We find that glutamate-induced spinogenesis requires opening of NMDARs (N-methyl-D-aspartate-type glutamate receptors) and activation of protein kinase A (PKA) but is independent of calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) and tyrosine kinase receptor B (TrkB) receptors. Furthermore, newly formed spines express glutamate receptors and are rapidly functional such that they transduce presynaptic activity into postsynaptic signals. Together, our data demonstrate that early neural connectivity is shaped by activity in a spatially precise manner and that nascent dendrite spines are rapidly functionally incorporated into cortical circuits.
Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD), muscle-eye-brain disease (MEB), and Walker-Warburg syndrome are congenital muscular dystrophies (CMDs) with associated developmental brain defects. Mutations reported in genes of FCMD and MEB patients suggest that the genes may be involved in protein glycosylation. Dystroglycan is a highly glycosylated component of the muscle dystrophin-glycoprotein complex that is also expressed in brain, where its function is unknown. Here we show that brain-selective deletion of dystroglycan in mice is sufficient to cause CMD-like brain malformations, including disarray of cerebral cortical layering, fusion of cerebral hemispheres and cerebellar folia, and aberrant migration of granule cells. Dystroglycan-null brain loses its high-affinity binding to the extracellular matrix protein laminin, and shows discontinuities in the pial surface basal lamina (glia limitans) that probably underlie the neuronal migration errors. Furthermore, mutant mice have severely blunted hippocampal long-term potentiation with electrophysiologic characterization indicating that dystroglycan might have a postsynaptic role in learning and memory. Our data strongly support the hypothesis that defects in dystroglycan are central to the pathogenesis of structural and functional brain abnormalities seen in CMD.
Much is known about the pathways from photoreceptors to higher visual areas in the brain. However, how we become aware of what we see or of having seen at all is a problem that has eluded neuroscience. Recordings from macaque V1 during deactivation of MT+/V5 and psychophysical studies of perceptual integration suggest that feedback from secondary visual areas to V1 is necessary for visual awareness. We used transcranial magnetic stimulation to probe the timing and function of feedback from human area MT+/V5 to V1 and found its action to be early and critical for awareness of visual motion.
In addition to its role in blood vessel and macrophage function, nitric oxide (NO) is a neurotransmitter found in high densities in emotion-regulating brain regions. Mice with targeted disruption of neuronal NO synthase (nNOS) display grossly normal appearance, locomotor activity, breeding, long-term potentiation and long-term depression. The nNOS- mice are resistant to neural stroke damage following middle cerebral artery ligation. Although CO2-induced cerebral vasodilatation in wild-type mice is NO-dependent, in nNOS- mice this vasodilation is unaffected by NOS inhibitors. Establishing a behavioural role for NO has, until now, not been feasible, as NOS inhibitor drugs can only be administered acutely and because their pronounced effects on blood pressure and other body functions obfuscate behavioural interpretations. We now report a large increase in aggressive behaviour and excess, inappropriate sexual behaviour in nNOS- mice.
The cerebral cortex of the mammalian brain has expanded rapidly during the course of evolution and acquired structurally distinguishable areas devoted to separate functions. In some brain regions, topographic restrictions to cell intermixing occur during embryonic development. As a means of examining experimentally whether such restrictions occur during formation of functional subdivisions in the rat neocortex, clonally related neocortical cells were marked by retroviral-mediated transfer of a histochemical marker gene. Clonal boundaries were determined by infection of the developing brain with a library of genetically distinct viruses and amplification of single viral genomes by the polymerase chain reaction. Many clonally related neurons in the cerebral cortex became widely dispersed across functional areas of the cortex. Specification of cortical areas therefore occurs after neurogenesis.
The neural representations associated with learned auditory behaviours, such as recognizing individuals based on their vocalizations, are not well described. Higher vertebrates learn to recognize complex conspecific vocalizations that comprise sequences of easily identified, naturally occurring auditory objects, which should facilitate the analysis of higher auditory pathways. Here we describe the first example of neurons selective for learned conspecific vocalizations in adult animals--in starlings that have been trained operantly to recognize conspecific songs. The neuronal population is found in a non-primary forebrain auditory region, exhibits increased responses to the set of learned songs compared with novel songs, and shows differential responses to categories of learned songs based on recognition training contingencies. Within the population, many cells respond highly selectively to a subset of specific motifs (acoustic objects) present only in the learned songs. Such neuronal selectivity may contribute to song-recognition behaviour, which in starlings is sensitive to motif identity. In this system, both top-down and bottom-up processes may modify the tuning properties of neurons during recognition learning, giving rise to plastic representations of behaviourally meaningful auditory objects.
Damage to the striate cortex usually causes blindness in those regions of the visual field which map to the area of neural damage. Nonetheless, there are reports that some patients with such damage can localize and perform certain visual discriminations between light stimuli presented within the 'blind' area of the visual field. Experiments on animals with different brain areas ablated suggest that visual function is served by two principal projection pathways from the retina. That to the striate cortex is primarily responsible for fine discrimination between stimulus parameters such as colour and spatial pattern, whereas that to the superior colliculus in the midbrain is responsible for visual localization of stimuli. The residual visual functions in patients with cortical damage are usually attributed to the non-striate retinal projection to the superior colliculus. We now present measurements of spatial discrimination in two observers with large visual field defects (scotomata) caused by damage to the striate cortical region. Both exhibit a near normal ability to discriminate displacements of targets when two lights are flashed sequentially in their defective visual field, but they are unable to discriminate spatial pattern or size. We argue that these results are consistent with the 'two visual systems' interpretation of ablation studies on non-human species.
Neurotrophins are thought to be important for the survival and differentiation of vertebrate neurons. Roles have been suggested for target-derived neurotrophins, based both on their expression in target tissues at the time of neuron innervation, and on their effects on axonal sprouting. However, direct in vivo evidence of their involvement in axon arborization has remained elusive. We have used in vivo microscopy to follow individual optic axons over time, and have examined the role of the neurotrophin brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in their development. Here we show that injection of BDNF into the optic tectum of live Xenopus laevis tadpoles increased the branching and complexity of optic axon terminal arbors. In contrast, injection of specific neutralizing antibodies to BDNF reduced axon arborization and complexity. The onset of these effects was rapid (within 2 hours) and persisted throughout the 24-hour observation period. Other neurotrophins had little or no significant effects. These results demonstrate the involvement of neurotrophins in the dynamic elaboration of axon terminals, and suggest a direct role for target-derived BDNF during synaptic patterning in the developing central nervous system.
Anxiety--a sustained state of heightened apprehension in the absence of immediate threat--becomes severely debilitating in disease states. Anxiety disorders represent the most common of psychiatric diseases (28% lifetime prevalence) and contribute to the aetiology of major depression and substance abuse. Although it has been proposed that the amygdala, a brain region important for emotional processing, has a role in anxiety, the neural mechanisms that control anxiety remain unclear. Here we explore the neural circuits underlying anxiety-related behaviours by using optogenetics with two-photon microscopy, anxiety assays in freely moving mice, and electrophysiology. With the capability of optogenetics to control not only cell types but also specific connections between cells, we observed that temporally precise optogenetic stimulation of basolateral amygdala (BLA) terminals in the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA)--achieved by viral transduction of the BLA with a codon-optimized channelrhodopsin followed by restricted illumination in the downstream CeA--exerted an acute, reversible anxiolytic effect. Conversely, selective optogenetic inhibition of the same projection with a third-generation halorhodopsin (eNpHR3.0) increased anxiety-related behaviours. Importantly, these effects were not observed with direct optogenetic control of BLA somata, possibly owing to recruitment of antagonistic downstream structures. Together, these results implicate specific BLA-CeA projections as critical circuit elements for acute anxiety control in the mammalian brain, and demonstrate the importance of optogenetically targeting defined projections, beyond simply targeting cell types, in the study of circuit function relevant to neuropsychiatric disease.
The peak concentration and rate of clearance of neurotransmitter from the synaptic cleft are important determinants of synaptic function, yet the neurotransmitter concentration time course is unknown at synapses in the brain. The time course of free glutamate in the cleft was estimated by kinetic analysis of the displacement of a rapidly dissociating competitive antagonist from N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors during synaptic transmission. Glutamate peaked at 1.1 millimolar and decayed with a time constant of 1.2 milliseconds at cultured hippocampal synapses. This time course implies that transmitter saturates postsynaptic NMDA receptors. However, glutamate dissociates much more rapidly from alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors. Thus, the time course of free glutamate predicts that dissociation contributes to the decay of the AMPA receptor-mediated postsynaptic current.
Humans differ from other primates in their significantly lengthened growth period. The persistence of a fetal pattern of brain growth after birth is another important feature of human development. Here we present the results of an analysis of the 1.8-million-year-old Mojokerto child (Perning 1, Java), the only well preserved skull of a Homo erectus infant, by computed tomography. Comparison with a large series of extant humans and chimpanzees indicates that this individual was about 1 yr (0-1.5 yr) old at death and had an endocranial capacity at 72-84% of an average adult H. erectus. This pattern of relative brain growth resembles that of living apes, but differs from that seen in extant humans. It implies that major differences in the development of cognitive capabilities existed between H. erectus and anatomically modern humans.
Long-term amphetamine administration to cats (a mean of 8.75 milligrams per kilogram twice daily for 10 days) produced large decreases (40 to 67 percent in serotonin and its major metabolite, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, in all brain regions examined. This treatment also produced several behaviors that are dependent on depressed central serotonergic neurotransmission, and which normally are elicited exclusively by hallucinogenic drugs. Short-term amphetamine administration (15 mg/kg) did not produce these behaviors and resulted in small decreases in brain serotonin and no change in 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. These data are discussed in the context of monoamine theories of schizophrenia.
Cortical areas are generally assumed to be uniform in their capacity for adaptive changes or plasticity. Here we demonstrate, however, that neurons in the cat striate cortex (V1) show pronounced adaptation-induced short-term plasticity of orientation tuning primarily at specific foci. V1 neurons are clustered according to their orientation preference in iso-orientation domains that converge at singularities or pinwheel centres. Although neurons in pinwheel centres have similar orientation tuning and responses to those in iso-orientation domains, we find that they differ markedly in their capacity for adaptive changes. Adaptation with an oriented drifting grating stimulus alters responses of neurons located at and near pinwheel centres to a broad range of orientations, causing repulsive shifts in orientation preference and changes in response magnitude. In contrast, neurons located in iso-orientation domains show minimal changes in their tuning properties after adaptation. The anisotropy of adaptation-induced orientation plasticity is probably mediated by inhomogeneities in local intracortical interactions that are overlaid on the map of orientation preference in V1.
Serotonin is strongly implicated in the aetiology of several cerebrovascular (circulatory) diseases, including stroke, migraine and vasospasm. Previous studies have suggested the existence of an indoleaminergic system of perivascular nerves in large cerebral arteries of the lamprey. In addition, some authors have observed that cerebral arteries (such as the vertebrobasilar system of the rabbit) and microvessels may take up serotonin and 5-hydroxytryptophan in various species. However, neither large cerebral arteries nor microvessels (primarily capillaries) directly control, or change, cerebral blood flow; as in other vascular beds, it is the arterioles and small arteries that are the major resistance elements. We report here on the presence of a central serotonergic innervation of pial arteries and arterioles in the rat, using immunocytochemical and neurochemical techniques. The fibres seem to have a central neuronal origin, emanating from both median and dorsal raphe nuclei. This perivascular serotonergic innervation may have a role both in the normal regulation of the cerebral circulation and in pathological conditions.
The mitotic spindle determines the cleavage furrow site during metazoan cell division, but whether other mechanisms exist remains unknown. Here we identify a spindle-independent mechanism for cleavage furrow positioning in Drosophila neuroblasts. We show that early and late furrow proteins (Pavarotti, Anillin, and Myosin) are localized to the neuroblast basal cortex at anaphase onset by a Pins cortical polarity pathway, and can induce a basally displaced furrow even in the complete absence of a mitotic spindle. Rotation or displacement of the spindle results in two furrows: an early polarity-induced basal furrow and a later spindle-induced furrow. This spindle-independent cleavage furrow mechanism may be relevant to other highly polarized mitotic cells, such as mammalian neural progenitors.
Neurons in the primary visual cortex are selective for the size, orientation and direction of motion of patterns falling within a restricted region of visual space known as the receptive field. The response to stimuli presented within the receptive field can be facilitated or suppressed by other stimuli falling outside the receptive field which, when presented in isolation, fail to activate the cell. Whether this interaction is facilitative or suppressive depends on the relative orientation of pattern elements inside and outside the receptive field. Here we show that neuronal facilitation preferentially occurs when a near-threshold stimulus inside the receptive field is flanked by higher-contrast, collinear elements located in surrounding regions of visual space. Collinear flanks and orthogonally oriented flanks, however, both act to reduce the response to high-contrast stimuli presented within the receptive field. The observed pattern of facilitation and suppression may be the cellular basis for the observation in humans that the detectability of an oriented pattern is enhanced by collinear flanking elements. Modulation of neuronal responses by stimuli falling outside their receptive fields may thus represent an early neural mechanism for encoding objects and enhancing their perceptual saliency.
The striatum, which is the major component of the basal ganglia in the brain, is regulated in part by dopaminergic input from the substantia nigra. Severe movement disorders result from the loss of striatal dopamine in patients with Parkinson's disease. Rats with lesions of the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway caused by 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) serve as a model for Parkinson's disease and show alterations in gene expression in the two major output systems of the striatum to the globus pallidus and substantia nigra. Striatopallidal neurons show a 6-OHDA-induced elevation in their specific expression of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) encoding the D2 dopamine receptor and enkephalin, which is reversed by subsequent continuous treatment with the D2 agonist quinpirole. Conversely, striatonigral neurons show a 6-OHDA-induced reduction in their specific expression of mRNAs encoding the D1 dopamine receptor and substance P, which is reversed by subsequent daily injections of the D1 agonist SKF-38393. This treatment also increases dynorphin mRNA in striatonigral neurons. Thus, the differential effects of dopamine on striatonigral and striatopallidal neurons are mediated by their specific expression of D1 and D2 dopamine receptor subtypes, respectively.
Histamine is a neuromodulator in the brain, and the hippocampus is one of the regions of the brain that is innervated by histaminergic neurons. When applied to cultured hippocampal neurons, histamine selectively increased by up to tenfold the amplitude of the component of synaptic transmission that was mediated by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Spontaneous miniature synaptic currents and the current elicited by applied NMDA also were enhanced, indicating that the histamine effect was expressed primarily postsynaptically. These results suggest that histamine may modulate processes involving NMDA receptors, such as the induction of long-term potentiation.
Midbrain dopamine neurons are activated by reward or sensory stimuli predicting reward. These excitatory responses increase as the reward value increases. This response property has led to a hypothesis that dopamine neurons encode value-related signals and are inhibited by aversive events. Here we show that this is true only for a subset of dopamine neurons. We recorded the activity of dopamine neurons in monkeys (Macaca mulatta) during a Pavlovian procedure with appetitive and aversive outcomes (liquid rewards and airpuffs directed at the face, respectively). We found that some dopamine neurons were excited by reward-predicting stimuli and inhibited by airpuff-predicting stimuli, as the value hypothesis predicts. However, a greater number of dopamine neurons were excited by both of these stimuli, inconsistent with the hypothesis. Some dopamine neurons were also excited by both rewards and airpuffs themselves, especially when they were unpredictable. Neurons excited by the airpuff-predicting stimuli were located more dorsolaterally in the substantia nigra pars compacta, whereas neurons inhibited by the stimuli were located more ventromedially, some in the ventral tegmental area. A similar anatomical difference was observed for their responses to actual airpuffs. These findings suggest that different groups of dopamine neurons convey motivational signals in distinct manners.
Artificial strabismus in kittens decreases the proportion of binocularly driven units in area 17 of the cortex. This change in the binocular interaction of cortical cells also takes place if the kittens are deprived of vision from the day in which the strabismus is surgically produced to the day of the electrophysiological recording. Thus, altered motility of the eyes per se is sufficient to affect binocular interaction in the neurons of area 17 of the cortex.
During the past century, treatments for the diseases of youth and middle age have helped raise life expectancy significantly. However, cognitive decline has emerged as one of the greatest health threats of old age, with nearly 50% of adults over the age of 85 afflicted with Alzheimer's disease. Developing therapeutic interventions for such conditions demands a greater understanding of the processes underlying normal and pathological brain ageing. Recent advances in the biology of ageing in model organisms, together with molecular and systems-level studies of the brain, are beginning to shed light on these mechanisms and their potential roles in cognitive decline.
Membrane phosphoinositides control a variety of cellular processes through the recruitment and/or regulation of cytosolic proteins. One mechanism ensuring spatial specificity in phosphoinositide signalling is the targeting of enzymes that mediate their metabolism to specific subcellular sites. Phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type 1 gamma (PtdInsPKI gamma) is a phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase that is expressed at high levels in brain, and is concentrated at synapses. Here we show that the predominant brain splice variant of PtdInsPKI gamma (PtdInsPKI gamma-90) binds, by means of a short carboxy-terminal peptide, to the FERM domain of talin, and is strongly activated by this interaction. Talin, a principal component of focal adhesion plaques, is also present at synapses. PtdInsPKI gamma-90 is expressed in non-neuronal cells, albeit at much lower levels than in neurons, and is concentrated at focal adhesion plaques, where phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate has an important regulatory role. Overexpression of PtdInsPKI gamma-90, or expression of its C-terminal domain, disrupts focal adhesion plaques, probably by local disruption of normal phosphoinositide balance. These findings define an interaction that has a regulatory role in cell adhesion and suggest new similarities between molecular interactions underlying synaptic junctions and general mechanisms of cell adhesion.
To understand a neural circuit requires knowledge of its connectivity. Here we report measurements of functional connectivity between the input and ouput layers of the macaque retina at single-cell resolution and the implications of these for colour vision. Multi-electrode technology was used to record simultaneously from complete populations of the retinal ganglion cell types (midget, parasol and small bistratified) that transmit high-resolution visual signals to the brain. Fine-grained visual stimulation was used to identify the location, type and strength of the functional input of each cone photoreceptor to each ganglion cell. The populations of ON and OFF midget and parasol cells each sampled the complete population of long- and middle-wavelength-sensitive cones. However, only OFF midget cells frequently received strong input from short-wavelength-sensitive cones. ON and OFF midget cells showed a small non-random tendency to selectively sample from either long- or middle-wavelength-sensitive cones to a degree not explained by clumping in the cone mosaic. These measurements reveal computations in a neural circuit at the elementary resolution of individual neurons.
A major impediment in the treatment of neurological diseases is the presence of the blood-brain barrier, which precludes the entry of therapeutic molecules from blood to brain. Here we show that a short peptide derived from rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG) enables the transvascular delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA) to the brain. This 29-amino-acid peptide specifically binds to the acetylcholine receptor expressed by neuronal cells. To enable siRNA binding, a chimaeric peptide was synthesized by adding nonamer arginine residues at the carboxy terminus of RVG. This RVG-9R peptide was able to bind and transduce siRNA to neuronal cells in vitro, resulting in efficient gene silencing. After intravenous injection into mice, RVG-9R delivered siRNA to the neuronal cells, resulting in specific gene silencing within the brain. Furthermore, intravenous treatment with RVG-9R-bound antiviral siRNA afforded robust protection against fatal viral encephalitis in mice. Repeated administration of RVG-9R-bound siRNA did not induce inflammatory cytokines or anti-peptide antibodies. Thus, RVG-9R provides a safe and noninvasive approach for the delivery of siRNA and potentially other therapeutic molecules across the blood-brain barrier.
Early intracellular studies of cerebral cortical neurons indicated that synaptic input evokes dendritic action potentials that convey information towards the soma. Subsequent work in vitro established that neocortical neurons produce dendritic Ca2+ action potentials. To determine whether natural stimuli elicit Ca2+ spikes, we combined the techniques of whole-cell recording, pharmacology and quantitative receptive field mapping. Our findings show that visual stimulation routinely evoked Ca2+ spikes in distinct functional and anatomical classes of cells in different layers of the cat striate cortex. Hence regenerative Ca2+ potentials appear to play a role in both the initial and later stages of cortical sensory processing.
D. G. Rainnie et al., in their report "Adenosine inhibition of mesopontine cholinergic neurons: Implications for EEG arousal" (4 Feb., p. 689), suggested that adenosine may mediate sleep-debt related potentiation of EEG slow-wave activity in non-REM sleep. This is similar to a hypothesis proposed by J. H. Benington et al. [Sleep Res. 22, 4 (1993)]. Rainnie et al. suggested that adenosine exerts this effect by means of inhibition of mesopontine cholinergic neurons rather than by direct inhibition of neurons in the cerebral cortex.
Blockade of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor function by direct microinjection of the GABA receptor antagonist bicuculline into the nucleus ambiguus of the brainstem produced a marked, dose-related depression of heart rate and blood pressure which was mediated by the vagus nerve. This effect was not obtained in other regions of the brainstem and was reversed by the GABA receptor agonist muscimol. These data indicate that the nucleus ambiguus may be the site of a GABA receptor-mediated inhibition of vagal outflow.
Persistent neuronal plasticity, including that observed at some hippocampal synapses, requires N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-mediated transmission. NMDA receptor activation may be necessary for hippocampus-dependent learning as antagonists block acquisition in many such tasks. The behavioural effects of NMDA agonists are less well defined. We have shown that a monoclonal antibody (B6B21) displaced [3H]-glycine that was bound specifically to the NMDA receptor, and enhanced the opening of its integral cation channel in a glycine-like fashion, effects that were competitively antagonized by 7-chlorokynurenic acid. B6B21 also enhanced long-term potentiation in hippocampal slices. We report here that intraventricular infusions of B6B21 significantly enhances acquisition rates in hippocampus-dependent trace eye blink conditioning in rabbits, halving the number of trials required to reach a criterion of 80% conditioned responses. Peripheral injections of D-cycloserine, a partial agonist of the glycine site on the NMDA receptor which crosses the blood-brain barrier, also doubles rabbits' learning rates. Pseudoconditioning control experiments indicated a lack of nonspecific behavioural sensitization effects. Our data suggest that enhanced activation of the glycine coagonist site on the NMDA receptor/channel complex facilitates one form of associative learning and may be used in other learning tasks.
Dissociated cell suspensions, prepared from the substantia nigra and septal regions of rat embryos, can be grafted to the depths of the caudate-putamen and hippocampus of aged rats. The grafts were rich in dopamine-containing and acetylcholinesterase-positive neurons and had produced extensive new dopaminergic and cholinergic terminal networks in the host neostriatum and hippocampus, respectively. The intrastriatal dopaminergic grafts were associated with a significant improvement in motor coordination in the aged rats. This result suggests that the intracerebral grafting technique may provide a new tool for exploring the role of dopaminergic and cholinergic deficits in the neurological and behavioral impairments associated with aging.
The topographic distribution of dopaminergic receptors in the cerebral cortex closely parallels that of the dopaminergic innervation. In the rat, dopaminergic axons which originate in the mesencephalon are confined to a few discrete regions of the neocortex--anterior cingulate cortex, entorhinal cortex, frontal cortex (particularly anteromedial and supragenual areas) and the transitional zone between the neocortex and the pyriform cortex. Moreover, biochemical examinations of processes generally considered to be indicative of dopaminergic neuro-transmission--neuronal uptake of labelled dopamine or dopamine-activation of adenylate cyclase activity--have confirmed a highly restricted locus of action of dopaminergic systems in the cerebral cortex. We describe here data obtained using the 2-deoxyglucose technique in conjunction with conventional neuropharmacological techniques, suggesting that the influence of dopaminergic systems on cortical function extends beyond the known confines of the mesocortical dopaminergic system.
The comprehension of visually presented sentences produces brain activation that increases with the linguistic complexity of the sentence. The volume of neural tissue activated (number of voxels) during sentence comprehension was measured with echo-planar functional magnetic resonance imaging. The modulation of the volume of activation by sentence complexity was observed in a network of four areas: the classical left-hemisphere language areas (the left laterosuperior temporal cortex, or Wernicke's area, and the left inferior frontal gyrus, or Broca's area) and their homologous right-hemisphere areas, although the right areas had much smaller volumes of activation than did the left areas. These findings generally indicate that the amount of neural activity that a given cognitive process engenders is dependent on the computational demand that the task imposes.
Many regions of the mammalian brain are characterized by iterated ensembles of nerve cells which can be distinguished anatomically and physiologically. A particularly striking example is the pattern of glomeruli in the olfactory bulbs; other instances are columns and 'blobs' in the visual cortex, barrels and columns in the somatosensory cortex, and striasomes and cell islands in the neostriatum. Understanding the generation of these neuronal ensembles has a bearing on a variety of important neurobiological problems, including the nature of critical periods, the age-dependent response of the nervous system to injury and the manner in which neural information is stored. Analysis of these issues has usually been restricted to studies of the brains of different individuals at various ages. Many questions about the formation of such units, however, can only be answered by observing the same brain repeatedly in a living animal. This strategy would enable a direct assessment of how these units are assembled, whether the initial ensembles persist and whether units are lost or gained as an animal matures. We have succeeded in studying the pattern of glomeruli in the mouse olfactory bulb on two separate occasions during postnatal development. Comparison of the patterns observed at intervals of up to three weeks show that this part of the brain is gradually constructed by the addition of new glomeruli to a persisting population.
Short-term memory storage can be divided into separate subsystems for verbal information and visual information, and recent studies have begun to delineate the neural substrates of these working-memory systems. Although the verbal storage system has been well characterized, the storage capacity of visual working memory has not yet been established for simple, suprathreshold features or for conjunctions of features. Here we demonstrate that it is possible to retain information about only four colours or orientations in visual working memory at one time. However, it is also possible to retain both the colour and the orientation of four objects, indicating that visual working memory stores integrated objects rather than individual features. Indeed, objects defined by a conjunction of four features can be retained in working memory just as well as single-feature objects, allowing sixteen individual features to be retained when distributed across four objects. Thus, the capacity of visual working memory must be understood in terms of integrated objects rather than individual features, which places significant constraints on cognitive and neurobiological models of the temporary storage of visual information.
The acoustic features useful for converting auditory information into perceived objects are poorly understood. Although auditory cortex neurons have been described as being narrowly tuned and preferentially responsive to narrowband signals, naturally occurring sounds are generally wideband with unique spectral energy profiles. Through the use of parametric wideband acoustic stimuli, we found that such neurons in awake marmoset monkeys respond vigorously to wideband sounds having complex spectral shapes, preferring stimuli of either high or low spectral contrast. Low contrast-preferring neurons cannot be studied thoroughly with narrowband stimuli and have not been previously described. These findings indicate that spectral contrast reflects an important stimulus decomposition in auditory cortex and may contribute to the recognition of acoustic objects.
Optical imaging with high spatial and temporal resolution of neural activity in rat cortical slices was used to investigate the dynamics of signal transmission through neural connections in the visual cortex. When inhibition due to gamma-aminobutyric acid was slightly suppressed, horizontal propagation of excitation in both the supra- and infragranular layers became prominent. This propagation was not affected by vertical cuts in either the supra- or infragranular layer, which suggests that excitation is at least partially conveyed horizontally by reciprocal vertical connections between neurons in these layers.
The long-term effects of excitotoxic lesions in the nucleus basalis magnocellularis of the rat were found to mimic several neuropathological and chemical changes associated with Alzheimer's disease. Neuritic plaque-like structures, neurofibrillary changes, and neuronal atrophy or loss were observed in the frontoparietal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, and entorhinal cortex 14 months after the lesions were made. Cholinergic markers in neocortex were reduced, while catecholamine and indoleamine metabolism was largely unaffected at this time. Bilateral lesions of the nucleus basalis magnocellularis increased somatostatin and neuropeptide Y in the cortex of the rat by at least 138 and 284 percent, respectively, suggesting a functional interaction between cholinergic and peptidergic neurons that may differ from that in Alzheimer's disease.
A theory of emotional expression, ignored since 1906, holds that facial muscles act as ligatures on facial blood vessels and thereby regulate cerebral blood flow, which, in turn, influences subjective feeling. The theory, developed by Israel Waynbaum, a French physician, hypothesizes the subjective experience of emotions as following facial expression rather than preceding it. It answers Darwin's question of why different muscles contract or relax in different emotions better than Darwin's own theory. When restated in terms of contemporary neurophysiological knowledge, it explains and organizes several ill-understood emotional processes and phenomena.
It has been known since the last century that the bill of the platypus contains densely packed arrays of specialized receptor organs and their afferent nerves. Until recently these were thought to be largely mechanoreceptive in function. However Scheich et al. provide both behavioural and electrophysiological evidence that there are electroreceptors in the bill of the platypus. These authors were able to record evoked potentials from the somatosensory cortex of the brain in response to weak voltage pulses applied across the bill. Behavioural observations showed that a platypus could detect weak electric dipoles and it was suggested the animal was able to locate moving prey by the electrical activity associated with muscle contractions. From these observations, and in view of the fact that it was known that the bill contained gland receptors which in several respects resembled the ampullary electroreceptors in fresh-water fish, Scheich et al. concluded that the receptor array of the platypus bill included electroreceptors. In this report we present direct electrophysiological evidence for the existence of such receptors.
6-Sulfidopeptide-containing leukotriene-like immunoreactivity was synthesized in gerbil forebrains after bilateral common carotid occlusion and reperfusion. At 5, 10, or 15 minutes of ischemia, concentrations increased significantly and became more marked on reperfusion. Immunoreactivity was highest in forebrain gray matter and was below the detection limit of the assay in brain regions remote from the zone of ischemia. In vitro experiments with vascular cells and organ cultures of cerebral arteries indicate that the cerebral blood vessel wall is not a major source of biosynthetic activity in the brain. These experiments demonstrate leukotriene biosynthesis by the brain. Because synthesis occurs during ischemia and reperfusion and because leukotrienes are potent vasoconstrictors and promoters of tissue edema, they may play a role in the pathophysiology of cerebral ischemia.
The hypothesis that working memory is crucial for reducing distraction by maintaining the prioritization of relevant information was tested in neuroimaging and psychological experiments with humans. Participants performed a selective attention task that required them to ignore distractor faces while holding in working memory a sequence of digits that were in the same order (low memory load) or a different order (high memory load) on every trial. Higher memory load, associated with increased prefrontal activity, resulted in greater interference effects on behavioral performance from the distractor faces, plus increased face-related activity in the visual cortex. These findings confirm a major role for working memory in the control of visual selective attention.
Dopamine has been implicated in the cognitive process of working memory but the cellular basis of its action has yet to be revealed. By combining iontophoretic analysis of dopamine receptors with single-cell recording during behaviour, we found that D1 antagonists can selectively potentiate the 'memory fields' of prefrontal neurons which subserve working memory. The precision shown for D1 receptor modulation of mnemonic processing indicates a direct gating of selective excitatory synaptic inputs to prefrontal neurons during cognition.
A perceptual image can be recalled from memory without sensory stimulation. However, the neural origin of memory retrieval remains unsettled. To examine whether memory retrieval can be regulated by top-down processes originating from the prefrontal cortex, a visual associative memory task was introduced into the partial split-brain paradigm in monkeys. Long-term memory acquired through stimulus-stimulus association did not transfer via the anterior corpus callosum, a key part interconnecting prefrontal cortices. Nonetheless, when a visual cue was presented to one hemisphere, the anterior callosum could instruct the other hemisphere to retrieve the correct stimulus specified by the cue. Thus, although visual long-term memory is stored in the temporal cortex, memory retrieval is under the executive control of the prefrontal cortex.
Neurons are often considered to be the computational engines of the brain, with synapses acting solely as conveyers of information. But the diverse types of synaptic plasticity and the range of timescales over which they operate suggest that synapses have a more active role in information processing. Long-term changes in the transmission properties of synapses provide a physiological substrate for learning and memory, whereas short-term changes support a variety of computations. By expressing several forms of synaptic plasticity, a single neuron can convey an array of different signals to the neural circuit in which it operates.
Feeding induced by food deprivation is accompanied by an increased production of the dopamine metabolite 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid in the brains of rats. This neurochemical change occurs in the nucleus accumbens, the posterior hypothalamus, and the amygdala but not in other dopaminergic nerve terminal fields such as the corpus striatum. These results indicate that the release of dopamine from particular groups of central neurons is increased during feeding and suggest that anatomically distinct subgroups of central dopaminergic neurons serve different roles in the regulation of food intake.
Chicken cerebellum expresses a polypeptide antigenically and biochemically related to the alpha subunit of spectrin, an erythrocyte membrane-cytoskeletal protein. Most of this polypeptide is associated with a brain specific spectrin subunit, gamma-spectrin, and is localized in virtually all neuronal cell bodies and processes. Cerebellum also expresses polypeptides antigenically related to the beta subunits of erythrocyte spectrin and these are also found in association with cerebellar alpha-spectrin but are confined to the plasmalemma of the neuronal cell bodies. This suggests that there is a mechanism for segregating different spectrin complexes into distinct membrane domains within a single cell.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) represent a group of common progressive encephalopathies of children which have a global incidence of 1 in 12,500. These severe brain diseases are divided into three autosomal recessive subtypes, assigned to different chromosomal loci. The infantile subtype of NCL (INCL), linked to chromosome 1p32, is characterized by early visual loss and rapidly progressing mental deterioration, resulting in a flat electroencephalogram by 3 years of age; death occurs at 8 to 11 years, and characteristic storage bodies are found in brain and other tissues at autopsy. The molecular pathogenesis underlying the selective loss of neurons of neocortical origin has remained unknown. Here we report the identification, by positional candidate methods, of defects in the palmitoyl-protein thioesterase gene in all 42 Finnish INCL patients and several non-Finnish patients. The most common mutation results in intracellular accumulation of the polypeptide and undetectable enzyme activity in the brain of patients.
During aroused states of the brain, electroencephalographic activity is characterized by fast, irregular fluctuations of low amplitude, which are thought to reflect desynchronization of neuronal activity. This phenomenon seems at odds with the proposal that synchronization of cortical responses may play an important role in the processing of sensory signals. Here, activation of the mesencephalic reticular formation (MRF), an effective way to "desynchronize the electroencephalogram," was shown to facilitate oscillatory activity in the gamma frequency range and to enhance the stimulus-specific synchronization of neuronal spike responses in the visual cortex of cats.
Down Syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam) genes encode neuronal cell recognition proteins of the immunoglobulin superfamily. In Drosophila, Dscam1 generates 19,008 different ectodomains by alternative splicing of three exon clusters, each encoding half or a complete variable immunoglobulin domain. Identical isoforms bind to each other, but rarely to isoforms differing at any one of the variable immunoglobulin domains. Binding between isoforms on opposing membranes promotes repulsion. Isoform diversity provides the molecular basis for neurite self-avoidance. Self-avoidance refers to the tendency of branches from the same neuron (self-branches) to selectively avoid one another. To ensure that repulsion is restricted to self-branches, different neurons express different sets of isoforms in a biased stochastic fashion. Genetic studies demonstrated that Dscam1 diversity has a profound role in wiring the fly brain. Here we show how many isoforms are required to provide an identification system that prevents non-self branches from inappropriately recognizing each other. Using homologous recombination, we generated mutant animals encoding 12, 24, 576 and 1,152 potential isoforms. Mutant animals with deletions encoding 4,752 and 14,256 isoforms were also analysed. Branching phenotypes were assessed in three classes of neurons. Branching patterns improved as the potential number of isoforms increased, and this was independent of the identity of the isoforms. Although branching defects in animals with 1,152 potential isoforms remained substantial, animals with 4,752 isoforms were indistinguishable from wild-type controls. Mathematical modelling studies were consistent with the experimental results that thousands of isoforms are necessary to ensure acquisition of unique Dscam1 identities in many neurons. We conclude that thousands of isoforms are essential to provide neurons with a robust discrimination mechanism to distinguish between self and non-self during self-avoidance.
Just-noticeable differences of physical parameters are often limited by the resolution of the peripheral sensory apparatus. Thus, two-point discrimination in vision is limited by the size of individual photoreceptors. Frequency selectivity is a basic property of neurons in the mammalian auditory pathway. However, just-noticeable differences of frequency are substantially smaller than the bandwidth of the peripheral sensors. Here we report that frequency tuning in single neurons recorded from human auditory cortex in response to random-chord stimuli is far narrower than that typically described in any other mammalian species (besides bats), and substantially exceeds that attributed to the human auditory periphery. Interestingly, simple spectral filter models failed to predict the neuronal responses to natural stimuli, including speech and music. Thus, natural sounds engage additional processing mechanisms beyond the exquisite frequency tuning probed by the random-chord stimuli.
The mushroom bodies, substructures of the Drosophila brain, are involved in olfactory learning and short-term memory, but their role in long-term memory is unknown. Here we show that the alpha-lobes-absent (ala) mutant lacks either the two vertical lobes of the mushroom body or two of the three median lobes which contain branches of vertical lobe neurons. This unique phenotype allows analysis of mushroom body function. Long-term memory required the presence of the vertical lobes but not the median lobes. Short-term memory was normal in flies without either vertical lobes or the two median lobes studied.
After biosynthesis of norepinephrine was inhibited, treatment of rats for 10 days with rubidium chloride (0.6 milliequivalent per kilogram of body weight) caused an increase in the rate of disappearance of norepinephrine in the brainstem but not in the telencephalon. Also the utilization of intracisternally injected tritiated norepinephrine was increased and was accompanied by a shift in the pattern of norepinephrine metabolism to normetanephrine. These data suggest that greater amounts of neuronally stored norepinephrine were released to central adrenergic receptors.
Glutamate, the neurotransmitter at most excitatory synapses in the brain, activates a variety of receptor subtypes that can broadly be divided into ionotropic (ligand-gated ion channels) and metabotropic (G-protein-coupled) receptors. Ionotropic receptors mediate fast excitatory synaptic transmission, and based on pharmacological and molecular biological studies are divided into NMDA and non-NMDA subtypes. The non-NMDA receptor group is further divided into AMPA and kainate subtypes. Virtually all fast excitatory postsynaptic currents studied so far in the central nervous system are mediated by the AMPA and NMDA subtypes of receptors. Surprisingly, despite extensive analysis of their structure, biophysical properties and anatomical distribution, a synaptic role for kainate receptors in the brain has not been found. Here we report that repetitive activation of the hippocampal mossy fibre pathway, which is associated with high-affinity kainate binding and many of the kainate receptor subtypes, generates a slow excitatory synaptic current with all of the properties expected of a kainate receptor. This activity-dependent synaptic current greatly augments the excitatory drive of CA3 pyramidal cells.
Current ideas about the dependence of neurons on target-derived growth factors were formulated on the basis of experiments involving neurons with projections to the periphery. Nerve growth factor (NGF) and recently identified members of the NGF family of neuronal growth factors, known as neurotrophins, are thought to regulate survival of sympathetic and certain populations of sensory ganglion cells during development. Far less is known about factors that regulate the survival of spinal and cranial motor neurons, which also project to peripheral targets. NGF has not been shown to influence motor neuron survival, and whether the newly identified neurotrophins promote motor neuron survival is unknown. We show here that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is retrogradely transported by motor neurons in neonatal rats and that local application of BDNF to transected sciatic nerve prevents the massive death of motor neurons that normally follows axotomy in the neonatal period. These results show that BDNF has survival-promoting effects on motor neurons in vivo and suggest that BDNF may influence motor neuron survival during development.
A fundamental property of many associative memory networks is the ability to decorrelate overlapping input patterns before information is stored. In the hippocampus, this neuronal pattern separation is expressed as the tendency of ensembles of place cells to undergo extensive 'remapping' in response to changes in the sensory or motivational inputs to the hippocampus. Remapping is expressed under some conditions as a change of firing rates in the presence of a stable place code ('rate remapping'), and under other conditions as a complete reorganization of the hippocampal place code in which both place and rate of firing take statistically independent values ('global remapping'). Here we show that the nature of hippocampal remapping can be predicted by ensemble dynamics in place-selective grid cells in the medial entorhinal cortex, one synapse upstream of the hippocampus. Whereas rate remapping is associated with stable grid fields, global remapping is always accompanied by a coordinate shift in the firing vertices of the grid cells. Grid fields of co-localized medial entorhinal cortex cells move and rotate in concert during this realignment. In contrast to the multiple environment-specific representations coded by place cells in the hippocampus, local ensembles of grid cells thus maintain a constant spatial phase structure, allowing position to be represented and updated by the same translation mechanism in all environments encountered by the animal.
Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian central nervous system. The ionotropic glutamate receptors are classified into two groups, NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors and AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate) receptors. The AMPA receptor is a ligand-gated cation channel that mediates the fast component of excitatory postsynaptic currents in the central nervous system. Here we report that AMPA receptors function not only as ion channels but also as cell-surface signal transducers by means of their interaction with the Src-family non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase Lyn. In the cerebellum, Lyn is physically associated with the AMPA receptor and is rapidly activated following stimulation of the receptor. Activation of Lyn is independent of Ca2+ and Na+ influx through AMPA receptors. As a result of activation of Lyn, the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling pathway is activated, and the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) messenger RNA is increased in a Lyn-kinase-dependent manner. Thus, AMPA receptors generate intracellular signals from the cell surface to the nucleus through the Lyn-MAPK pathway, which may contribute to synaptic plasticity by regulating the expression of BDNF.
The rat hippocampal formation was tested for the presence of factors that would accelerate neurite extension from chick parasympathetic (ciliary ganglion) or sympathetic (lumbar chain) neurons in vitro. Two growth factors were identified in extracts of this brain region. One accelerated neurite extension from sympathetic neurons and was blocked by antiserum to nerve growth factor. The other accelerated neurite extension from parasympathetic neurons but was not affected by the antiserum. These results suggest that specific growth factors account for the specificity of neuronal sprouting.
Schizophrenia is a complex disorder that interferes with the function of several brain systems required for cognition and normal social behaviour. Although the most notable clinical aspects of the disease only become apparent during late adolescence or early adulthood, many lines of evidence suggest that schizophrenia is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong genetic component. Several independent studies have identified neuregulin 1 (NRG1) and its receptor ERBB4 as important risk genes for schizophrenia, although their precise role in the disease process remains unknown. Here we show that Nrg1 and ErbB4 signalling controls the development of inhibitory circuitries in the mammalian cerebral cortex by cell-autonomously regulating the connectivity of specific GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-containing interneurons. In contrast to the prevalent view, which supports a role for these genes in the formation and function of excitatory synapses between pyramidal cells, we found that ErbB4 expression in the mouse neocortex and hippocampus is largely confined to certain classes of interneurons. In particular, ErbB4 is expressed by many parvalbumin-expressing chandelier and basket cells, where it localizes to axon terminals and postsynaptic densities receiving glutamatergic input. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments, both in vitro and in vivo, demonstrate that ErbB4 cell-autonomously promotes the formation of axo-axonic inhibitory synapses over pyramidal cells, and that this function is probably mediated by Nrg1. In addition, ErbB4 expression in GABA-containing interneurons regulates the formation of excitatory synapses onto the dendrites of these cells. By contrast, ErbB4 is dispensable for excitatory transmission between pyramidal neurons. Altogether, our results indicate that Nrg1 and ErbB4 signalling is required for the wiring of GABA-mediated circuits in the postnatal cortex, providing a new perspective to the involvement of these genes in the aetiology of schizophrenia.
During brain development, neurons and glia are generated from a germinal zone containing both neural stem cells (NSCs) and more limited intermediate neural progenitors (INPs). The signalling events that distinguish between these two proliferative neural cell types remain poorly understood. The Notch signalling pathway is known to maintain NSC character and to inhibit neurogenesis, although little is known about the role of Notch signalling in INPs. Here we show that both NSCs and INPs respond to Notch receptor activation, but that NSCs signal through the canonical Notch effector C-promoter binding factor 1 (CBF1), whereas INPs have attenuated CBF1 signalling. Furthermore, whereas knockdown of CBF1 promotes the conversion of NSCs to INPs, activation of CBF1 is insufficient to convert INPs back to NSCs. Using both transgenic and transient in vivo reporter assays we show that NSCs and INPs coexist in the telencephalic ventricular zone and that they can be prospectively separated on the basis of CBF1 activity. Furthermore, using in vivo transplantation we show that whereas NSCs generate neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes at similar frequencies, INPs are predominantly neurogenic. Together with previous work on haematopoietic stem cells, this study suggests that the use or blockade of the CBF1 cascade downstream of Notch is a general feature distinguishing stem cells from more limited progenitors in a variety of tissues.
The intracerebral injection of b-amyloid-containing brain extracts can induce cerebral b-amyloidosis and associated pathologies in susceptible hosts. We found that intraperitoneal inoculation with b-amyloid-rich extracts induced b-amyloidosis in the brains of b-amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice after prolonged incubation times.
Penicillin induces partial depolarization and increased excitability of the neuronal membrane of crayfish stretch receptor. Such effects suggest that the epileptic focus created by the topical application of penicillin to the mammalian cerebral cortex may result from the lowering of the threshold for impluse initiation by excitatory synaptic action within the neuron population.
Functional imaging methods monitor neural activity by measuring hemodynamic signals. These are more closely related to local field potentials (LFPs) than to action potentials. We simultaneously recorded electrical and hemodynamic responses in the cat visual cortex. Increasing stimulus strength enhanced spiking activity, high-frequency LFP oscillations, and hemodynamic responses. With constant stimulus intensity, the hemodynamic response fluctuated; these fluctuations were only loosely related to action potential frequency but tightly correlated to the power of LFP oscillations in the gamma range. These oscillations increase with the synchrony of synaptic events, which suggests a close correlation between hemodynamic responses and neuronal synchronization.
The brain of Homo floresiensis was assessed by comparing a virtual endocast from the type specimen (LB1) with endocasts from great apes, Homo erectus, Homo sapiens, a human pygmy, a human microcephalic, specimen number Sts 5 (Australopithecus africanus), and specimen number WT 17000 (Paranthropus aethiopicus). Morphometric, allometric, and shape data indicate that LB1 is not a microcephalic or pygmy. LB1's brain/body size ratio scales like that of an australopithecine, but its endocast shape resembles that of Homo erectus. LB1 has derived frontal and temporal lobes and a lunate sulcus in a derived position, which are consistent with capabilities for higher cognitive processing.
The glucose analogue 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) can be used quantitatively to measure metabolic activity and is widely used qualitatively for mapping functional activity in the brain. The resolution (meaning the full width at half maximum of the grain density distribution around a line source) of the technique using [14C]-2-DG and X-ray film is limited to about 100 micrometers. Attempts have been made to improve the resolution using [3H]-2-DG (ref. 6) and cellular resolution has been achieved in the goldfish retina and with cultured mouse neurones. An anatomical technique for mapping the metabolic activity of individual neurones would be useful for studying invertebrate central nervous systems, which are relatively simple and stereotyped compared to vertebrate brains. The [3H]-2-DG technique was applied to an invertebrate in a study of the Drosophila visual system, though without cellular resolution. We present here modifications of the [3H]-2-DG technique to demonstrate localization of 2-DG in single neurones of Limax maximus, a gastropod mollusc, with a resolution of less than 1 micrometer.
Although it has long been thought that the prefrontal cortex of primates is involved in the integrative regulation of behaviours, the neural architecture underlying specific aspects of cognitive behavioural planning has yet to be clarified. If subjects are required to remember a large number of complex motor sequences and plan to execute each of them individually, categorization of the sequences according to the specific temporal structure inherent in each subset of sequences serves to facilitate higher-order planning based on memory. Here we show, using these requirements, that cells in the lateral prefrontal cortex selectively exhibit activity for a specific category of behavioural sequences, and that categories of behaviours, embodied by different types of movement sequences, are represented in prefrontal cells during the process of planning. This cellular activity implies the generation of neural representations capable of storing structured event complexes at an abstract level, exemplifying the development of macro-structured action knowledge in the lateral prefrontal cortex.
Deposits of beta-amyloid are one of the main pathological characteristics of Alzheimer's disease. The beta-amyloid peptide constituent (relative molecular mass 4,200) of the deposits is derived from the beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP) which is expressed in several different isoforms. The two most prevalent beta-APP isoforms are distinguished by either the presence (beta-APP751) or absence (beta-APP695) of a Kunitz serine protease inhibitor domain. Changes in the abundance of different beta-APP messenger RNAs in brains of Alzheimer's disease victims have been widely reported. Although these results have been controversial, most evidence favours an increase in the mRNAs encoding protease inhibitor-containing isoforms of beta-APP and it is proposed that this change contributes to beta-amyloid formation. We have now produced an imbalance in the normal neuronal ratio of beta-APP isoforms by preparing transgenic mice expressing additional beta-APP751 under the control of a neural-specific promoter. The cortical and hippocampal brain regions of the transgenic mice display extracellular beta-amyloid immunoreactive deposits varying in size (less than 5-50 microns) and abundance. These results suggest that one mechanism of beta-amyloid formation may involve a disruption of the normal ratio of neuronal beta-APP isoform expression and support a direct relationship between increased expression of Kunitz inhibitor-bearing beta-APP isoforms and beta-amyloid deposition.
Positron emission tomography was used to measure changes in the regional cerebral blood flow of normal people while they searched visual displays for targets defined by color, by motion, or by a conjunction of color and motion. A region in the superior parietal cortex was activated only during the conjunction task, at a location that had previously been shown to be engaged by successive shifts of spatial attention. Correspondingly, the time needed to detect a conjunction target increased with the number of items in the display, which is consistent with the use of a mechanism that successively analyzes each item in the visual field.
Huntington's disease (HD) is a late-onset autosomal dominant neuropsychiatric disorder presenting in mid-adult life with personality disturbance and involuntary movements, cognitive and affective disturbance, and inexorable progression to death. The underlying genetic defect has been mapped to chromosomal band 4p16.3 (refs 2, 3). Analysis of specific recombination events in some families with HD has further refined the location of the HD defect to a 2.2 megabase DNA interval. Using a direct complementary DNA selection strategy we have identified at least seven transcriptional units within the minimal region believed to contain the HD gene. Screening with one of the cDNA clones identified an Alu insertion in genomic DNA from two persons with HD which showed complete cosegregation with the disease in these families but was not found in 1,000 control chromosomes. Two genes including the previously identified alpha-adducin gene and another that encodes for a 12-kilobase transcript, map in close proximity to the Alu insertion site. The 12-kilobase transcript should be regarded as a strong candidate for the HD gene.
Inhibitory neurotransmission mediated by GABA(A) receptors can be modulated by the endogenous neurosteroids, allopregnanolone and tetrahydro-deoxycorticosterone. Neurosteroids are synthesized de novo in the brain during stress, pregnancyand after ethanol consumption, and disrupted steroid regulation of GABAergic transmission is strongly implicated in several debilitating conditions such as panic disorder, major depression, schizophrenia, alcohol dependence and catamenial epilepsy. Determining how neurosteroids interact with the GABA(A) receptor is a prerequisite for understanding their physiological and pathophysiological roles in the brain. Here we identify two discrete binding sites in the receptor's transmembrane domains that mediate the potentiating and direct activation effects of neurosteroids. They potentiate GABA responses from a cavity formed by the alpha-subunit transmembrane domains, whereas direct receptor activation is initiated by interfacial residues between alpha and beta subunits and is enhanced by steroid binding to the potentiation site. Thus, significant receptor activation by neurosteroids relies on occupancy of both the activation and potentiation sites. These sites are highly conserved throughout the GABA(A )receptor family, and their identification provides a unique opportunity for the development of new therapeutic, neurosteroid-based ligands and transgenic disease models of neurosteroid dysfunction.
Electrical stimulation of the midbrain raphe, an area in which neuronal perikarya containing serotonin are aggregated, produces an increase in 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid and a decrease in serotonin in the forebrain. These changes indicate that serotonin in the brain can be released via a specific neural pathway, namely, the system of axons projecting into the forebrain from serotonin-containing neurons in the midbrain raphe.
The construction of the brain during embryonic development was thought to be largely independent of its electrical activity. In this view, proliferation, migration and differentiation of neurons are driven entirely by genetic programs and activity is important only at later stages in refinement of connections. However, recent findings demonstrate that activity plays essential roles in early development of the nervous system. Activity has similar roles in the incorporation of newly born neurons in the adult nervous system, suggesting that there are general rules underlying activity-dependent development. The extensive involvement of activity makes it likely that it is required at all developmental stages as a necessary partner with genetic programs.
Although prion proteins are most efficiently propagated through intracerebral inoculation, peripheral administration has caused the diseases kuru, iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and new-variant CJD. The development of neurological disease after peripheral inoculation depends on prion expansion within cells of the lymphoreticular system. Here we investigate the identity of these cells by using a panel of immune-deficient mice inoculated with prions intraperitoneally: we found that defects affecting only T lymphocytes had no apparent effect, but that all mutations that disrupted the differentiation and response of B lymphocytes prevented the development of clinical scrapie. As an absence of B cells and of antibodies correlates with severe defects in follicular dendritic cells, a lack of any of these three components may prevent the development of clinical scrapie. However, we found that scrapie developed after peripheral inoculation in mice expressing immunoglobulins that were exclusively of the M subclass and without detectable specificity for the normal form of the prion PrPC, and in mice which had differentiated B cells but no functional follicular dendritic cells. We conclude that differentiated B cells are crucial for neuroinvasion by scrapie, regardless of the specificity of their receptors.
Knowledge of regional cerebral hemodynamics has widespread application for both physiological research and clinical assessment because of the well-established interrelation between physiological function, energy metabolism, and localized blood supply. A magnetic resonance technique was developed for quantitative imaging of cerebral hemodynamics, allowing for measurement of regional cerebral blood volume during resting and activated cognitive states. This technique was used to generate the first functional magnetic resonance maps of human task activation, by using a visual stimulus paradigm. During photic stimulation, localized increases in blood volume (32 +/- 10 percent, n = 7 subjects) were detected in the primary visual cortex. Center-of-mass coordinates and linear extents of brain activation within the plane of the calcarine fissure are reported.
Cytosomes filled with intensely fluorescent material in the form of curvilinear bodies were isolated by density gradient centrifugation followed by pronase digestion from the cerebral cortex of a child who had died at age 7 from the late infantile form of Batten disease. Forty-three percent of the dry weight of the storage material was extracted by a mixture of chloroform and methanol, leaving a waterinsoluble amorphous fluorescent residue. Infrared spectroscopy, proton magnetic resonance spectrscopy, and mass spectrometry of this residue strongly suggested the presence of retinoyl polyenes linked to a small peptide. Base hydrolysis and methanolysis yielded retinoic acid and methyl retinoate, respectively. Ozonolysis yielded a product derived from the substituted cyclohexenyl ring of vitamin A. The results indicate that the fluorescent component of the neuronal storage material is a retinoyl complex and is not derived from peroxidized polyunsatured fatty acids as previously thought.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) is the parent molecule of a family of polypeptide hormones, some of which are secreted from the small intestine after food ingestion and stimulate both exocrine secretion and gall bladder contraction. CCK-like molecules have also been identified in the central and peripheral nervous systems. The significance of CCK in the brain is unknown, but it could mediate satiety. The satiety produced by introduction of food into the intestine can be mimicked by systemic injections of CCK and its analogues-these hormones are also effective when injected into the hypothalamus and the cerebral ventricle. Straus and Yalow showed that brain CCK levels were reduced in the cerebral cortex of both genetically obese (ob/ob) and normal mice after a 2-5-day fast. However, Schneider detected no such reduction in similar conditions and other studies have suggested a peripheral rather than central action on satiety. Using CCK of high specific activity, specific CCK receptors have been measured both in pancreatic acini and in various brain regions. We show here that fasting in mice significantly increases CCK binding due to an increased number of CCK receptors in the olfactory bulb and hypothalamus, but not in other brain regions. In contrast, insulin binding to its receptors was not altered by fasting. As the hypothalamus is known to regulate appetite, this finding supports the concept that CCK regulates satiety through interaction with this brain region.
It has been shown that the dystrophin gene, which is defective in patients with Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy (reviewed in ref. 1), is transcribed in brain from a specific promoter that is different from the one used in muscle, and so the two types of transcripts differ at least in their first exon. We recently found that the dystrophin gene is expressed at a higher level in primary cultures of neuronal cells than in astro-glial cells derived from adult mouse brain. Here we investigate the use of two different promoters in each cell type. Our results demonstrate that the brain-type promoter of the dystrophin gene is highly specific to neurons, in which there is a significant increase in the amount of brain-specific messenger RNA during the course of in vitro maturation. By contrast, the muscle-type promoter is active in a wider range of cell types, including not only striated and smooth muscle, but also glial cells to a lesser extent, and probably neurons.
Some G-protein-coupled receptors display 'constitutive activity', that is, spontaneous activity in the absence of agonist. This means that a proportion of the receptor population spontaneously undergoes an allosteric transition, leading to a conformation that can bind G proteins. The process has been shown to occur with recombinant receptors expressed at high density, and/or mutated, but also non-mutated recombinant receptors expressed at physiological concentrations. Transgenic mice that express a constitutively active mutant of the beta2-adrenergic receptor display cardiac anomalies; and spontaneous receptor mutations leading to constitutive activity are at the origin of some human diseases. Nevertheless, this process has not previously been found to occur in animals expressing normal levels of receptor. Here we show that two isoforms of the recombinant rat H3 receptor display high constitutive activity. Using drugs that abrogate this activity ('inverse agonists') and a drug that opposes both agonists and inverse agonists ('neutral antagonist'), we show that constitutive activity of native H3 receptors is present in rodent brain and that it controls histaminergic neuron activity in vivo. Inverse agonists may therefore find therapeutic applications, even in the case of diseases involving non-mutated receptors expressed at normal levels.
Neurogenesis normally only occurs in limited areas of the adult mammalian brain--the hippocampus, olfactory bulb and epithelium, and at low levels in some regions of macaque cortex. Here we show that endogenous neural precursors can be induced in situ to differentiate into mature neurons, in regions of adult mammalian neocortex that do not normally undergo any neurogenesis. This differentiation occurs in a layer- and region-specific manner, and the neurons can re-form appropriate corticothalamic connections. We induced synchronous apoptotic degeneration of corticothalamic neurons in layer VI of anterior cortex of adult mice and examined the fates of dividing cells within cortex, using markers for DNA replication (5-bromodeoxyuridine; BrdU) and progressive neuronal differentiation. Newly made, BrdU-positive cells expressed NeuN, a mature neuronal marker, in regions of cortex undergoing targeted neuronal death and survived for at least 28 weeks. Subsets of BrdU+ precursors expressed Doublecortin, a protein found exclusively in migrating neurons, and Hu, an early neuronal marker. Retrograde labelling from thalamus demonstrated that BrdU+ neurons can form long-distance corticothalamic connections. Our results indicate that neuronal replacement therapies for neurodegenerative disease and CNS injury may be possible through manipulation of endogenous neural precursors in situ.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are evolutionarily conserved, 18- to 25-nucleotide, non-protein coding transcripts that posttranscriptionally regulate gene expression during development. miRNAs also occur in postmitotic cells, such as neurons in the mammalian central nervous system, but their function is less well characterized. We investigated the role of miRNAs in mammalian midbrain dopaminergic neurons (DNs). We identified a miRNA, miR-133b, that is specifically expressed in midbrain DNs and is deficient in midbrain tissue from patients with Parkinson's disease. miR-133b regulates the maturation and function of midbrain DNs within a negative feedback circuit that includes the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor Pitx3. We propose a role for this feedback circuit in the fine-tuning of dopaminergic behaviors such as locomotion.
Neurons in the visual cortex are selectively responsive to light or dark bars presented at particular orientations. On the basis of physiological data, this orientation selectivity is hypothesized as being due at least partially to intracortical inhibitory mechanisms. But this hypothesis has been challenged by intracellular recordings indicating that excitatory inputs themselves are orientation-selective, so inhibition may not contribute to the observed selectivity. Also, there is controversy about the presence of intracortical horizontal connections mediating inhibition for selectivity and about the theoretical validity of such inhibitory connections. Using cross-correlation analysis of the activities of two neurons recorded simultaneously, we find that inhibitory interactions exist between cells with somewhat different, but not orthogonal, orientation preferences. This suggests that intracortical horizontal inhibition operates between 'orientation columns' to sharpen the orientation tuning of cortical neurons.
Autoradiography demonstrated prominent retrograde labeling of olivocerebellar climbing fiber neurons after injection of tritiated D-aspartate into the rat cerebellar cortex or deep nuclei. Mossy fiber systems originating in the brainstem and spinal cord remained unlabeled. Potassium ion-induced depolarization of cerebellar slices resulted in calcium ion-dependent release of endogenous L-aspartate, L-glutamate, gamma-aminobutyric acid, and glycine. A 26 percent decrease in aspartate release was observed after 3-acetylpyridine-induced destruction of the inferior olive, supporting the hypothesis that aspartate is a neurotransmitter in climbing fibers.
gamma-Aminobutyric acid (GABA), the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in mammalian brain, is believed to act by increasing membrane conductance of chloride ions. In this study it was found that GABA agonists increased the uptake of chloride-36 by cell-free membrane preparations from mouse brain. This influx was rapid (less than 5 seconds), and 13 micromolar GABA produced a half-maximal effect. The GABA antagonists (bicuculline and picrotoxin) blocked the effect of GABA, whereas pentobarbital enhanced the action. This may be the first demonstration of functional coupling among GABA and barbiturate receptors and chloride channels in isolated membranes. The technique should facilitate biochemical and pharmacological studies of GABA receptor-effector coupling.
Protease nexin-II (PN-II) is a protease inhibitor that forms SDS-resistant inhibitory complexes with the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-binding protein, the gamma-subunit of nerve growth factor, and trypsin. The properties of PN-II indicate that it has a role in the regulation of certain proteases in the extracellular environment. Here we describe more of the amino-acid sequence of PN-II and its identity to the deduced sequence of the amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP). Amyloid beta-protein is present in neuritic plaques and cerebrovascular deposits in individuals with Alzheimer's disease and Down's syndrome. A monoclonal antibody against PN-II (designated mAbP2-1) recognized PN-II in immunoblots of serum-free culture medium from human glioblastoma cells and neuroblastoma cells, as well as in homogenates of normal and Alzheimer's disease brains. In addition, mAbP2-1 stained neuritic plaques in Alzheimer's disease brain. PN-II was a potent inhibitor of chymotrypsin with an inhibition constant Ki of 6 x 10(-10)M. Together, these data demonstrate that PN-II and APP are probably the same protein. The regulation of extracellular proteolysis by PN-II and the deposition of at least parts of the molecule in senile plaques is consistent with previous reports that implicate altered proteolysis in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.
Neurotrophins promote neuronal survival and differentiation, but the fact that their expression is modified by neuronal activity, suggests a role in regulating synapse development and plasticity. In developing hippocampus, the expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its receptor TrkB increases in parallel with the ability to undergo long-term potentiation (LTP). Here we report a mechanism by which BDNF modulates hippocampal LTP. Exogenous BDNF promoted the induction of LTP by tetanic stimulation in young (postnatal day 12-13) hippocampal slices, which in the absence of BDNF show only short-term potentiation (STP). This effect was due to an enhanced ability of hippocampal synapses to respond to tetanic stimulation, rather than to a direct modulation of the LTP-triggering mechanism. A TrkB-IgG fusion protein, which scavenges endogenous BDNF, reduced the synaptic responses to tetanus as well as the magnitude of LTP in adult hippocampus. Our results suggest that BDNF may regulate LTP in developing and adult hippocampus by enhancing synaptic responses to tetanic stimulation.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) is a neuropeptide present in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS). In all species studied so far, the highest concentrations of this neuropeptide have been found in the cerebral cortex, the amygdala and the hippocampus. Five molecular forms of CCK having 39, 33, 13, 8 and 4 amino acid residues have been identified in the CNS, the sulphated octapeptide (CCK8) being the most abundant form detected. Specific CCK binding sites have been demonstrated in the rat, guinea pig and human brain. CCK8, applied by microiontophoresis to deep cortical neurones and hippocampal pyramidal neurones, has a powerful excitatory effect, whereas the non-sulphated CCK octapeptide has no such effect on these neurones. Low doses of benzodiazepines depress the spontaneous activity of hippocampal pyramidal neurones. We report here that benzodiazepines at very low doses antagonize selectively the CCK8-induced activation of rat hippocampal pyramidal neurones. This antagonistic action might be involved in the anxiolytic effect of these drugs.
Understanding the brain computations leading to object recognition requires quantitative characterization of the information represented in inferior temporal (IT) cortex. We used a biologically plausible, classifier-based readout technique to investigate the neural coding of selectivity and invariance at the IT population level. The activity of small neuronal populations (approximately 100 randomly selected cells) over very short time intervals (as small as 12.5 milliseconds) contained unexpectedly accurate and robust information about both object "identity" and "category." This information generalized over a range of object positions and scales, even for novel objects. Coarse information about position and scale could also be read out from the same population.
Facing the consequence of a decision we made can trigger emotions like satisfaction, relief, or regret, which reflect our assessment of what was gained as compared to what would have been gained by making a different decision. These emotions are mediated by a cognitive process known as counterfactual thinking. By manipulating a simple gambling task, we characterized a subject's choices in terms of their anticipated and actual emotional impact. Normal subjects reported emotional responses consistent with counterfactual thinking; they chose to minimize future regret and learned from their emotional experience. Patients with orbitofrontal cortical lesions, however, did not report regret or anticipate negative consequences of their choices. The orbitofrontal cortex has a fundamental role in mediating the experience of regret.
Atriopeptin, the atrial natriuretic peptide, is a circulating hormone that is released from the atria of mammalian hearts in response to volume expansion and acts upon the kidneys, adrenal glands and vasculature to regulate fluid and electrolyte homeostasis. Atriopeptin is also present in the brain of the rat. Atriopeptin immunoreactive cell bodies and fibres are found in many areas known to be involved in the central regulation of the cardiovascular system, suggesting that it may be a neuromediator in the central control of fluid and electrolyte balance. The paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, which contains the cell bodies of neurons that secrete vasopressin from the posterior pituitary gland, receives a dense innervation from atriopeptin-like immunoreactive fibres. We have studied the effect of atriopeptin on the electrical activity of single neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of anaesthetized rats and found that atriopeptin is a potent inhibitor of putative vasopressin neurons. Atriopeptin, which has systemic actions that oppose those of vasopressin, may act as a neuromodulator in the brain to prevent vasopressin secretion.
Neurones in the visual cortex are highly selective for orientation and spatial frequency of visual stimuli. There is strong neurophysiological evidence that orientation selectivity is enhanced by inhibitory interconnections between columns in the cortex which have different orientation sensitivities, an idea which is supported by experiments using neuropharmacological manipulation or complex visual stimuli. It has also been proposed that selectivity for spatial frequency is mediated in part by a similar mechanism to that for orientation, although evidence for this is based on special use of visual stimuli, which hampers interpretation of the findings. We have therefore examined selectivity for both orientation and spatial frequency using a technique which allows direct inferences about inhibitory processes. Our method uses microiontophoresis of an excitatory amino acid to elevate maintained discharge of single neurones in the visual cortex. We then present visual stimuli both within and outside the range of orientations and spatial frequencies which cause a cell to respond with increased discharge. Our results show that orientations presented on either side of the responsive range usually produce clear suppression of maintained discharge. In marked contrast, spatial frequencies shown to either side of the responsive range have little or no effect on maintained activity. We conclude that there is an intracortical organization of inhibitory connections between cells tuned to different orientations but not different spatial frequencies.
Schizophrenia is a debilitating mental illness that affects 1% of the population. Despite intensive study, its molecular etiology remains enigmatic. Like many common diseases, schizophrenia is multifactorial in origin, with both genetic and environmental contributions likely playing an important role in the manifestation of symptoms. Recent advances based on pharmacological studies, brain imaging analyses, and genetic research are now converging on tantalizing leads that point to a central role for several neurotransmitters, including dopamine, glutamate, and serotonin, that may interface with neurodevelopmental defects reflecting disease-related genetic aberrations. Here, we provide a brief overview of the parallel approaches being used to identify the molecular causes of schizophrenia and discuss possible directions for future research.
The stimulation of mating behavior by means of the stereotaxic introduction of small implants of solid C(14)-diethylstilbestrol di-n-butyrate to the hypothalamus of ovariectomized cats is described. Autoradiographic examination of the brains of mating animals reveals that certain neurons in the region of these implants show a selective affinity for labeled estrogen.
Cell types associated with angiotensinogen mRNA in rat brain were identified in individual brain sections by in situ hybridization with tritiated RNA probes or with a sulfur-35--labeled oligonucleotide combined with immunocytochemical detection of either glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) for astrocytes or microtubule-associated protein (MAP-2) for neurons. Autoradiography revealed silver grains clustered primarily over GFAP-reactive soma and processes; most grain clusters were not associated with MAP-2--reactive cells. These results demonstrate that, in contrast to other known neuropeptide precursors, angiotensinogen is synthesized by glia.
The vertebrate hindbrain develops in a segmental pattern, with distinctive groups of neurons originating from different segments. We report here that members of the Hox-2 cluster of murine homoeobox genes are expressed in segment-specific patterns in the developing hindbrain, with successive genes having boundaries at two-segment intervals. These data indicate that Hox genes specify segment phenotype, a role analogous to that of their Drosophila homologues.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a therapeutic option for intractable neurological and psychiatric disorders, including Parkinson's disease and major depression. Because of the heterogeneity of brain tissues where electrodes are placed, it has been challenging to elucidate the relevant target cell types or underlying mechanisms of DBS. We used optogenetics and solid-state optics to systematically drive or inhibit an array of distinct circuit elements in freely moving parkinsonian rodents and found that therapeutic effects within the subthalamic nucleus can be accounted for by direct selective stimulation of afferent axons projecting to this region. In addition to providing insight into DBS mechanisms, these results demonstrate an optical approach for dissection of disease circuitry and define the technological toolbox needed for systematic deconstruction of disease circuits by selectively controlling individual components.
Recent physiological studies show that the spatial context of visual stimuli enhances the response of cells in primary visual cortex to weak stimuli and suppresses the response to strong stimuli. A model of orientation-tuned neurons was constructed to explore the role of lateral cortical connections in this dual effect. The differential effect of excitatory and inhibitory current and noise conveyed by the lateral connections explains the physiological results as well as the psychophysics of pop-out and contour completion. Exploiting the model's property of stochastic resonance, the visual context changes the model's intrinsic input variability to enhance the detection of weak signals.
In young animals, monocular deprivation leads to an ocular dominance shift, whereas in adults after the critical period there is no such shift. Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans (CSPGs) are components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) inhibitory for axonal sprouting. We tested whether the developmental maturation of the ECM is inhibitory for experience-dependent plasticity in the visual cortex. The organization of CSPGs into perineuronal nets coincided with the end of the critical period and was delayed by dark rearing. After CSPG degradation with chondroitinase-ABC in adult rats, monocular deprivation caused an ocular dominance shift toward the nondeprived eye. The mature ECM is thus inhibitory for experience-dependent plasticity, and degradation of CSPGs reactivates cortical plasticity.
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) has been implicated in the ongoing neurogenesis in postnatal rodent brains. Here we adopted an in vivo genetic fate-mapping strategy, using Gli1 (GLI-Kruppel family member) as a sensitive readout of Shh activity, to systematically mark and follow the fate of Shh-responding cells in the adult mouse forebrain. We show that initially, only a small population of cells (including both quiescent neural stem cells and transit-amplifying cells) responds to Shh in regions undergoing neurogenesis. This population subsequently expands markedly to continuously provide new neurons in the forebrain. Our study of the behaviour of quiescent neural stem cells provides in vivo evidence that they can self-renew for over a year and generate multiple cell types. Furthermore, we show that the neural stem cell niches in the subventricular zone and dentate gyrus are established sequentially and not until late embryonic stages.
To look at or reach for what we see, spatial information from the visual system must be transformed into a motor plan. The posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is well placed to perform this function, because it lies between visual areas, which encode spatial information, and motor cortical areas. The PPC contains several subdivisions, which are generally conceived as high-order sensory areas. Neurons in area 7a and the lateral intraparietal area fire before and during visually guided saccades. Other neurons in areas 7a and 5 are active before and during visually guided arm movements. These areas are also active during memory tasks in which the animal remembers the location of a target for hundreds of milliseconds before making an eye or arm movement. Such activity could reflect either visual attention or the intention to make movements. This question is difficult to resolve, because even if the animal maintains fixation while directing attention to a peripheral location, the observed neuronal activity could reflect movements that are planned but not executed. To address this, we recorded from the PPC while monkeys planned either reaches or saccades to a single remembered location. We now report that, for most neurons, activity before the movement depended on the type of movement being planned. We conclude that PPC contains signals related to what the animal intends to do.
The correlation between neurodegenerative disease and protein aggregation in the brain has long been recognized, but a causal relationship has not been unequivocally established, in part because a discrete pathogenic aggregate has not been identified. The complexity of these diseases and the dynamic nature of protein aggregation mean that, despite progress towards understanding aggregation, its relationship to disease is difficult to determine in the laboratory. Nevertheless, drug candidates that inhibit aggregation are now being tested in the clinic. These have the potential to slow the progression of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and related disorders and could, if administered presymptomatically, drastically reduce the incidence of these diseases. The clinical trials could also settle the century-old debate about causality.
Guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved in exocytosis, endocytosis, and recycling of vesicles in yeast and mammalian secretory cells. However, little is known about their contribution to fast synaptic transmission. We loaded guanine nucleotide analogs directly into a giant nerve terminal in rat brainstem slices. Inhibition of G-protein activity had no effect on basal synaptic transmission, but augmented synaptic depression and significantly slowed recovery from depression. A nonhydrolyzable GTP analog blocked recovery of transmission from activity-dependent depression. Neither effect was accompanied by a change in presynaptic calcium currents. Thus, G proteins contribute to fast synaptic transmission by refilling synaptic vesicles depleted after massive exocytosis.
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a severe brain demyelinating disease in boys that is caused by a deficiency in ALD protein, an adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette transporter encoded by the ABCD1 gene. ALD progression can be halted by allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). We initiated a gene therapy trial in two ALD patients for whom there were no matched donors. Autologous CD34+ cells were removed from the patients, genetically corrected ex vivo with a lentiviral vector encoding wild-type ABCD1, and then re-infused into the patients after they had received myeloablative treatment. Over a span of 24 to 30 months of follow-up, we detected polyclonal reconstitution, with 9 to 14% of granulocytes, monocytes, and T and B lymphocytes expressing the ALD protein. These results strongly suggest that hematopoietic stem cells were transduced in the patients. Beginning 14 to 16 months after infusion of the genetically corrected cells, progressive cerebral demyelination in the two patients stopped, a clinical outcome comparable to that achieved by allogeneic HCT. Thus, lentiviral-mediated gene therapy of hematopoietic stem cells can provide clinical benefits in ALD.
Glial cells, which outnumber neurones in the central nervous system, have traditionally been considered to be electrically inexcitable and to play only a passive role in the electrical activity of the brain. Recent reports have demonstrated, however, that certain glial cells, when maintained in primary culture, possess voltage-dependent ion channels. It remains to be demonstrated whether these channels are also present in glial cells in vivo. I show here that Muller cells, the principal glial cells of the vertebrate retina, can generate 'Ca2+ spikes' in freshly excised slices of retinal tissue. In addition, voltage-clamp studies of enzymatically dissociated Muller cells demonstrate the presence of four types of voltage-dependent ion channels: a Ca2+ channel, a Ca2+-activated K+ channel, a fast-inactivating (type A) K+ channel and an inward-rectifying K+ channel. Currents generated by these voltage-dependent channels may enhance the ability of Muller cells to regulate extracellular K+ levels in the retina and may be involved in the generation of the electroretinogram.
Conspicuous visual features commonly attract gaze, but how the brain selects targets for eye movements is not known. We investigated target selection in rhesus monkeys performing a visual search task by recording neurons in the frontal eye field, an area known to be responsible for generating purposive eye movements. Neurons with combined visual- and eye movement-related activity were analysed. We found that the initial visual responses to search stimulus arrays were the same whether the target or a distractor was in the response field. We also found that the neural activity evolved to specify target location before the execution of eye movements, ultimately peaking when the target was in the response field and being suppressed when the target was beside but not distant from the response field. These results demonstrate a possible mechanism by which a desired target is fixated and inappropriate eye movements are prevented.
In the monkey, the blood-brain barrier and the blood-aqueous and blood-vitreous barriers of the eye can be opened by internal carotid perfusion of solutions of 2 molar urea in a way compatible with survival and, in some few cases, without detectable neurological deficits. Urea presumably acts by osmotically shrinking the endothelial cells of the cerebrovascular vessels and opening their tight junctions. The high incidence of brain necrosis with neurological sequelae after perfusion of urea by the present technique precludes the use of osmotic opening of the blood-brain barrier for pharmacotherapy at this time.
For many insects, the polarization pattern of the blue sky serves as a compass cue for spatial navigation. E-vector orientations are detected by photoreceptors in a dorsal rim area of the eye. Polarized-light signals from both eyes are finally integrated in the central complex, a brain area consisting of two subunits, the protocerebral bridge and the central body. Here we show that a topographic representation of zenithal E-vector orientations underlies the columnar organization of the protocerebral bridge in a locust. The maplike arrangement is highly suited to signal head orientation under the open sky.
Three Siamese cats were found to have a progressive neurological disease that became obvious when they were 4 to 5 months of age. Their brains contained an excess of GM2 and GM3 gangliosides, and their livers a nine- to tenfold excess of sphingomyelin and cholesterol. A total deficiency of lysosomal (pH 5.0) sphingomyelinase was found in the leukocytes, liver, and brain of the cats, although the activity of the microsomal (pH 7.4, magnesium-dependent) sphingomyelinase was normal in brain. These cats appear to have a genetic disease identical to Niemann-Pick disease type A.
Visual working memory provides an essential link between perception and higher cognitive functions, allowing for the active maintenance of information about stimuli no longer in view. Research suggests that sustained activity in higher-order prefrontal, parietal, inferotemporal and lateral occipital areas supports visual maintenance, and may account for the limited capacity of working memory to hold up to 3-4 items. Because higher-order areas lack the visual selectivity of early sensory areas, it has remained unclear how observers can remember specific visual features, such as the precise orientation of a grating, with minimal decay in performance over delays of many seconds. One proposal is that sensory areas serve to maintain fine-tuned feature information, but early visual areas show little to no sustained activity over prolonged delays. Here we show that orientations held in working memory can be decoded from activity patterns in the human visual cortex, even when overall levels of activity are low. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging and pattern classification methods, we found that activity patterns in visual areas V1-V4 could predict which of two oriented gratings was held in memory with mean accuracy levels upwards of 80%, even in participants whose activity fell to baseline levels after a prolonged delay. These orientation-selective activity patterns were sustained throughout the delay period, evident in individual visual areas, and similar to the responses evoked by unattended, task-irrelevant gratings. Our results demonstrate that early visual areas can retain specific information about visual features held in working memory, over periods of many seconds when no physical stimulus is present.
One class of neurons in the somatic sensory cortex of unanesthetized monkeys is rhythmically entrained by sinusoidal mechanical stimulation of the skin of the hand at low frequencies. A second class, which is linked to Pacinian afferents, increases its rate of discharge in response to high-frequency peripheral stimuli but is not entrained. The vibratory sense is served by two distinct classes of cortical cells. The code for the group sensitive to low-frequency stimuli is the temporal order of impulses; for the high-frequency group the code is the labeled line.
Simple cells within layer IV of the cat primary visual cortex are selective for lines of a specific orientation. It has been proposed that their receptive-field properties are established by the pattern of connections that they receive from the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus. Thalamic inputs, however, represent only a small proportion of the synapses made onto simple cells, and others have argued that corticocortical connections are likely to be important in shaping simple-cell response properties. Here we describe a mechanism that might be involved in selectively strengthening the effect of thalamic inputs. We show that neighbouring geniculate neurons with overlapping receptive fields of the same type (on-centre or off-centre) often fire spikes that are synchronized to within 1 millisecond. Moreover, these neurons often project to a common cortical target neuron where synchronous spikes are more effective in evoking a postsynaptic response. We propose that precisely correlated firing within a group of geniculate neurons could serve to reinforce the thalamic input to cortical simple cells.
Coordinated migration of neurons in the developing and adult brain is essential for its proper function. The secreted glycoprotein Reelin (also known as RELN) guides migration of neurons by binding to two lipoprotein receptors, the very-low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) and apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2, also known as LRP8). Loss of Reelin function in humans results in the severe developmental disorder lissencephaly and it has also been associated with other neurological disorders such as epilepsy, schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease. The molecular mechanisms by which Reelin activates its receptors and controls cellular functions are largely unknown. Here we show that the neuronal guidance cues ephrin B proteins are essential for Reelin signalling during the development of laminated structures in the brain. We show that ephrin Bs genetically interact with Reelin. Notably, compound mouse mutants (Reln(+/-); Efnb3(-/-) or Reln(+/-); Efnb2(-/-)) and triple ephrin B1, B2, B3 knockouts show neuronal migration defects that recapitulate the ones observed in the neocortex, hippocampus and cerebellum of the reeler mouse. Mechanistically, we show that Reelin binds to the extracellular domain of ephrin Bs, which associate at the membrane with VLDLR and ApoER2 in neurons. Clustering of ephrin Bs leads to the recruitment and phosphorylation of Dab1 which is necessary for Reelin signalling. Conversely, loss of function of ephrin Bs severely impairs Reelin-induced Dab1 phosphorylation. Importantly, activation of ephrin Bs can rescue the reeler neuronal migration defects in the absence of Reelin protein. Together, our results identify ephrin Bs as essential components of the Reelin receptor/signalling pathway to control neuronal migration during the development of the nervous system.
The prefrontal cortex (PFC) subserves cognitive control: the ability to coordinate thoughts or actions in relation with internal goals. Its functional architecture, however, remains poorly understood. Using brain imaging in humans, we showed that the lateral PFC is organized as a cascade of executive processes from premotor to anterior PFC regions that control behavior according to stimuli, the present perceptual context, and the temporal episode in which stimuli occur, respectively. The results support an unified modular model of cognitive control that describes the overall functional organization of the human lateral PFC and has basic methodological and theoretical implications.
Complex brain functions, such as learning and memory, are believed to involve changes in the efficiency of communication between nerve cells. Therefore, the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms that regulate synaptic transmission, the process of intercellular communication, is an essential step toward understanding nervous system function. Several proteins associated with synaptic vesicles, the organelles that store neurotransmitters, are targets for protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. One of these phosphoproteins, synapsin I, by means of changes in its state of phosphorylation, appears to control the fraction of synaptic vesicles available for release and thereby to regulate the efficiency of neurotransmitter release. This article describes current understanding of the mechanism by which synapsin I modulates communication between nerve cells and reviews the properties and putative functions of other phosphoproteins associated with synaptic vesicles.
Calcium channels, controlling the influx of extracellular Ca2+ and hence neurotransmitter release, exist in the brain. However, drugs classed as calcium antagonists and which inhibit Ca2+ entry through voltage-activated Ca2+ channels in heart and smooth muscle, seem not to affect any aspect of neuronal function in the brain at pharmacologically relevant concentrations. Yet the dihydropyridine calcium antagonists (for example, nitrendipine) bind stereospecifically with high affinity to a recognition site on brain-cell membranes thought to represent the Ca2+ channel and consequently, the physiological relevance of these sites has been questioned. However, activation of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels can increase cytoplasmic Ca2+ and neurotransmitter release in neuronal tissue. We show here that Bay K8644, a dihydropyridine Ca2+-channel activator, can augment K+-stimulated release of serotonin from rat frontal cortex slices and that these effects can be antagonized by low concentrations of calcium antagonists. As 3H-dihydropyridine binding to cortical membrane preparations resembles the binding in heart and smooth muscle where there are good functional correlates we conclude that the dihydropyridine binding sites in the brain represent functional Ca2+ channels that can be unmasked under certain circumstances.
Transgenic mice expressing a stabilized beta-catenin in neural precursors develop enlarged brains with increased cerebral cortical surface area and folds resembling sulci and gyri of higher mammals. Brains from transgenic animals have enlarged lateral ventricles lined with neuroepithelial precursor cells, reflecting an expansion of the precursor population. Compared with wild-type precursors, a greater proportion of transgenic precursors reenter the cell cycle after mitosis. These results show that beta-catenin can function in the decision of precursors to proliferate or differentiate during mammalian neuronal development and suggest that beta-catenin can regulate cerebral cortical size by controlling the generation of neural precursor cells.
Corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) is a key hormone in the integrated response to stress, acting both as the major regulator of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) release and as a neuropeptide in the brain. The actions of CRF are mediated by specific plasma membrane receptors in the anterior pituitary gland and in discrete brain areas including the cerebral cortex and several regions related to the limbic system. In addition to the pituitary and central actions of CRF, systemic administration of the peptide in the rat, dog, monkey and man causes hypotension and tachycardia because of a decrease in peripheral vascular resistance. These observations, in conjunction with the finding of immunoreactive and bioactive CRF in peripheral tissues, suggest that the peptide is locally released in tissues to act as a neurotransmitter or paracrine hormone. As CRF is present in the adrenal medulla and the peptide is known to modulate the central activity of the autonomic nervous system, we investigated the possibility that CRF is involved in the regulation of the peripheral autonomic nervous system. Such an action of CRF is supported by our demonstration of specific CRF receptors in the monkey adrenal medulla and sympathetic ganglia. In the adrenal medulla, these receptors are coupled to adenylate cyclase and can stimulate the secretion of catecholamines and Met-enkephalin.
The serums from animals with experimental allergic encephalomyelitis and humans with multiple sclerosis produce, in addition to demyelination, rapid, reversible alterations in complex, evoked bioelectric (synaptic) responses of cultured cerebral cortex and spinal cord tissues of the mouse. The active factors are dependent on complement and are not present in serums from normal animals and humans.
In the chick embryo hindbrain, morphological segmentation into rhombomeres is matched by metameric patterns of early neuronal differentiation and axonogenesis. Boundaries between rhombomeres coincide with boundaries of expression of murine regulatory genes. By clonal analysis using intracellular marking, we show here that the rhombomere boundaries are partitions across which cells do not move. When a parent cell is marked before the appearance of rhombomere boundaries, the resulting clone is able to spread into the neighbouring rhombomere. When marked after boundary appearance, the clone still expands freely within the rhombomere of origin, but it is now restricted at the boundaries. Rhombomeres in the chick embryo thus behave like polyclonal units, raising the possibility that they are analogous to the compartments of insects.
Thalamic nuclei have long been regarded as passive relay stations for sensory information en route to higher level processing in the cerebral cortex. Recently, physiological and theoretical studies have reassessed the role of the thalamus and it has been proposed that thalamic nuclei may actively participate with cortical areas in processing specific information. In support of this idea, we now show that a subset of neurons in an extrageniculate visual nucleus, the lateral-posterior pulvinar complex, can signal the true direction of motion of a plaid pattern, indicating that thalamic cells can integrate different motion signals into a coherent moving percept. This is the first time that these computations have been found to occur outside the higher-order cortical areas. Our findings implicate extrageniculate cortico-thalamo-cortical loops in the dynamic processing of image motion, and, more generally, as basic computational modules involved in analysing specific features of complex visual scenes.
The massive visual input from the eye to the brain requires selective processing of some visual information at the expense of other information, a process referred to as visual attention. Increases in the responses of visual neurons with attention have been extensively studied along the visual processing streams in monkey cerebral cortex, from primary visual areas to parietal and frontal cortex. Here we show, by recording neurons in attending macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta), that attention modulates visual signals before they even reach cortex by increasing responses of both magnocellular and parvocellular neurons in the first relay between retina and cortex, the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). At the same time, attention decreases neuronal responses in the adjacent thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN). Crick argued for such modulation of the LGN by observing that it is inhibited by the TRN, and suggested that "if the thalamus is the gateway to the cortex, the reticular complex might be described as the guardian of the gateway", a reciprocal relationship we now show to be more than just hypothesis. The reciprocal modulation in LGN and TRN appears only during the initial visual response, but the modulation of LGN reappears later in the response, suggesting separate early and late sources of attentional modulation in LGN.
Early in life, neural circuits are highly susceptible to outside influences. The organization of the primary auditory cortex (A1) in particular is governed by acoustic experience during the critical period, an epoch near the beginning of postnatal development throughout which cortical synapses and networks are especially plastic. This neonatal sensitivity to the pattern of sensory inputs is believed to be essential for constructing stable and adequately adapted representations of the auditory world and for the acquisition of language skills by children. One important principle of synaptic organization in mature brains is the balance between excitation and inhibition, which controls receptive field structure and spatiotemporal flow of neural activity, but it is unknown how and when this excitatory-inhibitory balance is initially established and calibrated. Here we use whole-cell recording to determine the processes underlying the development of synaptic receptive fields in rat A1. We find that, immediately after the onset of hearing, sensory-evoked excitatory and inhibitory responses are equally strong, although inhibition is less stimulus-selective and mismatched with excitation. However, during the third week of postnatal development, excitation and inhibition become highly correlated. Patterned sensory stimulation drives coordinated synaptic changes across receptive fields, rapidly improves excitatory-inhibitory coupling and prevents further exposure-induced modifications. Thus, the pace of cortical synaptic receptive field development is set by progressive, experience-dependent refinement of intracortical inhibition.
Subjective figures, seen in the absence of luminance gradients (Fig. 1), provide a phenomenal illusion that can be related to the properties of single cells in the visual cortex, offering a rare bridge between brain function and visual awareness. It remains controversial whether subjective figures arise from intelligent cognitive mechanisms, or from lower-level processes in early vision. The cognitive account implies that the perception of subjective figures may require serial attentive processing, whereas on the low-level account they should arise in parallel at earlier visual stages. Physiological evidence apparently fits a low-level account and indicates that some types of subjective contour may be detected earlier than the conventional Kanizsa type. Here we report that even Kanizsa subjective figures can be detected without focal attention at parallel stages of the human visual system.
Despite the great diversity of shapes exhibited by different classes of nerve cells, nearly all neurons share one feature in that they have a single axon and several dendrites. The two types of processes differ in their morphology, in their rate of growth, in the macromolecular composition of their cytoskeletons and surface membranes, and in their synaptic polarity. When hippocampal neurons are dissociated from the embryonic brain and cultured, they reproducibly establish this basic form with a single axon and several dendrites, despite the absence of any spatially organized environmental cues, and without the need for cell to cell contact. We have cut the axons of young hippocampal neurons within a day of their development: in some cases the initial axon regenerated, but more frequently one of the other processes, which if undisturbed would have become a dendrite, instead became the axon. Frequently the stump of the original axon persisted following the transection and subsequently became a dendrite. Evidently the neuronal processes that first develop in culture have the capacity to form either axons or dendrites. The acquisition of axonal characteristics by one neuronal process apparently inhibits the others from becoming axons, so they subsequently become dendrites.
Mouse neuroblastoma tumors have only the fifth isozyme band (A(4)) of lactate dehydrogenase, whereas this band is missing in the brain which contained four other bands of lactate dehydrogenase. The alpha-esterase isozyme patterns of tumors, kidney, and brain are similar except that there is an additional slowest-moving form of esterase in all tumor tissues. The malate dehydrogenase pattern is not altered in any of the tissues.
gamma-Aminobutyric acid (a simple amino acid and potent neurotransmitter in human brain and other tissues of higher animals) and certain of its congeners rapidly and synchronously induce planktonic larvae of the red abalone, Haliotis rufescens, to settle and commence behavioral and developmental metamorphosis. These naturally occurring inducers of algal origin apparently are responsible, in part, for the substrate-specific recruitment, induction of settling, and the onset of metamorphosis of abalone and other planktonic larvae upon specific algae which provide naturally favorable habitats for the young of these species in coastal waters. These observations provide a convenient experimental model for further analysis of the basic molecular mechanisms by which environmental and endogenous factors control the recruitment and development of planktonic larvae. Halogenated organic pesticides significantly interfere with larval settling, as quantified in a new bioassay based upon these findings.
Neurohypophyseal hormnones and several synthetic analogs stimulate adenyl cyclase prepared from rabbit kidney medullary tissue. [8-Arginine]-vasopressinoic acid inhibits the stimulation of medullary adenyl cyclase by neurohypophyseal peptides but does not influence the action of parathyroid hormone on adenyl cyclase from kidiney cortex.
Although scientists have provided mounting evidence in the past few years that new neurons can be produced in some areas of the adult brain, the neocortex--the region most concerned with such higher brain functions as memory and learning--did not seem capable of such regeneration. Now, in the 22 June issue of Nature, neuroscientists report that when they induced certain neurons in the neocortex of adult mice to self-destruct, the loss triggered the formation of replacement neurons by brain stem cells. If similar regeneration of brain neurons can be triggered in humans, the findings could open the door for treatments that might restore memory in Alzheimer's disease, for example, or undo the damage wreaked by spinal cord injury.
Neurosecretory nerve endings in the rat neurohypophysis release their hormones by exocytosis subsequent to an influx of calcium from the external medium. The nerve endings are characterized by the presence of neurosecretory granules, mitochondria, occasional vacuoles, and a population of microvesicles similar in appearance to spherical synaptic vesicles. The function of the microvesicles has, for a long time, been uncertain. In view of evidence that coated microvesicles isolated from cerebral cortex are capable of ATP-dependent calcium accumulation, a method has now been developed for the visualization of calcium in the neurohypophysis at the ultrastructural level. With this technique, calcium precipitates are consistently seen in the microvesicles, mitochondria and glial cell (pituicyte) nuclei. In addition, the pituicyte cytoplasm and perivascular space show a diffuse precipitate which can be removed by washing the tissue prior to fixation. The function of the microvesicles might therefore be to sequester calcium within the nerve endings.
Commissural neurons in the mammalian dorsal spinal cord send axons ventrally toward the floor plate, where they cross the midline and turn anteriorly toward the brain; a gradient of chemoattractant(s) inside the spinal cord controls this turning. In rodents, several Wnt proteins stimulate the extension of commissural axons after midline crossing (postcrossing). We found that Wnt4 messenger RNA is expressed in a decreasing anterior-to-posterior gradient in the floor plate, and that a directed source of Wnt4 protein attracted postcrossing commissural axons. Commissural axons in mice lacking the Wnt receptor Frizzled3 displayed anterior-posterior guidance defects after midline crossing. Thus, Wnt-Frizzled signaling guides commissural axons along the anterior-posterior axis of the spinal cord.
Calcium ions have a pivotal role in many neuronal activities, but little is known about their involvement in the cortical processing of visual information. Using immunohistochemical methods, we have now detected a calcium-binding protein, calbindin-D-28K, which may confer on certain compartments of cortical area 17 the ability to modulate Ca2+ metabolism. Thus, calbindin occurs in the primate striate cortex in a pattern almost complementary to that displaying strong cytochrome c-oxidase activity. From this and other observations, we deduce that the distribution of calbindin-immunoreactive sites corresponds mainly to extra-geniculocortical connections of the primary visual cortex. This implies that the geniculocortical and extra-geniculocortical compartments of area 17 differ in an intracellular system for Ca2+ homeostasis.
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD; also called spinocerebellar ataxia type 3) is a dominantly inherited late-onset neurodegenerative disorder caused by expansion of polyglutamine (polyQ)-encoding CAG repeats in the MJD1 gene (also known as ATXN3). Proteolytic liberation of highly aggregation-prone polyQ fragments from the protective sequence of the MJD1 gene product ataxin 3 (ATXN3) has been proposed to trigger the formation of ATXN3-containing aggregates, the neuropathological hallmark of MJD. ATXN3 fragments are detected in brain tissue of MJD patients and transgenic mice expressing mutant human ATXN3(Q71), and their amount increases with disease severity, supporting a relationship between ATXN3 processing and disease progression. The formation of early aggregation intermediates is thought to have a critical role in disease initiation, but the precise pathogenic mechanism operating in MJD has remained elusive. Here we show that L-glutamate-induced excitation of patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons initiates Ca(2+)-dependent proteolysis of ATXN3 followed by the formation of SDS-insoluble aggregates. This phenotype could be abolished by calpain inhibition, confirming a key role of this protease in ATXN3 aggregation. Aggregate formation was further dependent on functional Na(+) and K(+) channels as well as ionotropic and voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels, and was not observed in iPSCs, fibroblasts or glia, thereby providing an explanation for the neuron-specific phenotype of this disease. Our data illustrate that iPSCs enable the study of aberrant protein processing associated with late-onset neurodegenerative disorders in patient-specific neurons.
The hippocampus has two major outputs: multisynaptic pathways to the cerebral cortex and a massive descending projection directly to the lateral septal part of the basal ganglia. Here it is shown that the descending output is organized in such a way that different hippocampal regions map in an orderly way onto hypothalamic systems mediating the expression of different classes of goal-oriented behavior. This mapping is characterized by a unidirectional hippocampo-lateral septal projection and then by bidirectional lateral septo-hypothalamic projections, all topographically organized. The connectional evidence predicts that information processing in different regions of the hippocampus selectively influences the expression of different classes of behavior.
The behavioral and cognitive effects of nicotine suggest that nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) participate in central nervous system (CNS) function. Although nAChR subunit messenger RNA (mRNA) and nicotine binding sites are common in the brain, there is little evidence for synapses mediated by nAChRs in the CNS. To test whether, CNS nAChRs might modify rather than mediate transmission, the regulation of excitatory synaptic transmission by these receptors was examined. Nanomolar concentrations of nicotine enhanced both glutamatergic and cholinergic synaptic transmission by activation of presynaptic nAChRs that increased presynaptic [Ca2]i. Pharmacological and subunit deletion experiments reveal that these presynaptic nAChRs include the alpha 7 subunit. These findings reveal that CNS nAChRs enhance fast excitatory transmission, providing a likely mechanism for the complex behavioral effects of nicotine.
Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the nervous system. Inactivation of synaptic glutamate is handled by the glutamate transporter GLT1 (also known as EAAT2; refs 1, 2), the physiologically dominant astroglial protein. In spite of its critical importance in normal and abnormal synaptic activity, no practical pharmaceutical can positively modulate this protein. Animal studies show that the protein is important for normal excitatory synaptic transmission, while its dysfunction is implicated in acute and chronic neurological disorders, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), stroke, brain tumours and epilepsy. Using a blinded screen of 1,040 FDA-approved drugs and nutritionals, we discovered that many beta-lactam antibiotics are potent stimulators of GLT1 expression. Furthermore, this action appears to be mediated through increased transcription of the GLT1 gene. beta-Lactams and various semi-synthetic derivatives are potent antibiotics that act to inhibit bacterial synthetic pathways. When delivered to animals, the beta-lactam ceftriaxone increased both brain expression of GLT1 and its biochemical and functional activity. Glutamate transporters are important in preventing glutamate neurotoxicity. Ceftriaxone was neuroprotective in vitro when used in models of ischaemic injury and motor neuron degeneration, both based in part on glutamate toxicity. When used in an animal model of the fatal disease ALS, the drug delayed loss of neurons and muscle strength, and increased mouse survival. Thus these studies provide a class of potential neurotherapeutics that act to modulate the expression of glutamate neurotransmitter transporters via gene activation.
The posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is thought to have a function in the sensorimotor transformations that underlie visually guided reaching, as damage to the PPC can result in difficulty reaching to visual targets in the absence of specific visual or motor deficits. This function is supported by findings that PPC neurons in monkeys are modulated by the direction of hand movement, as well as by visual, eye position and limb position signals. The PPC could transform visual target locations from retinal coordinates to hand-centred coordinates by combining sensory signals in a serial manner to yield a body-centred representation of target location, and then subtracting the body-centred location of the hand. We report here that in dorsal area 5 of the PPC, remembered target locations are coded with respect to both the eye and hand. This suggests that the PPC transforms target locations directly between these two reference frames. Data obtained in the adjacent parietal reach region (PRR) indicate that this transformation may be achieved by vectorially subtracting hand location from target location, with both locations represented in eye-centred coordinates.
Figures in which human observers perceive "illusory contours" were found to evoke responses in cells of area 18 in the visual cortex of alert monkeys. The cells responded as if the contours were formed by real lines or edges. Modifications that weakened the perception of contours also reduced the neuronal responses. In contrast, cells in area 17 were apparently unable to "see" these contours.
A mechanism by which members of the ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF)-leukemia inhibitory factor cytokine family regulate gliogenesis in the developing mammalian central nervous system was characterized. Activation of the CNTF receptor promoted differentiation of cerebral cortical precursor cells into astrocytes and inhibited differentiation of cortical precursors along a neuronal lineage. Although CNTF stimulated both the Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) and Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways in cortical precursor cells, the JAK-STAT signaling pathway selectively enhanced differentiation of these precursors along a glial lineage. These findings suggest that cytokine activation of the JAK-STAT signaling pathway may be a mechanism by which cell fate is controlled during mammalian development.
The gene designated gamma 134.5 maps in the inverted repeats flanking the long unique sequence of herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) DNA, and therefore it is present in two copies per genome. This gene is not essential for viral growth in cell culture. Four recombinant viruses were genetically engineered to test the function of this gene. These were (i) a virus from which both copies of the gene were deleted, (ii) a virus containing a stop codon in both copies of the gene, (iii) a virus containing after the first codon an insert encoding a 16-amino acid epitope known to react with a specific monoclonal antibody, and (iv) a virus in which the deleted sequences were restored. The viruses from which the gene was deleted or which carried stop codons were avirulent on intracerebral inoculation of mice. The virus with the gene tagged by the sequence encoding the epitope was moderately virulent, whereas the restored virus reacquired the phenotype of the parent virus. Significant amounts of virus were recovered only from brains of animals inoculated with virulent viruses. Inasmuch as the product of the gamma 134.5 gene extended the host range of the virus by enabling it to replicate and destroy brain cells, it is a viral neurovirulence factor.
MicroRNAs are small, non-coding RNAs that control the translation of target messenger RNAs, thereby regulating critical aspects of plant and animal development. In the mammalian nervous system, the spatiotemporal control of mRNA translation has an important role in synaptic development and plasticity. Although a number of microRNAs have been isolated from the mammalian brain, neither the specific microRNAs that regulate synapse function nor their target mRNAs have been identified. Here we show that a brain-specific microRNA, miR-134, is localized to the synapto-dendritic compartment of rat hippocampal neurons and negatively regulates the size of dendritic spines--postsynaptic sites of excitatory synaptic transmission. This effect is mediated by miR-134 inhibition of the translation of an mRNA encoding a protein kinase, Limk1, that controls spine development. Exposure of neurons to extracellular stimuli such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor relieves miR-134 inhibition of Limk1 translation and in this way may contribute to synaptic development, maturation and/or plasticity.
Cerebellar Purkinje neurons accumulated propidium iodide, granular blue, and horseradish peroxidase conjugated to wheat germ agglutinin but not unconjugated horseradish peroxidase, bisbenzimide, or Evans blue when these compounds were infused into the lateral cerebral ventricles of awake, unrestrained rats. Accumulation of propidium iodide by Purkinje neurons of the vermis was associated with a reproducible behavioral abnormality characterized by truncal tremor, ataxia, and nystagmus. Both the accumulation of propidium iodide in Purkinje cells and the behavioral abnormality were prevented by prior intracerebroventricular administration of ouabain or colchicine, drugs that block neuronal transport processes. The ability of cerebellar Purkinje neurons to extract small and large molecules from the cerebrospinal fluid has important implications for their physiology and pathology.
In an awake state, neurons in the cerebral cortex fire irregularly and electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings display low-amplitude, high-frequency fluctuations. During sleep, neurons oscillate between 'on' periods, when they fire as in an awake brain, and 'off' periods, when they stop firing altogether and the EEG displays high-amplitude slow waves. However, what happens to neuronal firing after a long period of being awake is not known. Here we show that in freely behaving rats after a long period in an awake state, cortical neurons can go briefly 'offline' as in sleep, accompanied by slow waves in the local EEG. Neurons often go offline in one cortical area but not in another, and during these periods of 'local sleep', the incidence of which increases with the duration of the awake state, rats are active and display an 'awake' EEG. However, they are progressively impaired in a sugar pellet reaching task. Thus, although both the EEG and behaviour indicate wakefulness, local populations of neurons in the cortex may be falling asleep, with negative consequences for performance.
Slices of rat brain and heart that had concentrated H(3)-norepinephrine were superfused and electrically stimulated. Stimulation induced a marked release of H(3)-norepinephrine with a threshold and a maximum repsonse. Release also occurred with increased concentrations of potassium, presumably due to neuronal depolarization. Inhibition of electrically induced release occurred with low calcium and with chlorpromazine and pentobarbital.
At any instant, our visual system allows us to perceive a rich and detailed visual world. Yet our internal, explicit representation of this visual world is extremely sparse: we can only hold in mind a minute fraction of the visual scene. These mental representations are stored in visual short-term memory (VSTM). Even though VSTM is essential for the execution of a wide array of perceptual and cognitive functions, and is supported by an extensive network of brain regions, its storage capacity is severely limited. With the use of functional magnetic resonance imaging, we show here that this capacity limit is neurally reflected in one node of this network: activity in the posterior parietal cortex is tightly correlated with the limited amount of scene information that can be stored in VSTM. These results suggest that the posterior parietal cortex is a key neural locus of our impoverished mental representation of the visual world.
Brief monocular deprivation during early postnatal development can lead to a depression of synaptic transmission that renders visual cortical neurons unresponsive to subsequent visual stimulation through the deprived eye. The Bienenstock-Cooper-Munro (BCM) theory proposes that homosynaptic mechanisms of long-term depression (LTD) account for the deprivation effects. Homosynaptic depression, by definition, occurs only at active synapses. Thus, in contrast to the commonly held view that the synaptic depression caused by monocular deprivation is simply a result of retinal inactivity, this theoretical framework indicates that the synaptic depression may actually be driven by the residual activity in the visually deprived retina. Here we examine the validity of this idea by comparing the consequences of brief monocular deprivation by lid suture with those of monocular inactivation by intra-ocular treatment with tetrodotoxin. Lid suture leaves the retina spontaneously active, whereas tetrodotoxin eliminates all activity. In agreement with the BCM theory, our results show that monocular lid suture causes a significantly greater depression of deprived-eye responses in kitten visual cortex than does treatment with tetrodotoxin. These findings have important implications for mechanisms of experience-dependent plasticity in the neocortex.
Recent evidence demonstrating multiple regions of human cerebral cortex activated by pain has prompted speculation about their individual contributions to this complex experience. To differentiate cortical areas involved in pain affect, hypnotic suggestions were used to alter selectively the unpleasantness of noxious stimuli, without changing the perceived intensity. Positron emission tomography revealed significant changes in pain-evoked activity within anterior cingulate cortex, consistent with the encoding of perceived unpleasantness, whereas primary somatosensory cortex activation was unaltered. These findings provide direct experimental evidence in humans linking frontal-lobe limbic activity with pain affect, as originally suggested by early clinical lesion studies.
The distribution of cells containing messenger RNA that encodes amyloid beta protein was determined in hippocampi and in various cortical regions from cynomolgus monkeys, normal humans, and patients with Alzheimer's disease by in situ hybridization. Both 35S-labeled RNA antisense and sense probes to amyloid beta protein messenger RNA were used to ensure specific hybridization. Messenger RNA for amyloid beta protein was expressed in a subset of neurons in the prefrontal cortex from monkeys, normal humans, and patients with Alzheimer's disease. This messenger RNA was also present in the neurons of all the hippocampal fields from monkeys, normal humans and, although to a lesser extent in cornu ammonis 1, patients with Alzheimer's disease. The distribution of amyloid beta protein messenger RNA was similar to that of the neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer's disease in some regions, but the messenger RNA was also expressed in other neurons that are not usually involved in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease.
Exploring visual illusions reveals fundamental principles of cortical processing. Illusory motion perception of non-moving stimuli was described almost a century ago by Gestalt psychologists. However, the underlying neuronal mechanisms remain unknown. To explore cortical mechanisms underlying the 'line-motion' illusion, we used real-time optical imaging, which is highly sensitive to subthreshold activity. We examined, in the visual cortex of the anaesthetized cat, responses to five stimuli: a stationary small square and a long bar; a moving square; a drawn-out bar; and the well-known line-motion illusion, a stationary square briefly preceding a long stationary bar presentation. Whereas flashing the bar alone evoked the expected localized, short latency and high amplitude activity patterns, presenting a square 60-100 ms before a bar induced the dynamic activity patterns resembling that of fast movement. The preceding square, even though physically non-moving, created gradually propagating subthreshold cortical activity that must contribute to illusory motion, because it was indistinguishable from cortical representations of real motion in this area. These findings demonstrate the effect of spatio-temporal patterns of subthreshold synaptic potentials on cortical processing and the shaping of perception.
A monoclonal antibody produced against hippocampal cell membranes labeled the surface of neurons in the rat limbic system. With a few exceptions, all nonlimbic components were unstained. This specific distribution of immunopositive neurons provides strong evidence of molecular specificity among functionally related neurons in the mammalian brain and supports the concept of a limbic system.
In mammals, the major subcortical visual structures receive projections from both eyes, with the uncrossed projection being smaller than the crossed. Each projection is arranged as a separate orderly map of one hemiretina. Although these hemiretinal maps are separate in the nuclei, they are aligned so that the representations of points in the visual field are in register, thus there is a continuity of visual field representation between them. During the early development of the binocular pathways, terminals from the two eyes overlap almost entirely. As development proceeds, terminals arising from each eye segregate to form the adult pattern. In the present study, local retinal lesions were made in ferrets at various stages in development before the separation of the projections from the two eyes. A neuronal tracer was then injected into the damaged eye, defining the pattern of projection from that eye. As reported here, the lesion resulted in a limited interruption in the pattern of terminal label on both sides of the brain, demonstrating that terminals from each eye are arranged in an orderly retinotopic manner at this stage. hence, during later development, as one projection is reduced relative to the other, the two maps must slide in relation to each other.
Universal positive correlations between different cognitive tests motivate the concept of "general intelligence" or Spearman's g. Here the neural basis for g is investigated by means of positron emission tomography. Spatial, verbal, and perceptuo-motor tasks with high-g involvement are compared with matched low-g control tasks. In contrast to the common view that g reflects a broad sample of major cognitive functions, high-g tasks do not show diffuse recruitment of multiple brain regions. Instead they are associated with selective recruitment of lateral frontal cortex in one or both hemispheres. Despite very different task content in the three high-g-low-g contrasts, lateral frontal recruitment is markedly similar in each case. Many previous experiments have shown these same frontal regions to be recruited by a broad range of different cognitive demands. The results suggest that "general intelligence" derives from a specific frontal system important in the control of diverse forms of behavior.
A fundamental aspect of visuomotor behavior is deciding where to look or move next. Under certain conditions, the brain constructs an internal representation of stimulus location on the basis of previous knowledge and uses it to move the eyes or to make other movements. Neuronal responses in primary visual cortex were modulated when such an internal representation was acquired: Responses to a stimulus were affected progressively by sequential presentation of the stimulus at one location but not when the location was varied randomly. Responses of individual neurons were spatially tuned for gaze direction and tracked the Bayesian probability of stimulus appearance. We propose that the representation arises in a distributed cortical network and is associated with systematic changes in response selectivity and dynamics at the earliest stages of cortical visual processing.
Intracranial self-stimulation techniques, modified for use with neuropsychiatric patients, provide data suggestive of positive and negative reinforcing properties of brief electrical stimulation to various subcortical structures of the human brain.
The twitcher mouse is an animal model of galactosylceramidase deficiency (Krabbe's disease), a human sphingolipidosis. The effects of hematopoietic cell transplantation as potential enzyme replacement therapy were examined in the twitcher mouse. Survival in twitcher mice with transplants was significantly prolonged and was associated with gradual repair of demyelination in peripheral nerves. In contrast, there was no improvement in the neurodegenerative process in the central nervous system after transplantation. These observations indicate that cellular transplantation may effectively provide in vivo enzyme replacement for the peripheral manifestations of genetic storage diseases. Strategies to perturb the blood-brain barrier may be necessary for enzyme replacement to be therapeutic in diseases with central nervous system manifestations.
Correlated spiking is often observed in cortical circuits, but its functional role is controversial. It is believed that correlations are a consequence of shared inputs between nearby neurons and could severely constrain information decoding. Here we show theoretically that recurrent neural networks can generate an asynchronous state characterized by arbitrarily low mean spiking correlations despite substantial amounts of shared input. In this state, spontaneous fluctuations in the activity of excitatory and inhibitory populations accurately track each other, generating negative correlations in synaptic currents which cancel the effect of shared input. Near-zero mean correlations were seen experimentally in recordings from rodent neocortex in vivo. Our results suggest a reexamination of the sources underlying observed correlations and their functional consequences for information processing.
Specificity of protein kinases and phosphatases may be achieved through compartmentalization with preferred substrates. In neurons, adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKA) is localized at postsynaptic densities by association of its regulatory subunit with an A kinase anchor protein, AKAP79. Interaction cloning experiments demonstrated that AKAP79 also binds protein phosphatase 2B, or calcineurin (CaN). A ternary complex of PKA, AKAP, and CaN was isolated from bovine brain, and colocalization of the kinase and the phosphatase was established in neurites of cultured hippocampal neurons. The putative CaN-binding domain of AKAP79 is similar to that of the immunophilin FKBP-12, and AKAP79 inhibited CaN phosphatase activity. These results suggest that both PKA and CaN are targeted to subcellular sites by association with a common anchor protein and thereby regulate the phosphorylation state of key neuronal substrates.
The gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-benzodiazepine receptor complex, which is composed of distinct proteins embedded in the neuronal plasma membrane, is important for several effects of benzodiazepines, including protection afforded against convulsions. During structural modification of ethyl beta-carboline-3-carboxylate an agent was discovered which has high affinity for brain benzodiazepine receptors but which is a potent convulsant. Also in contrast to benzodiazepines, this type of benzodiazepine receptor ligand favors benzodiazepine receptors in the non-GABA-stimulated conformation, which may explain the convulsive properties.
The neural processes underlying empathy are a subject of intense interest within the social neurosciences. However, very little is known about how brain empathic responses are modulated by the affective link between individuals. We show here that empathic responses are modulated by learned preferences, a result consistent with economic models of social preferences. We engaged male and female volunteers in an economic game, in which two confederates played fairly or unfairly, and then measured brain activity with functional magnetic resonance imaging while these same volunteers observed the confederates receiving pain. Both sexes exhibited empathy-related activation in pain-related brain areas (fronto-insular and anterior cingulate cortices) towards fair players. However, these empathy-related responses were significantly reduced in males when observing an unfair person receiving pain. This effect was accompanied by increased activation in reward-related areas, correlated with an expressed desire for revenge. We conclude that in men (at least) empathic responses are shaped by valuation of other people's social behaviour, such that they empathize with fair opponents while favouring the physical punishment of unfair opponents, a finding that echoes recent evidence for altruistic punishment.
Critical issues in the cognitive neuroscience of language are whether there are multiple systems for the representation of meaning, perhaps organized by processing system (such as vision or language), and whether further subsystems are distinguishable within these larger ones. We describe here a patient (K.R.) with cerebral damage whose pattern of acquired deficits offers direct evidence for a major division between visually based and language-based higher-level representations, and for processing subsystems within language. K.R. could not name animals regardless of the type of presentation (auditory or visual), but had no difficulty naming other living things and objects. When asked to describe verbally the physical attributes of animals (for example, 'what colour is an elephant?'), she was strikingly impaired. Nevertheless, she could distinguish the correct physical attributes of animals when they were presented visually (she could distinguish animals that were correctly coloured from those that were not). Her knowledge of input stimulus. To explain this selective deficit, these data mandate the existence of two distinct representations of such properties in normal individuals, one visually based and one language-based. Furthermore, these data establish that knowledge of physical attributes is strictly segregated from knowledge of other properties in the language system.
Recent neuroimagery findings showed that the patterns of cerebral activation during the mental rehearsal of a motor act are similar to those produced by its actual execution. This concurs with the notion that part of the distributed neural activity taking place during movement involves internal simulations, but it is not yet clear what specific contribution the different brain areas involved bring to this process. Here, patients with lesions restricted to the parietal cortex were found to be impaired selectively at predicting, through mental imagery, the time necessary to perform differentiated finger movements and visually guided pointing gestures, in comparison to normal individuals and to a patient with damage to the primary motor area. These results suggest that the parietal cortex is important for the ability to generate mental movement representations.
Although the conductance and kinetic behavior of inhibitory synaptic channels have been studied in a number of nerve and muscle cells, there has been little if any detailed study of such channels at synapses in the vertebrate central nervous system or of the relation of such channels to natural synaptic events. In the experiments reported here, current noise measurements were used to obtain such information at synapses on Muller cells in the lamprey brainstem. Application of glycine to the cells activated synaptic channels with large conductances and relaxation time constants (70 picosiemens and 33 milliseconds, respectively, at 3 degrees to 10 degrees C). Spontaneous inhibitory synaptic currents had a mean conductance of 107 nanosiemens and decayed with the same time constant. In addition, the glycine responses and the spontaneous currents had the same reversal potential and both were abolished by strychnine. These results support the idea that glycine is the natural inhibitory transmitter at these synapses and suggest that one quantum of transmitter activates about 1500 elementary conductance channels.
Traumatic brain injury triggers the accumulation of harmful mediators that may lead to secondary damage. Protective mechanisms to attenuate damage are also set in motion. 2-Arachidonoyl glycerol (2-AG) is an endogenous cannabinoid, identified both in the periphery and in the brain, but its physiological roles have been only partially clarified. Here we show that, after injury to the mouse brain, 2-AG may have a neuroprotective role in which the cannabinoid system is involved. After closed head injury (CHI) in mice, the level of endogenous 2-AG was significantly elevated. We administered synthetic 2-AG to mice after CHI and found significant reduction of brain oedema, better clinical recovery, reduced infarct volume and reduced hippocampal cell death compared with controls. When 2-AG was administered together with additional inactive 2-acyl-glycerols that are normally present in the brain, functional recovery was significantly enhanced. The beneficial effect of 2-AG was dose-dependently attenuated by SR-141761A, an antagonist of the CB1 cannabinoid receptor.
Chronic exposure of rats to 10 parts of halothane per million during early life produced later deficits in learning a shock-motivated light-dark discrimination and a food-motivated maze pattern, correlated with enduring synaptic nembrane malformation in cerebral cortex. Adult exposure had no effect. Halothane may provide a useful analytical tool for study of brain. The behavioral-ultrastructural techniques also suggest a standard for assessing the safety of trace toxicants with central nervous system effects.
Nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) selectively bind to distinct members of the Trk family of tyrosine kinase receptors, but all three bind with similar affinities to the neurotrophin receptor p75 (p75NTR). The biological significance of neurotrophin binding to p75NTR in cells that also express Trk receptors has been difficult to ascertain. In the absence of TrkA, NGF binding to p75NGR activated the transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) in rat Schwann cells. This activation was not observed in Schwann cells isolated from mice that lacked p75NTR. The effect was selective for NGF; NF-kappa B was not activated by BDNF or NT-3.
Projection neurons that form part of the motor pathway for song control continue to be produced and to replace older projection neurons in adult canaries and zebra finches. This is shown by combining [3H]thymidine, a cell birth marker, and fluorogold, a retrogradely transported tracer of neuronal connectivity. Species and seasonal comparisons suggest that this process is related to the acquisition of perceptual or motor memories. The ability of an adult brain to produce and replace projection neurons should influence our thinking on brain repair.
We have developed a method for temporal and regional gene expression targeting (TARGET) in Drosophila and show the simultaneous spatial and temporal rescue of a memory defect. The transient expression of the rutabaga-encoded adenylyl cyclase in the mushroom bodies of the adult brain was necessary and sufficient to rescue the rutabaga memory deficit, which rules out a developmental brain defect in the etiology of this deficit and demonstrates an acute role for rutabaga in memory formation in these neurons. The TARGET system offers general utility in simultaneously addressing issues of when and where gene products are required.
Ion channels formed by the TRP (transient receptor potential) superfamily of proteins act as sensors for temperature, osmolarity, mechanical stress and taste. The growth cones of developing axons are responsible for sensing extracellular guidance factors, many of which trigger Ca2+ influx at the growth cone; however, the identity of the ion channels involved remains to be clarified. Here, we report that TRP-like channel activity exists in the growth cones of cultured Xenopus neurons and can be modulated by exposure to netrin-1 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor, two chemoattractants for axon guidance. Whole-cell recording from growth cones showed that netrin-1 induced a membrane depolarization, part of which remained after all major voltage-dependent channels were blocked. Furthermore, the membrane depolarization was sensitive to blockers of TRP channels. Pharmacological blockade of putative TRP currents or downregulation of Xenopus TRP-1 (xTRPC1) expression with a specific morpholino oligonucleotide abolished the growth-cone turning and Ca2+ elevation induced by a netrin-1 gradient. Thus, TRPC currents reflect early events in the growth cone's detection of some extracellular guidance signals, resulting in membrane depolarization and cytoplasmic Ca2+ elevation that mediates the turning of growth cones.
The mammalian cerebral cortex is organized into columns of cells with common functional properties. During embryogenesis, cortical neurons are formed deep, near the lateral ventricles, and migrate radially to their final position. This observation led to the suggestion that the cortex consists of radial, ontogenetic units of clonally related neurons. In the experiments reported here, this hypothesis was tested by studying cell lineage in the rat cortex with a retroviral vector carrying the Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase gene, which can be easily visualized. Labeled, clonally related cortical neurons did not occur in simple columnar arrays. Instead, clonally related neurons entered several different radial columns, apparently by migrating along different radial glial fibers.
In this, the 21st century, human-brain mapping celebrates 21 years of cognitive activation studies. This review looks at imaging neuroscience and key ideas it has pursued; some ideas portend exciting developments, and others have failed gloriously. In terms of achievements, there is much to celebrate, in the sense that it is difficult to imagine modern neuroscience without brain imaging. I will look at recent advances from the perspectives of functional segregation and integration in the brain, paying special attention to approaches that deal with the distributed and integrated nature of neuronal processing and the questions they address.
Protein 4.1 is a membrane skeletal protein that converts the low-affinity interaction between spectrin and actin into a high-affinity ternary complex of spectrin, protein 4.1, and actin that is essential to the structural stability of the erythrocyte. Pig brain was shown to contain an 87-kilodalton immunoreactive analog of protein 4.1 that has partial sequence homology with pig erythrocyte protein 4.1 and the same location as spectrin in the cortical cytoplasm of neuronal and glial cell types of the cerebellum.
2'-Fluoro-5-methyl-l-beta-D-arabinosyluracil (FMAU) labeled with carbon-14 was used to image herpes simplex virus type 1-infected regions of rat brain by quantitative autoradiography. FMAU is a potent antiviral pyrimidine nucleoside which is selectively phosphorylated by virus-coded thymidine kinase. When the labeled FMAU was administered 6 hours before the rats were killed, the selective uptake and concentration of the drug and its metabolites by infected cells (defined by immunoperoxidase staining of viral antigens) allowed quantitative definition and mapping of HSV-1-infected structures in autoradiograms of brain sections. These results show that quantitative autoradiography can be used to characterize the local metabolism of antiviral drugs by infected cells in vivo. They also suggest that the selective uptake of drugs that exploit viral thymidine kinase for their antiviral effect can, by appropriate labeling, be used in conjunction  with clinical neuroimaging techniques to define infected regions of human brain, thereby providing a new approach to the diagnosis of herpes encephalitis in man.
In the developing nervous system, Id2 (inhibitor of DNA binding 2, also known as inhibitor of differentiation 2) enhances cell proliferation, promotes tumour progression and inhibits the activity of neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. The anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome and its activator Cdh1 (APC/C(Cdh1)) restrains axonal growth but the targets of APC/C(Cdh1) in neurons are unknown. Id2 and other members of the Id family are very unstable proteins that are eliminated as cells enter the quiescent state, but how they are targeted for degradation has remained elusive. Here we show that Id2 interacts with the core subunits of APC/C and Cdh1 in primary neurons. APC/C(Cdh1) targets Id2 for degradation through a destruction box motif (D box) that is conserved in Id1 and Id4. Depletion of Cdh1 stabilizes Id proteins in neurons, whereas Id2 D-box mutants are impaired for Cdh1 binding and remain stable in cells that exit from the cell cycle and contain active APC/C(Cdh1). Mutants of the Id2 D box enhance axonal growth in cerebellar granule neurons in vitro and in the context of the cerebellar cortex, and overcome the myelin inhibitory signals for growth. Conversely, activation of bHLH transcription factors induces a cluster of genes with potent axonal inhibitory functions including the gene coding for the Nogo receptor, a key transducer of myelin inhibition. Degradation of Id2 in neurons permits the accumulation of the Nogo receptor, thereby linking APC/C(Cdh1) activity with bHLH target genes for the inhibition of axonal growth. These findings indicate that deregulated Id activity might be useful to reprogramme quiescent neurons into the axonal growth mode.
Recent studies have renewed interest in the role of acetylcholine (ACh) in the cognitive changes associated with ageing and dementia. Deficits in cortical choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) in Alzheimer's disease have been consistently demonstrated, while other research has suggested a connection between deterioration of cortical ACh fibres and dementia. However, despite clear biochemical and anatomical evidence for a fall in ACh in dementia, results of therapeutic trials with cholinergic agonists, precursors and cholinesterase inhibitors have been inconsistent. Such findings suggest that cortical cholinergic disorders are not wholly a function of simple biochemical change; alterations of impulse flow along cholinergic fibres could well be as debilitating. An important extrinsic source of cortical ACh innervation derives from neurones diffusely located in rat basal forebrain, denoted the nucleus basalis (NB). We have now investigated the impulse conduction properties of cortically projecting, putatively cholinergic NB axons in adult and aged rats and have found that conduction latencies from NB to frontal cortex are significantly longer (by 51%) in aged animals. In addition, systematic analysis varying cortical stimulation depth revealed that these longer latencies are due entirely to decreased conduction velocities in the subcortical fibre projections. Indeed, intracortical velocities were virtually identical in the two groups. Our results indicate that ageing occasions a decrease in the temporal fidelity of impulse flow in the cholinergic input to the cortex from the NB, a previously overlooked but potentially important element in cognitive deficits that occur with age.
The developmental and evolutionary mechanisms behind the emergence of human-specific brain features remain largely unknown. However, the recent ability to compare our genome to that of our closest relative, the chimpanzee, provides new avenues to link genetic and phenotypic changes in the evolution of the human brain. We devised a ranking of regions in the human genome that show significant evolutionary acceleration. Here we report that the most dramatic of these 'human accelerated regions', HAR1, is part of a novel RNA gene (HAR1F) that is expressed specifically in Cajal-Retzius neurons in the developing human neocortex from 7 to 19 gestational weeks, a crucial period for cortical neuron specification and migration. HAR1F is co-expressed with reelin, a product of Cajal-Retzius neurons that is of fundamental importance in specifying the six-layer structure of the human cortex. HAR1 and the other human accelerated regions provide new candidates in the search for uniquely human biology.
When perfusate is collected from the anterior hypothalamus of a cooled donor monkey and is transfused to a corresponding hypothalamic site in a normal monkey, fever occurs in this recipient. Conversely, perfusate from a heated donor monkey lowers the recipient monkey's temperature when the same hypothalamic transfusion procedure is followed. These experiments provide direct evidence of a neurochemical "coding" within the specific anatomical region of the brain historically implicated in the control of body temperature.
Positive reinforcement helps to control the acquisition of learned behaviours. Here we report a cellular mechanism in the brain that may underlie the behavioural effects of positive reinforcement. We used intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) as a model of reinforcement learning, in which each rat learns to press a lever that applies reinforcing electrical stimulation to its own substantia nigra. The outputs from neurons of the substantia nigra terminate on neurons in the striatum in close proximity to inputs from the cerebral cortex on the same striatal neurons. We measured the effect of substantia nigra stimulation on these inputs from the cortex to striatal neurons and also on how quickly the rats learned to press the lever. We found that stimulation of the substantia nigra (with the optimal parameters for lever-pressing behaviour) induced potentiation of synapses between the cortex and the striatum, which required activation of dopamine receptors. The degree of potentiation within ten minutes of the ICSS trains was correlated with the time taken by the rats to learn ICSS behaviour. We propose that stimulation of the substantia nigra when the lever is pressed induces a similar potentiation of cortical inputs to the striatum, positively reinforcing the learning of the behaviour by the rats.
Throughout the history of mathematics, concepts of number and space have been tightly intertwined. We tested the hypothesis that cortical circuits for spatial attention contribute to mental arithmetic in humans. We trained a multivariate classifier algorithm to infer the direction of an eye movement, left or right, from the brain activation measured in the posterior parietal cortex. Without further training, the classifier then generalized to an arithmetic task. Its left versus right classification could be used to sort out subtraction versus addition trials, whether performed with symbols or with sets of dots. These findings are consistent with the suggestion that mental arithmetic co-opts parietal circuitry associated with spatial coding.
Alzheimer's disease is a form of localized amyloidosis characterized by cerebral cortical amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and amyloid deposits within the walls of leptomeningeal vessels. Although most cases of Alzheimer's disease are sporadic, kindreds with autosomal-dominant inheritance of the syndrome suggest that a single mutation may be important in pathogenesis. Direct sequencing of DNA from a family with autopsy-proven Alzheimer's disease revealed a single amino acid substitution (Phe for Val) in the transmembrane domain of the amyloid precursor protein. This mutation correlates with the presence of Alzheimer's disease in all patients in this study, and may be the inherited factor causing both amyloid fibril formation and dementia.
In the cochlear nucleus of decerebrate, paralyzed cats, multiple-unit responses to an acoustic stimulus showed significant decrements when the stimulus was repeatedly presented once every 5 seconds. These decrements developed in the absence of peripheral receptor adaptation. The responses recovered to the level prior to stimulation when stimulation was withheld for 5 to 10 minutes. Dishabituation by somatic stimulation of the forepaw, however, was less effective than in the intact cat. The continued development of response decrements after strychnine blockade of peripheral olivocochlear influences and central postsynaptic inhibition suggests a mechanism of decreased synaptic effectiveness, which has previously been postulated for neuronal habituation in brainstem and spinal cord.
To determine the direction of a sound source in space, animals must process a variety of auditory spatial cues, including interaural level and time differences, as well as changes in the sound spectrum caused by the direction-dependent filtering of sound by the outer ear. Behavioural deficits observed when primary auditory cortex (A1) is damaged have led to the widespread view that A1 may have an essential role in this complex computational task. Here we show, however, that the spatial selectivity exhibited by the large majority of A1 neurons is well predicted by a simple linear model, which assumes that neurons additively integrate sound levels in each frequency band and ear. The success of this linear model is surprising, given that computing sound source direction is a necessarily nonlinear operation. However, because linear operations preserve information, our results are consistent with the hypothesis that A1 may also form a gateway to higher, more specialized cortical areas.
Fourteen rats with bilaterally implanted lateral hypothalamic electrodes were allowed to self-stimulate each side of the brain during daily test sessions. Rotation (circling behavior) during self-stimulation sessions was also recorded. All rats rotated in preferential direction regardless of the side of the brain stimulated, and, in each case, the direction was the same as that subsequently determined in response to d-amphetamine. All rats had asymmetries in self-stimulation thresholds related to the direction of rotation. Thresholds were lower on the side contralateral to the direction of rotation, and entire rate-intensity functions were displaced to the left on that side. The results, discussed in terms of lateralization of affect, suggest a model in which quantitative differences in neuronal firing can be translated into apparent qualitative specialization, with the two sides of the brain appearing to be specialized for high and low mood, respectively.
The prefrontal cortex is thought to modulate sensory signals in posterior cortices during top-down attention, but little is known about the underlying neural circuitry. Experimental and clinical evidence indicate that prefrontal dopamine has an important role in cognitive functions, acting predominantly through D1 receptors. Here we show that dopamine D1 receptors mediate prefrontal control of signals in the visual cortex of macaques (Macaca mulatta). We pharmacologically altered D1-receptor-mediated activity in the frontal eye field of the prefrontal cortex and measured the effect on the responses of neurons in area V4 of the visual cortex. This manipulation was sufficient to enhance the magnitude, the orientation selectivity and the reliability of V4 visual responses to an extent comparable with the known effects of top-down attention. The enhancement of V4 signals was restricted to neurons with response fields overlapping the part of visual space affected by the D1 receptor manipulation. Altering either D1- or D2-receptor-mediated frontal eye field activity increased saccadic target selection but the D2 receptor manipulation did not enhance V4 signals. Our results identify a role for D1 receptors in mediating the control of visual cortical signals by the prefrontal cortex and suggest how processing in sensory areas could be altered in mental disorders involving prefrontal dopamine.
Mid-aged rats were either adrenalectomized and chronically maintained, or left intact and treated daily for a 9- to 10-month period with a potent analog of the peptide adrenocorticotropin (residues 4 to 9), which has some stimulant properties, or with the neural stimulant pentylenetetrazole. All three treatments reduced hippocampal morphologic correlates of brain aging (neuronal loss, glial reactivity). The pentylenetetrazole and peptide treatments also improved reversal learning. These results suggest that certain endogenous peptides, with stimulant properties, may also exert long-term, trophic effects on brain structure and function.
The differential formation of excitatory (glutamate-mediated) and inhibitory (GABA-mediated) synapses is a critical step for the proper functioning of the brain. An imbalance in these synapses may lead to various neurological disorders such as autism, schizophrenia, Tourette's syndrome and epilepsy. Synapses are formed through communication between the appropriate synaptic partners. However, the molecular mechanisms that mediate the formation of specific synaptic types are not known. Here we show that two members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family, FGF22 and FGF7, promote the organization of excitatory and inhibitory presynaptic terminals, respectively, as target-derived presynaptic organizers. FGF22 and FGF7 are expressed by CA3 pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus. The differentiation of excitatory or inhibitory nerve terminals on dendrites of CA3 pyramidal neurons is specifically impaired in mutants lacking FGF22 or FGF7. These presynaptic defects are rescued by postsynaptic expression of the appropriate FGF. FGF22-deficient mice are resistant to epileptic seizures, and FGF7-deficient mice are prone to them, as expected from the alterations in excitatory/inhibitory balance. Differential effects of FGF22 and FGF7 involve both their distinct synaptic localizations and their use of different signalling pathways. These results demonstrate that specific FGFs act as target-derived presynaptic organizers and help to organize specific presynaptic terminals in the mammalian brain.
Recent studies have revealed some remarkably simple relationships between visual performance and the neuroanatomy of the visual pathways. The visual field is mapped topographically on the surface of the striate cortex in man; the projection is large for the central visual field and is progressively compressed towards the periphery. Visual acuity decreases with distance from the fovea in proportion to the estimated cortical magnification factor, M (the extent of striate cortex in millimetres corresponding to a degree of arc in visual space). If a stimulus is magnified at peripheral locations in proportion to 1/M, it becomes equally resolvable across the visual field. This scaling procedure (M-scaling) maintains equivalence of the cortical projection of stimuli with different visual field loci. We have used M-scaling to investigate motion perception as a visual field variable. We report here that both the lower threshold of motion and adaptation to motion are uniform for M-scaled stimuli, and are related to the velocity of the 'cortical image'.
Female birds that do not normally sing possess brain nuclei associated with song production in males. To determine whether one song nucleus, the caudal nucleus of the ventral hyperstriatum (HVc), acts in conspecific song perception, courtship responses of female canaries to canary and white-crowned sparrow songs were compared before and after HVc lesions. Bilateral lesions of a portion of the HVc resulted in copulation solicitations to heterospecific song as well as conspecific song. Control females continued to respond only to conspecific song. This suggests that the HVc is critical for conspecific song perception in females. Because female canaries do not normally sing, neurons in female HVc must develop response selectivity by a mechanism different from that proposed for male birds in the motor theory of song perception.
The effect of ethanol on hippocampal axonal sprouting was studied with a histochemical technique for identifying acetylcholinesterase. Unilateral lesion of the entorhinal cortex in adult rats produced an increase in the density of acetylcholinesterase staining in the outer molecular layer and a concomitant increase in the width of the pale-staining commissural-associational zone of the dentate gyrus. Other rats were given ethanol (11.3 +/- 0.45 grams per kilogram) for 2 weeks before and 9 days after receiving the lesion. Ethanol abolished the expansion of the commissural-associated zone. The effect of ethanol on sprouting axons suggests that it may inhibit recovery of function after brain injury.
The mammalian neocortex consists of a mosaic of columnar units whose development is poorly understood. Optical recordings of brain slices labeled with the fluorescent calcium indicator fura-2 revealed that the neonatal rat cortex was partitioned into distinct domains of spontaneously coactive neurons. In tangential slices, these domains were 50 to 120 micrometers in diameter; in coronal slices they spanned several cortical layers and resembled columns found in the adult cortex. In developing somatosensory cortex, domains were smaller than, and distinct from, the barrels, which represent sensory input from a single vibrissa. The neurons within each domain were coupled by gap junctions. Thus, nonsynaptic communication during cortical development defines discrete multicellular patterns that could presage adult functional architecture.
An unusual feature of the cerebellar cortex is that its output neurons, Purkinje cells, release GABA (g-aminobutyric acid). Their high intrinsic firing rates (50 Hz) and extensive convergence predict that their target neurons in the cerebellar nuclei would be largely inhibited unless Purkinje cells pause their spiking, yet Purkinje and nuclear neuron firing rates do not always vary inversely. One indication of how these synapses transmit information is that populations of Purkinje neurons synchronize their spikes during cerebellar behaviours. If nuclear neurons respond to Purkinje synchrony, they may encode signals from subsets of inhibitory inputs. Here we show in weanling and adult mice that nuclear neurons transmit the timing of synchronous Purkinje afferent spikes, owing to modest Purkinje-to-nuclear convergence ratios (~40:1), fast inhibitory postsynaptic current kinetics (t(decay) = 2.5 ms) and high intrinsic firing rates (~90 Hz). In vitro, dynamically clamped asynchronous inhibitory postsynaptic potentials mimicking Purkinje afferents suppress nuclear cell spiking, whereas synchronous inhibitory postsynaptic potentials entrain nuclear cell spiking. With partial synchrony, nuclear neurons time-lock their spikes to the synchronous subpopulation of inputs, even when only 2 out of 40 afferents synchronize. In vivo, nuclear neurons reliably phase-lock to regular trains of molecular layer stimulation. Thus, cerebellar nuclear neurons can preferentially relay the spike timing of synchronized Purkinje cells to downstream premotor areas.
Infant vocal babbling has been assumed to be a speech-based phenomenon that reflects the maturation of the articulatory apparatus responsible for spoken language production. Manual babbling has now been reported to occur in deaf children exposed to signed languages from birth. The similarities between manual and vocal babbling suggest that babbling is a product of an amodal, brain-based language capacity under maturational control, in which phonetic and syllabic units are produced by the infant as a first step toward building a mature linguistic system. Contrary to prevailing accounts of the neurological basis of babbling in language ontogeny, the speech modality is not critical in babbling. Rather, babbling is tied to the abstract linguistic structure of language and to an expressive capacity capable of processing different types of signals (signed or spoken).
Courtship is an innate sexually dimorphic behaviour that can be observed in naive animals without previous learning or experience, suggesting that the neural circuits that mediate this behaviour are developmentally programmed. In Drosophila, courtship involves a complex yet stereotyped array of dimorphic behaviours that are regulated by Fru(M), a male-specific isoform of the fruitless gene. Fru(M) is expressed in about 2,000 neurons in the fly brain, including three subpopulations of olfactory sensory neurons and projection neurons (PNs). One set of Fru(+) olfactory neurons expresses the odorant receptor Or67d and responds to the male-specific pheromone cis-vaccenyl acetate (cVA). These neurons converge on the DA1 glomerulus in the antennal lobe. In males, activation of Or67d(+) neurons by cVA inhibits courtship of other males, whereas in females their activation promotes receptivity to other males. These observations pose the question of how a single pheromone acting through the same set of sensory neurons can elicit different behaviours in male and female flies. Anatomical or functional dimorphisms in this neural circuit might be responsible for the dimorphic behaviour. We therefore developed a neural tracing procedure that employs two-photon laser scanning microscopy to activate the photoactivatable green fluorescent protein. Here we show, using this technique, that the projections from the DA1 glomerulus to the protocerebrum are sexually dimorphic. We observe a male-specific axonal arbor in the lateral horn whose elaboration requires the expression of the transcription factor Fru(M) in DA1 projection neurons and other Fru(+) cells. The observation that cVA activates a sexually dimorphic circuit in the protocerebrum suggests a mechanism by which a single pheromone can elicit different behaviours in males and in females.
The primary mechanism of activation of intracellular prohormones seems to involve proteolytic cleavage at sequences of consecutive basic residues. Thus, all the known biologically active peptides derived from the prohormone of corticotropin and beta-endorphin appear to be excised initially by enzymes with this specificity. The C-terminal peptide, beta-endorphin (1-31), is generated by cleavage at a lysyl arginine sequence and an additional cleavage can give rise to the related peptides, beta-endorphin (1-27) and beta-endorphin (1-26). These derivatives of beta-endorphin are released by an endopeptidase that appears to catalyse cleavage on the carboxyl side of paired lysine residues, followed by the action of a carboxypeptidase B-like enzyme (Fig. 1). The beta-endorphin fragments, beta-endorphin (1-27) and beta-endorphin (1-26), have been isolated from porcine and bovine pituitary but the C-terminal dipeptide, glycyl glutamine, has not been reported previously. Here we describe the isolation of glycyl glutamine from porcine pituitary and present evidence for its presence in sheep brain stem. When applied ionophoretically to brain stem neurones in the rat, the dipeptide exhibited an inhibitory action on cell firing.
Two kitteens with progressive neurologic disease had increased concentrations of GM2 ganglioside in their cerebral cortex. Examination under the light microscope revealed cytoplasmic vacuolation of neurons and hepatocytes. Transmission and scanning electron microscopy demosntrated cytoplasmic inclusions encompassed by membranes in various central nervous system cell types and in hepatocytes. Beta-D-N-acetyl-hexosaminidase activity was reduced to about 1.0 percent of normal in brain, liver, and cultured skin fibroblasts of the diseased kittens; both major electrophoretic forms, A and B, of the enzyme were deficient. In fibroblasts from the parents of the diseased kittens, this enzyme activity was intermediate between that of affected and normal cats, suggesting an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance of the enzyme defect. Histopahtological and ultrastructural lesions, glycolipid storage, enzyme defect, and pattern of inheritance are similar to those of human GM2 gangliosidosis type 2.
Clonal cell lines derived from specific types of central neurons can be used to identify and characterize properties specific to those neurons. With somatic cell fusion techniques, nine clonal hybrid cell lines have been developed from the septal region of the mouse basal forebrain. Two lines express characteristics typical of cholinergic neurons--choline acetyltransferase activity and immunoreactivity, neurite formation with neurofilament protein immunoreactivity, and aggregation in rotation-mediated cell culture. These cell lines may be useful for studying the trophic interactions that support the development and maintenance of central cholinergic connections.
Schizophrenic patients with high ventricle brain ratios and cortical brain atrophy, as shown by computerized tomography, had decreased spinal fluid concentrations of homovanillic acid and dopamine-beta-hydroxylase activity. These decreased cerebral spinal fluid concentrations in patients with brain atrophy support the proposal of disturbed noradrenaline and dopamine neurotransmission in a subgroup of schizophrenic patients.
The accumulation of cerebral 5-hydroxytryptophan after decarboxylase inhibition was decreased in rats maintained at arterial O(2) tensions below 60 mm-Hg. In contrast, brain lactate was stable above 40 mm-Hg and brain adenosine triphosphate, adenosine diphosphate, and adenosine monophosphate were unchanged above 30 mm-Hg. There was a linear correlation of brain 5-hydroxytryptophan accumulation to cerebral venous O(2) tension. Cerebral tryptophan hydroxylase appears to have a poor affinity for oxygen and to be affected by slight hypoxia. The resultant decreases in monoamine neurotransmitter metabolism may explain the behavioral changes of mild oxygen deprivation.
Application of arachidonic acid or prostaglandin G(2) to the brain surface of anesthetized cats induced cerebral arteriolar damage. Scavengers of free oxygen radicals inhibited this damage. Prostaglandin H(2), prostaglandin E(2), and 11,14,17-eicosatrienoic acid did not produce arteriolar damage. It appears that increased prostaglandin synthesis produces cerebral vascular damage by generating free oxygen radicals.
The transneuronal transfer of neurotropic viruses may represent an effective tool for tracing chains of connected neurons because replication of virus in the recipient neurons after transfer amplifies the "tracer signal." Herpes simplex virus type 1 was transferred transneuronally from forelimb and hindlimb nerves of rats to the cortical and brainstem neurons that project to the spinal enlargements to which the nerves receiving injections are connected. This transneuronal transfer of herpes simplex virus type 1 from peripheral nerves has the potential to be used to identify neurons in the brain that are related transsynaptically to different nerves and muscles.
The 4-kilodalton (39 to 43 amino acids) amyloid beta protein (beta AP), which is deposited as amyloid in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's diseases, is derived from a large protein, the amyloid beta protein precursor (beta APP). Human mononuclear leukemic (K562) cells expressing a beta AP-bearing, carboxyl-terminal beta APP derivative released significant amounts of a soluble 4-kilodalton beta APP derivative essentially identical to the beta AP deposited in Alzheimer's disease. Human neuroblastoma (M17) cells transfected with constructs expressing full-length beta APP and M17 cells expressing only endogenous beta APP also released soluble 4-kilodalton beta AP, and a similar, if not identical, fragment was readily detected in cerebrospinal fluid from individuals with Alzheimer's disease and normal individuals. Thus cells normally produce and release soluble 4-kilodalton beta AP that is essentially identical to the 4-kilodalton beta AP deposited as insoluble amyloid fibrils in Alzheimer's disease.
To what extent do we learn from the positive versus negative outcomes of our decisions? The neuromodulator dopamine plays a key role in these reinforcement learning processes. Patients with Parkinson's disease, who have depleted dopamine in the basal ganglia, are impaired in tasks that require learning from trial and error. Here, we show, using two cognitive procedural learning tasks, that Parkinson's patients off medication are better at learning to avoid choices that lead to negative outcomes than they are at learning from positive outcomes. Dopamine medication reverses this bias, making patients more sensitive to positive than negative outcomes. This pattern was predicted by our biologically based computational model of basal ganglia-dopamine interactions in cognition, which has separate pathways for "Go" and "NoGo" responses that are differentially modulated by positive and negative reinforcement.
Neurodegenerative diseases of the central nervous system are often associated with impaired learning and memory, eventually leading to dementia. An important aspect in pre-clinical research is the exploration of strategies to re-establish learning ability and access to long-term memories. By using a mouse model that allows temporally and spatially restricted induction of neuronal loss, we show here that environmental enrichment reinstated learning behaviour and re-established access to long-term memories after significant brain atrophy and neuronal loss had already occurred. Environmental enrichment correlated with chromatin modifications (increased histone-tail acetylation). Moreover, increased histone acetylation by inhibitors of histone deacetylases induced sprouting of dendrites, an increased number of synapses, and reinstated learning behaviour and access to long-term memories. These data suggest that inhibition of histone deacetylases might be a suitable therapeutic avenue for neurodegenerative diseases associated with learning and memory impairment, and raises the possibility of recovery of long-term memories in patients with dementia.
Recordings have been obtained simultaneously from several, individually selected neurons in the motor cortex of unanesthetized monkey as the animal performed simple arm movements. With the use of comparatively simple quantitative procedures, the activity of small sets of cells was found to be adequate for rather accurate real-time prediction of the time course of various response measurements. In addition, the results suggest that hypotheses concerning the response variables "controlled" by cortical motor systems may well depend upon whether or not the temporal relations between simultaneously active neurons are taken into account.
The glutamate receptors mediate excitatory neurotransmission in the brain and are important in memory acquisition, learning, and some neurodegenerative disorders. This receptor family is classified in three groups: the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate (AMPA)-kainate, and metabotropic receptors. Recent molecular studies have shown that many receptor subtypes exist in all three groups of the receptors and exhibit heterogeneity in function and expression patterns. This article reviews the molecular and functional diversity of the glutamate receptors and discusses their implications for integrative brain function.
Cells from the cerebral proliferative zones of newborn ferrets were labeled with tritiated thymidine and a fluorescent dye and were transplanted as a single-cell suspension into the occipital region of newborn ferrets. The transplanted cells became thoroughly integrated into the host environment: many cells migrated through the intermediate zone and into the cortical plate, where they developed as pyramidal neurons. Other transplanted cells came to resemble glial cells. After 1 to 2 months most transplanted neurons had taken up residence in layer 2 + 3, the normal destination of neurons generated on postnatal days 1 and 2. Thus the sequence of morphological differentiation and the eventual laminar position of the isochronically transplanted neurons closely paralleled that of their normal host counterparts.
Connectivity in the cortex is organized at multiple scales, suggesting that scale-dependent correlated activity is particularly important for understanding the behaviour of sensory cortices and their function in stimulus encoding. We analysed the scale-dependent structure of cortical interactions by using maximum entropy models to characterize multiple-tetrode recordings from primary visual cortex of anaesthetized macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta). We compared the properties of firing patterns among local clusters of neurons (<300 microm apart) with those of neurons separated by larger distances (600-2,500 microm). Here we report that local firing patterns are distinctive: whereas multi-neuronal firing patterns at larger distances can be predicted by pairwise interactions, patterns within local clusters often show evidence of high-order correlations. Surprisingly, these local correlations are flexible and rapidly reorganized by visual input. Although they modestly reduce the amount of information that a cluster conveys, they also modify the format of this information, creating sparser codes by increasing the periods of total quiescence, and concentrating information into briefer periods of common activity. These results imply a hierarchical organization of neuronal correlations: simple pairwise correlations link neurons over scales of tens to hundreds of minicolumns, but on the scale of a few minicolumns, ensembles of neurons form complex subnetworks whose moment-to-moment effective connectivity is dynamically reorganized by the stimulus.
The brain has diversified and advanced in evolution more than any other organ; the variety of nervous systems and behaviors among animal species is thus available for our exploitation. Comparative neuroscience is likely to reach insights so novel as to constitute revolutions in understanding the structure, functions, ontogeny, and evolution of nervous systems. This promise requires pursuit on a wide front, in respect to disciplines and in respect to the species, stages, and states compared. It also requires deliberate concentration on the differences among animals, in addition to the prevailing concern for the basic and common. Neglect of these challenges would be costly. Without due consideration of the neural and behavioral correlates of differences between higher taxa and between closely related families, species, sexes, and stages, we cannot expect to understand our nervous systems or ourselves.
Studies of human amnesia and studies of an animal model of human amnesia in the monkey have identified the anatomical components of the brain system for memory in the medial temporal lobe and have illuminated its function. This neural system consists of the hippocampus and adjacent, anatomically related cortex, including entorhinal, perirhinal, and parahippocampal cortices. These structures, presumably by virtue of their widespread and reciprocal connections with neocortex, are essential for establishing long-term memory for facts and events (declarative memory). The medial temporal lobe memory system is needed to bind together the distributed storage sites in neocortex that represent a whole memory. However, the role of this system is only temporary. As time passes after learning, memory stored in neocortex gradually becomes independent of medial temporal lobe structures.
Bilateral removal of the sulcal prefrontal cortex in rats at 60 days of age and older results in aphagia and adipsia, but removal of this area before 60 days of age does not affect food or water regulation. Apparently the development of the role of this neocortical region in feeding and drinking continues well beyond the time of weaning in the rat.
The dopamine (DA) innervation to the forebrain arises from subpopulations of midbrain DA neurones broadly classified as nigrostriatal, mesolimbic and mesocortical. Significant differences in the autoregulatory mechanisms and neuronal inputs of these DA pathways may account for their differences in physiological and pharmacological responsiveness. For example, footshock stress can activate rat mesocortical DA cells but does not alter nigrostriatal DA turnover, while also decreasing substance P (SP) concentrations in the midbrain interpeduncular nucleus and in the adjacent ventral tegmental area (VTA), but not in the substantia nigra (SN). This suggested that the activation of the SP input to the VTA may mediate activation of certain DA systems by footshock stress; behavioural studies also had suggested an excitatory effect of SP on DA cells in the VTA. SP antagonists now available are neurotoxic and of questionable efficacy, we therefore used monoclonal antibody against SP. Antibody microinjected into the VTA prevented normal footshock-induced activation of mesocortical DA neurones, suggesting mediation by SP input to the VTA. The in vivo application of antibodies may prove valuable in studies of neuropeptides in the central nervous system (CNS).
Deriving the quantity of items is an abstract form of categorization. To explore it, monkeys were trained to judge whether successive visual displays contained the same quantity of items. Many neurons in the lateral prefrontal cortex were tuned for quantity irrespective of the exact physical appearance of the displays. Their tuning curves formed overlapping filters, which may explain why behavioral discrimination improves with increasing numerical distance and why discrimination of two quantities with equal numerical distance worsens as their numerical size increases. A mechanism that extracts the quantity of visual field items could contribute to general numerical ability.
The vast majority of synaptic connections onto neurons in the cerebral cortex arise from other cortical neurons, both excitatory and inhibitory, forming local and distant 'recurrent' networks. Although this is a basic theme of cortical organization, its study has been limited largely to theoretical investigations, which predict that local recurrent networks show a proportionality or balance between recurrent excitation and inhibition, allowing the generation of stable periods of activity. This recurrent activity might underlie such diverse operations as short-term memory, the modulation of neuronal excitability with attention, and the generation of spontaneous activity during sleep. Here we show that local cortical circuits do indeed operate through a proportional balance of excitation and inhibition generated through local recurrent connections, and that the operation of such circuits can generate self-sustaining activity that can be turned on and off by synaptic inputs. These results confirm the long-hypothesized role of recurrent activity as a basic operation of the cerebral cortex.
Mutations in the X-linked MECP2 gene, which encodes the transcriptional regulator methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2), cause Rett syndrome and several neurodevelopmental disorders including cognitive disorders, autism, juvenile-onset schizophrenia and encephalopathy with early lethality. Rett syndrome is characterized by apparently normal early development followed by regression, motor abnormalities, seizures and features of autism, especially stereotyped behaviours. The mechanisms mediating these features are poorly understood. Here we show that mice lacking Mecp2 from GABA (g-aminobutyric acid)-releasing neurons recapitulate numerous Rett syndrome and autistic features, including repetitive behaviours. Loss of MeCP2 from a subset of forebrain GABAergic neurons also recapitulates many features of Rett syndrome. MeCP2-deficient GABAergic neurons show reduced inhibitory quantal size, consistent with a presynaptic reduction in glutamic acid decarboxylase 1 (Gad1) and glutamic acid decarboxylase 2 (Gad2) levels, and GABA immunoreactivity. These data demonstrate that MeCP2 is critical for normal function of GABA-releasing neurons and that subtle dysfunction of GABAergic neurons contributes to numerous neuropsychiatric phenotypes.
The neurotrophins are signaling factors important for the differentiation and survival of distinct neuronal populations during development. To test whether the neurotrophins also function in the mature nervous system, the effects of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF), and neurotrophic factor 3 (NT-3) on the strength of synaptic transmission in hippocampal slices were determined. Application of BDNF or NT-3 produced a dramatic and sustained (2 to 3 hours) enhancement of synaptic strength at the Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses; NGF was without significant effect. The enhancement was blocked by K252a, an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinases. BDNF and NT-3 decreased paired-pulse facilitation, which is consistent with a possible presynaptic modification. Long-term potentiation could still be elicited in slices previously potentiated by exposure to the neurotrophic factors, which implies that these two forms of plasticity may use at least partially independent cellular mechanisms.
Mammalian prions cause fatal neurodegenerative conditions including Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans and scrapie and bovine spongiform encephalopathy in animals. Prion infections are typically associated with remarkably prolonged but highly consistent incubation periods followed by a rapid clinical phase. The relationship between prion propagation, generation of neurotoxic species and clinical onset has remained obscure. Prion incubation periods in experimental animals are known to vary inversely with expression level of cellular prion protein. Here we demonstrate that prion propagation in brain proceeds via two distinct phases: a clinically silent exponential phase not rate-limited by prion protein concentration which rapidly reaches a maximal prion titre, followed by a distinct switch to a plateau phase. The latter determines time to clinical onset in a manner inversely proportional to prion protein concentration. These findings demonstrate an uncoupling of infectivity and toxicity. We suggest that prions themselves are not neurotoxic but catalyse the formation of such species from PrP(C). Production of neurotoxic species is triggered when prion propagation saturates, leading to a switch from autocatalytic production of infectivity (phase 1) to a toxic (phase 2) pathway.
The primate cortical visual system is composed of many structurally and functionally distinct areas, each receiving and sending about 10 projections from and to other cortical areas. The visual cortex is thus served by many cortico-cortical connections to form a network of considerable complexity. Thus the gross organization of this cortical processing system presents a formidable topological problem: although the spatial position of the areas in the brain is reasonably well established, the gross 'processing architecture' defined by the connections, is less well understood. Here I report an optimization approach that gives both qualitative and quantitative insight into the connectional topology of the primate cortical visual system. This approach supports suggestions that the system is divided into a dorsal 'stream' and a ventral 'stream' with limited cross-talk, that these two streams reconverge in the region of the principal sulcus (area 46) and in the superior temporal polysensory areas, that the system is hierarchically organized, and that the majority of the connections are from 'nearest-neighbour' and 'next-door-but-one' areas.
The vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) stabilizes retinal images by generating smooth eye movements that are equal in amplitude and opposite in direction to head turns. Whenever image motion occurs persistently during head turns, the VOR undergoes motor learning; as a result image stability is gradually restored. A group of brain stem neurons that are in the modified pathways has now been described. The neurons express changes in firing in association with motor learning in the VOR and receive monosynaptic inhibition from the flocculus of the cerebellum. The changes in firing have an appropriate magnitude and are expressed at the correct latency to account for the altered VOR. The response properties of the neurons point to their brain stem vestibular inputs for further investigation of the site of motor learning.
Amounts of cyclic adenosine monophosphate in discrete regions of the brain were estimated after exposure of rats to microwave irradiation. Amounts were highest in the cerebellum and brainstem, intermediate in the hypothalamus and midbrain, and lowest in the hippocampus and cortex. Decapitation increased the concentration of cyclic adenosine monophosphate in all brain areas, although the increase in the cerebellum was three to four times greater than that in other areas. Microwave irradiation may provide a means of rapidly fixing brain tissue in situ while permitting easy dissection of the brain. In this way artifacts produced by decapitation can be eliminated, and concentrations of heat-stable compounds in the brain can be estimated under conditions which more closely approximate those in vivo.
Astrocytes in cultures of brain cells from fetal or newborn hamsters undergo neoplastic transformation after infection with simian virus 40 or polyoma virus. Subcutaneous or intracerebral inoculation of the transformed brain cells into newborn or adult hamsters produces progressively enlarging astrocytomas at the sites of injection. Astrocytomas produced by polyomatransformed cell lines are histologically better differentiated, but grow more rapidly and metastasize more frequently, than astrocytomas produced by cell lines transformed by simian virus 40. These observations make available in vitro models of virus-induced oncogenesis in astrocytes and provide simple techniques for obtaining astrocytoma cell lines suitable for screening studies of chemical agents effective against astrocytomas.
Familial British dementia (FBD), previously designated familial cerebral amyloid angiopathy-British type, is an autosomal dominant disorder of undetermined origin characterized by progressive dementia, spasticity, and cerebellar ataxia, with onset at around the fifth decade of life. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, non-neuritic and perivascular plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are the predominant pathological lesions. Here we report the identification of a unique 4K protein subunit named ABri from isolated amyloid fibrils. This highly insoluble peptide is a fragment of a putative type-II single-spanning transmembrane precursor that is encoded by a novel gene, BRI, located on chromosome 13. A single base substitution at the stop codon of this gene generates a longer open reading frame, resulting in a larger, 277-residue precursor. Release of the 34 carboxy-terminal amino acids from the mutated precursor generates the ABri amyloid subunit. The mutation creates a cutting site for the restriction enzyme XbaI, which is useful for detecting asymptomatic carriers. Antibodies against the amyloid or homologous synthetic peptides recognize both parenchymal and vascular lesions in FBD patients. A point mutation at the stop codon of BRI therefore results in the generation of the ABri peptide, which is deposited as amyloid fibrils causing neuronal disfunction and dementia.
Neuronal activity in the motor cortex is understood to be correlated with movements, but the impact of action potentials (APs) in single cortical neurons on the generation of movement has not been fully determined. Here we show that trains of APs in single pyramidal cells of rat motor cortex can evoke long sequences of small whisker movements. For layer-5 pyramids, we find that evoked rhythmic movements have a constant phase relative to the AP train, indicating that single layer-5 pyramids can reset the rhythm of whisker movements. Action potentials evoked in layer-6 pyramids can generate bursts of rhythmic whisking, with a variable phase of movements relative to the AP train. An increasing number of APs decreases the latency to onset of movement, whereas AP frequency determines movement direction and amplitude. We find that the efficacy of cortical APs in evoking whisker movements is not dependent on background cortical activity and is greatly enhanced in waking rats. We conclude that in vibrissae motor cortex sparse AP activity can evoke movements.
Neurons in the cortex of behaving animals show temporally irregular spiking patterns. The origin of this irregularity and its implications for neural processing are unknown. The hypothesis that the temporal variability in the firing of a neuron results from an approximate balance between its excitatory and inhibitory inputs was investigated theoretically. Such a balance emerges naturally in large networks of excitatory and inhibitory neuronal populations that are sparsely connected by relatively strong synapses. The resulting state is characterized by strongly chaotic dynamics, even when the external inputs to the network are constant in time. Such a network exhibits a linear response, despite the highly nonlinear dynamics of single neurons, and reacts to changing external stimuli on time scales much smaller than the integration time constant of a single neuron.
Classical conditioning of the eyelid response in the rabbit was used to investigate the neuronal structures mediating basic associative learning of discrete, adaptive responses. Lesions of the ipsilateral dentate-interpositus nuclei, but not of the cerebellar cortex, abolished the learned eyeblink response. Recordings from these nuclei have revealed neuronal responses related to the learning of the response. Stimulating these recording sites produced the eyelid response. The dentate-interpositus nuclei were concluded to be critically involved in the learning and production of classically conditioned responses.
The process of segmentation, in which the developing embryo is divided into repetitive structures along its antero-posterior (A-P) axis, as a means of organizing and coordinating the body plan is found in a wide range of organisms. In Drosophila, homoeotic genes are involved in all levels of segmental organization and in determining segment identity. The roles of these genes in segmentation have been found mainly by mutational studies, but also by in situ hybridization, which has shown their domains of expression. In contrast to Drosophila, however, embryonic expression of homoeobox-containing genes in vertebrate organisms has not been found to follow a segmental pattern. Vertebrate segmentation can be clearly seen in the mesodermal somites, but repetitive morphological structures in the central nervous system (neuromeres) have only recently been shown to have developmental significance. Neuromeres in the hindbrain (rhombomeres) have been defined as segmental units by their pattern of nerve formation in the developing chick and by the alternating expression of Krox-20, a gene encoding a zinc-finger DNA-binding protein, in the 9.5-day-old mouse. Here we report that a mouse homoeobox-containing gene, Hox-2.9, is expressed in a segment-specific manner in the developing mouse hindbrain. This expression is in a region which is flanked by the regions of expression of Krox-20, and is precisely contained within a single neuromere, rhombomere 4.
Recent studies have demonstrated that monkeys and humans can use signals from the brain to guide computer cursors. Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) may one day assist patients suffering from neurological injury or disease, but relatively low system performance remains a major obstacle. In fact, the speed and accuracy with which keys can be selected using BCIs is still far lower than for systems relying on eye movements. This is true whether BCIs use recordings from populations of individual neurons using invasive electrode techniques or electroencephalogram recordings using less- or non-invasive techniques. Here we present the design and demonstration, using electrode arrays implanted in monkey dorsal premotor cortex, of a manyfold higher performance BCI than previously reported. These results indicate that a fast and accurate key selection system, capable of operating with a range of keyboard sizes, is possible (up to 6.5 bits per second, or approximately 15 words per minute, with 96 electrodes). The highest information throughput is achieved with unprecedentedly brief neural recordings, even as recording quality degrades over time. These performance results and their implications for system design should substantially increase the clinical viability of BCIs in humans.
A cell line has been established in continuous culture of human cerebral cortical neurons obtained from a patient with unilateral megalencephaly, a disorder associated with continued proliferation of immature neuronal cells. When differentiated in the presence of nerve growth factor, 1-isobutyl-3-methylxanthine, and dibutyryl adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP), the cells display mature neuronal morphology with numerous long, extensively branched processes with spines and varicosities. The cells stain positively for neurofilament protein and neuron-specific enolase (selective neuronal markers) but are negative for glial markers, such as glial fibrillary acidic protein, S-100, and myelin basic protein. The cells also stain positively for the neurotransmitters gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), glutamate, somatostatin, cholecystokinin-8, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. These cells may facilitate characterization of neurons in the human central nervous system.
Global anterograde amnesia is described in three patients with brain injuries that occurred in one case at birth, in another by age 4, and in the third at age 9. Magnetic resonance techniques revealed bilateral hippocampal pathology in all three cases. Remarkably, despite their pronounced amnesia for the episodes of everyday life, all three patients attended mainstream schools and attained levels of speech and language competence, literacy, and factual knowledge that are within the low average to average range. The findings provide support for the view that the episodic and semantic components of cognitive memory are partly dissociable, with only the episodic component being fully dependent on the hippocampus.
Assessing patterns of synaptic connections in the developing mammalian neocortex has relied primarily on anatomical studies. In a physiological approach described here, the patterns of synaptic connections in slices of developing ferret visual cortex were determined with scanning laser photostimulation. Functional synaptic inputs to pyramidal cells in cortical layers 2 and 3 originating from sites close to the neuronal cell body appeared at least 2 weeks before eye opening, prior to the formation of long-range horizontal connections. Extensive long-range horizontal connections appeared in the next 10 days of development. The number of local connections peaked at the time of eye opening; the number of these connections subsequently declined to the level found in the adult while the specificity of long-distance connections increased. Thus, the relative influence of local connections on the activity of layer 2 and layer 3 neurons declines as the cortex matures while the influence of longer range connections increases substantially.
Theories of instrumental learning are centred on understanding how success and failure are used to improve future decisions. These theories highlight a central role for reward prediction errors in updating the values associated with available actions. In animals, substantial evidence indicates that the neurotransmitter dopamine might have a key function in this type of learning, through its ability to modulate cortico-striatal synaptic efficacy. However, no direct evidence links dopamine, striatal activity and behavioural choice in humans. Here we show that, during instrumental learning, the magnitude of reward prediction error expressed in the striatum is modulated by the administration of drugs enhancing (3,4-dihydroxy-L-phenylalanine; L-DOPA) or reducing (haloperidol) dopaminergic function. Accordingly, subjects treated with L-DOPA have a greater propensity to choose the most rewarding action relative to subjects treated with haloperidol. Furthermore, incorporating the magnitude of the prediction errors into a standard action-value learning algorithm accurately reproduced subjects' behavioural choices under the different drug conditions. We conclude that dopamine-dependent modulation of striatal activity can account for how the human brain uses reward prediction errors to improve future decisions.
Vascular endothelial cells in the central nervous system (CNS) form a barrier that restricts the movement of molecules and ions between the blood and the brain. This blood-brain barrier (BBB) is crucial to ensure proper neuronal function and protect the CNS from injury and disease. Transplantation studies have demonstrated that the BBB is not intrinsic to the endothelial cells, but is induced by interactions with the neural cells. Owing to the close spatial relationship between astrocytes and endothelial cells, it has been hypothesized that astrocytes induce this critical barrier postnatally, but the timing of BBB formation has been controversial. Here we demonstrate that the barrier is formed during embryogenesis as endothelial cells invade the CNS and pericytes are recruited to the nascent vessels, over a week before astrocyte generation. Analysing mice with null and hypomorphic alleles of Pdgfrb, which have defects in pericyte generation, we demonstrate that pericytes are necessary for the formation of the BBB, and that absolute pericyte coverage determines relative vascular permeability. We demonstrate that pericytes regulate functional aspects of the BBB, including the formation of tight junctions and vesicle trafficking in CNS endothelial cells. Pericytes do not induce BBB-specific gene expression in CNS endothelial cells, but inhibit the expression of molecules that increase vascular permeability and CNS immune cell infiltration. These data indicate that pericyte-endothelial cell interactions are critical to regulate the BBB during development, and disruption of these interactions may lead to BBB dysfunction and neuroinflammation during CNS injury and disease.
A single injection of 10 microliters of antiserum to total brain ganglioside onto (and into) the sensorimotor cortex of the rat resulted in recurrent spiking in the cortical electroencephalogram, lasting from 7 to 17 days. Absorption of antibody with pure monosialoganglioside (GM1) completely abosished the effect. Spiking was reactivated after 4 weeks by intramuscular injection of pentylenetetrazole.
Findings from single-cell recording studies suggest that a comparison of the outputs of different pools of selectively tuned lower-level sensory neurons may be a general mechanism by which higher-level brain regions compute perceptual decisions. For example, when monkeys must decide whether a noisy field of dots is moving upward or downward, a decision can be formed by computing the difference in responses between lower-level neurons sensitive to upward motion and those sensitive to downward motion. Here we use functional magnetic resonance imaging and a categorization task in which subjects decide whether an image presented is a face or a house to test whether a similar mechanism is also at work for more complex decisions in the human brain and, if so, where in the brain this computation might be performed. Activity within the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is greater during easy decisions than during difficult decisions, covaries with the difference signal between face- and house-selective regions in the ventral temporal cortex, and predicts behavioural performance in the categorization task. These findings show that even for complex object categories, the comparison of the outputs of different pools of selectively tuned neurons could be a general mechanism by which the human brain computes perceptual decisions.
The NMDA (N-methyl D-aspartate) receptors in the brain play a critical role in synaptic plasticity, synaptogenesis and excitotoxicity. Molecular cloning has demonstrated that NMDA receptors consist of several homologous subunits (NMDAR1, 2A-2D). A variety of studies have suggested that protein phosphorylation of NMDA receptors may regulate their function and play a role in many forms of synaptic plasticity such as long-term potentiation. We have examined the phosphorylation of the NMDA receptor subunit NMDAR1 (NR1) by protein kinase C (PKC) in cells transiently expressing recombinant NR1 and in primary cultures of cortical neurons. PKC phosphorylation occurs on several distinct sites on the NR1 subunit. Most of these sites are contained within a single alternatively spliced exon in the C-terminal domain, which has previously been proposed to be on the extracellular side of the membrane. These results demonstrate that alternative splicing of the NR1 messenger RNA regulates its phosphorylation by PKC, and that mRNA splicing is a novel mechanism for regulating the sensitivity of glutamate receptors to protein phosphorylation. These results also provide evidence that the C-terminal domain of the NR1 protein is located intracellularly, suggesting that the proposed transmembrane topology model for glutamate receptors may be incorrect.
Mutations of the presenilin-1 gene are a major cause of familial early-onset Alzheimer's disease. Presenilin-1 can associate with members of the catenin family of signalling proteins, but the significance of this association is unknown. Here we show that presenilin-1 forms a complex with beta-catenin in vivo that increases beta-catenin stability. Pathogenic mutations in the presenilin-1 gene reduce the ability of presenilin-1 to stabilize beta-catenin, and lead to increased degradation of beta-catenin in the brains of transgenic mice. Moreover, beta-catenin levels are markedly reduced in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients with presenilin-1 mutations. Loss of beta-catenin signalling increases neuronal vulnerability to apoptosis induced by amyloid-beta protein. Thus, mutations in presenilin-1 may increase neuronal apoptosis by altering the stability of beta-catenin, predisposing individuals to early-onset Alzheimer's disease.
Although the question of to whom a male directs his mating attempts is a critical one in social interactions, little is known about the molecular and cellular mechanisms controlling mammalian sexual preference. Here we report that the neurotransmitter 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) is required for male sexual preference. Wild-type male mice preferred females over males, but males lacking central serotonergic neurons lost sexual preference although they were not generally defective in olfaction or in pheromone sensing. A role for 5-HT was demonstrated by the phenotype of mice lacking tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (Tph2), which is required for the first step of 5-HT synthesis in the brain. Thirty-five minutes after the injection of the intermediate 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), which circumvented Tph2 to restore 5-HT to the wild-type level, adult Tph2 knockout mice also preferred females over males. These results indicate that 5-HT and serotonergic neurons in the adult brain regulate mammalian sexual preference.
Electrical synapses are common between inhibitory neurons in the mammalian thalamus and neocortex. Synaptic modulation, which allows flexibility of communication between neurons, has been studied extensively at chemical synapses, but modulation of electrical synapses in the mammalian brain has barely been examined. We found that the activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors, via endogenous neurotransmitter or by agonist, causes long-term reduction of electrical synapse strength between the inhibitory neurons of the rat thalamic reticular nucleus.
A major monoaminergic innervation in infant rat neocortex, predominantly in layer IV, has been demonstrated by ultrastructural and biochemical studies after the administration of exogenous catecholamine precursors and congeners. One-third of all cortical synapses have an uptake-storage mechanism for catecholamines. In newborn cortex, the storage capacity for catecholamines is tenfold greater than the endogenous levels, and the uptake-storage mechanism matures earlier than the ability to synthesize neurotransmitter.
People typically exhibit greater sensitivity to losses than to equivalent gains when making decisions. We investigated neural correlates of loss aversion while individuals decided whether to accept or reject gambles that offered a 50/50 chance of gaining or losing money. A broad set of areas (including midbrain dopaminergic regions and their targets) showed increasing activity as potential gains increased. Potential losses were represented by decreasing activity in several of these same gain-sensitive areas. Finally, individual differences in behavioral loss aversion were predicted by a measure of neural loss aversion in several regions, including the ventral striatum and prefrontal cortex.
Nerve fibers transmitting information from the thalamus to the cerebral cortex may be classified according to their major cortical layers of termination. (i) One class consists of inputs from thalamic relay nuclei for vision, audition, and somesthesis to layer IV, layer III, or both. In contrast, autoradiographic studies of projections from other thalamic nuclei reveal strikingly different patterns of termination: (ii) layer VI (or layer V, or both) is the target of fibers from the intralaminar nuclei, and (iii) layer I is the target for fibers from the ventromedial and magnocellular medial geniculate nuclei. (iv) The remaining class is typified by termination both in layer I and in additional layers that depend on the cortical area in which the terminations are found. The data demonstrate that convergent thalamic inputs to a given cortical area are usually not confluent within a layer and provide a new frame-work for categorizing thalamic nuclei.
The owl can discriminate changes in the location of sound sources as small as 3 degrees and can aim its head to within 2 degrees of a source. A typical neuron in its midbrain space map has a spatial receptive field that spans 40 degrees--a width that is many times the behavioural threshold. Here we have quantitatively examined the relationship between neuronal activity and perceptual acuity in the auditory space map in the barn owl midbrain. By analysing changes in firing rate resulting from small changes of stimulus azimuth, we show that most neurons can reliably signal changes in source location that are smaller than the behavioural threshold. Each source is represented in the space map by a focus of activity in a population of neurons. Displacement of the source causes the pattern of activity in this population to change. We show that this change predicts the owl's ability to detect a change in source location.
The pathophysiology of brain dysfunction was studied with an animal model of chronic alcoholism. Rats were fed a liquid diet with or without ethanol for 20 weeks and then the diet without ethanol for three more weeks. Hippocampal slices were prepared and intracellular recordings were obtained from dentate granule and CA1 cells. Significant depression of orthodromically elicited inhibitory postsynaptic potentials and postspike afterhyperpolarizations was observed in neurons from ethanol-exposed animals. No differences were observed in other active or passive membrane characteristics. These results suggest that a loss of neuronal inhibition could contribute to brain dysfunction in chronic alcoholism.
Recent studies have emphasized the role of acetylcholine (ACh) as an excitatory modulator of neuronal activity in mammalian cortex and hippocampus. Much less is known about the mechanism of direct cholinergic inhibition in the central nervous system or its role in regulating neuronal activities. Here we report that application of ACh to thalamic nucleus reticularis (nRt) neurones, which are known to receive a cholinergic input from the ascending reticular system of the brain stem, causes a hyperpolarization due to a relatively small (1-4 nS) increase in membrane conductance to K+. This cholinergic action appears to be mediated by the M2 subclass of muscarinic receptors and acts in conjunction with the intrinsic membrane properties of nucleus reticularis neurones to inhibit single spike activity while promoting the occurrence of burst discharges. Thus, cholinergic inhibitory mechanisms may be important in controlling the firing pattern of this important group of thalamic neurones.
A central action of gallamine triethiodide has been demonstrated in cats with permanently implanted electrodes that permit direct repetitive stimulation and recording of afterdischarges from cerebral cortex. Systemically administered gallamine produced a consistent and reproducible augmentation of duration of afterdischarge at doses just sufficient to produce skeletal muscle paralysis. Simultaneous examination of expiratory carbon dioxide, blood pressure, body temperature, blood glucose, and direct cortical response to brief single stimuli failed to reveal any consistent peripheral change to which the centrally observed effecte Could be attributed.
Membrane-associated guanylate kinases (MAGUKs) contain multiple protein-binding domains that allow them to assemble specific multiprotein complexes in particular regions of the cell. CASK/LIN-2, a MAGUK required for EGF receptor localization and signalling in Caenorhabditis elegans, contains a calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-like domain followed by PDZ, SH3 and guanylate kinase-like domains. In adult rat brain, CASK is concentrated at neuronal synapses and binds to the cell-surface proteins neurexin and syndecan and the cytoplasmic proteins Mint/LIN-10 and Veli/LIN-7. Here we report that, through its guanylate kinase domain, CASK interacts with Tbr-1, a T-box transcription factor that is involved in forebrain development. CASK enters the nucleus and binds to a specific DNA sequence (the T-element) in a complex with Tbr-1. CASK acts as a coactivator of Tbr-1 to induce transcription of T-element containing genes, including reelin, a gene that is essential for cerebrocortical development. Our findings show that a MAGUK which is usually associated with cell junctions has a transcription regulation function.
Sensorimotor coordination emerges early in development. The maturation period is characterized by the establishment of somatotopic cortical maps, the emergence of long-range cortical connections, heightened experience-dependent plasticity and spontaneous uncoordinated skeletal movement. How these various processes cooperate to allow the somatosensory system to form a three-dimensional representation of the body is not known. In the visual system, interactions between spontaneous network patterns and afferent activity have been suggested to be vital for normal development. Although several intrinsic cortical patterns of correlated neuronal activity have been described in developing somatosensory cortex in vitro, the in vivo patterns in the critical developmental period and the influence of physiological sensory inputs on these patterns remain unknown. We report here that in the intact somatosensory cortex of the newborn rat in vivo, spatially confined spindle bursts represent the first and only organized network pattern. The localized spindles are selectively triggered in a somatotopic manner by spontaneous muscle twitches, motor patterns analogous to human fetal movements. We suggest that the interaction between movement-triggered sensory feedback signals and self-organized spindle oscillations shapes the formation of cortical connections required for sensorimotor coordination.
The neural basis of pattern recognition is a central problem in visual neuroscience. Responses of single cells were recorded in area V4 of macaque monkey to three classes of periodic stimuli that are based on spatial derivative operators: polar (concentric and radial), hyperbolic, and conventional sinusoidal (Cartesian) gratings. Of 118 cells tested, 16 percent responded significantly more to polar or hyperbolic (non-Cartesian) gratings than to Cartesian gratings and only 8 percent showed a significant preference for Cartesian gratings. Among cells selective for non-Cartesian gratings, those that preferred concentric gratings were most common. Cells selective for non-Cartesian gratings may constitute an important intermediate stage in pattern recognition and the representation of surface shape.
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), a hormone secreted from mammalian atria, regulates the homoeostatic balance of body fluid and blood pressure. ANP-like immunoreactivity is also present in the brain, suggesting that the peptide functions as a neuropeptide. We report here identification in porcine brain of a novel peptide of 26 amino-acid residues, eliciting a pharmacological spectrum very similar to that of ANP, such as natriuretic-diuretic, hypotensive and chick rectum relaxant activities. The complete amino-acid sequence determined for the peptide is remarkably similar to but definitely distinct from the known sequence of ANP, indicating that the genes for the two are distinct. Thus, we have designated the peptide 'brain natriuretic peptide' (BNP). The occurrence of BNP with ANP in mammalian brain suggests the possibility that the physiological functions so far thought to be mediated by ANP may be regulated through a dual mechanism involving both ANP and BNP.
The developing chicken cerebellum contains two forms of the plasma membrane-associated actin-binding protein spectrin. The brain form, alpha gamma-spectrin (fodrin), is expressed constitutively in all neuronal cell bodies and processes during all stages of cerebellar morphogenesis. On the other hand, the erythrocyte form, alpha beta'beta-spectrin, accumulates exclusively at the plasma membrane of the cell bodies of Purkinje and granule cells and of neurons in cerebellar nuclei, but only after these cells have become postmitotic and have completed their migration to their final positions in the cerebellum. The appearance of alpha beta'beta-spectrin coincides temporally with the establishment of axosomatic contacts on these three neuronal cell types, which suggests that alpha beta'beta-spectrin accumulates in response to the formation of functional synaptic connections during cerebellar ontogeny.
The twitcher mouse is an animal model of galactosylceramidase deficiency, comparable to Krabbe's disease, a lysosomal storage disease in humans. As in most lysosomal storage diseases, neurological deterioration is a prominent feature of the disease in these mice. Transplantation of enzymatically normal congenic bone marrow was earlier found to result in prolonged survival and increased levels of galactosylceramidase in the visceral organs of twitcher mice. It is now reported that bone marrow transplantation results in increased galactosylceramidase levels in the central nervous system (CNS). Concomitantly, the levels of psychosine, a highly toxic lipid that progressively accumulates in the CNS of untreated twitcher mice, stabilized at much lower levels in the CNS of treated twitcher mice. Histologically, a gradual disappearance of globoid cells, the histological hallmark of Krabbe's disease, and the appearance of foamy macrophages capable of metabolizing the storage product were seen in the CNS. By immunohistochemical labeling it was demonstrated that these foamy macrophages were of donor origin. The infiltration of enzymatically competent, donor-derived macrophages was accompanied by extensive remyelination in the CNS. It is concluded that after bone marrow transplantation, donor-derived macrophages infiltrate the affected brain tissue and are capable of inducing a partial reversal of the enzyme deficiency.
N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), phencyclidine (PCP), and quisqualate receptor binding were compared to benzodiazepine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and muscarinic cholinergic receptor binding in the putamen and cerebral cortex of individuals with Huntington's disease (HD). NMDA receptor binding was reduced by 93 percent in putamen from HD brains compared to binding in normal brains. Quisqualate and PCP receptor binding were reduced by 67 percent, and the binding to other receptors was reduced by 55 percent or less. Binding to these receptors in the cerebral cortex was unchanged in HD brains. The results support the hypothesis that NMDA receptor-mediated neurotoxicity plays a role in the pathophysiology of Huntington's disease.
Normative developmental equations provide reliable descriptors of brain electrical activity in people 6 to 90 years old. Healthy persons display only chance deviations beyond predicted ranges. Patients with neurological impairment, subtle cognitive dysfunctions, or psychiatric disorders (including dementia and primary depression) show a high incidence of abnormal values. The magnitude of the deviations increases with clinical severity. Different disorders are characterized by distinctive profiles of abnormal values of brain electrical features. Computerized differential classification of some of these disorders can be achieved with high accuracy. Such classification, providing objective corroboration of brain dysfunctions, may be a useful adjunct to psychiatric diagnosis, which relies primarily on subjective clinical impressions. These methods may provide independent criteria for diagnostic validity, evaluations of treatment efficacy, and more individualized therapy.
The agent responsible for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) is thought to be a malfolded, protease-resistant version (PrPres) of the normal cellular prion protein (PrP). The interspecies transmission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) to mice was studied. Although all of the mice injected with homogenate from BSE-infected cattle brain exhibited neurological symptoms and neuronal death, more than 55 percent had no detectable PrPres. During serial passage, PrPres appeared after the agent became adapted to the new host. Thus, PrPres may be involved in species adaptation, but a further unidentified agent may actually transmit BSE.
The brain frequently needs to store information for short periods. In vision, this means that the perceptual correlate of a stimulus has to be maintained temporally once the stimulus has been removed from the visual scene. However, it is not known how the visual system transfers sensory information into a memory component. Here, we identify a neural correlate of working memory in the monkey primary visual cortex (V1). We propose that this component may link sensory activity with memory activity.
After intravascular delivery of genetically marked adult mouse bone marrow into lethally irradiated normal adult hosts, donor-derived cells expressing neuronal proteins (neuronal phenotypes) developed in the central nervous system. Flow cytometry revealed a population of donor-derived cells in the brain with characteristics distinct from bone marrow. Confocal microscopy of individual cells showed that hundreds of marrow-derived cells in brain sections expressed gene products typical of neurons (NeuN, 200-kilodalton neurofilament, and class III beta-tubulin) and were able to activate the transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). The generation of neuronal phenotypes in the adult brain 1 to 6 months after an adult bone marrow transplant demonstrates a remarkable plasticity of adult tissues with potential clinical applications.
Intracerebroventricular administration of human pancreatic growth hormone-releasing factor caused a dose-dependent inhibition of growth hormone secretion, elevated plasma glucose concentrations, and produced marked behavioral and motor effects. Immunoneutralization with antiserum to somatostatin did not reverse the suppression of growth hormone. These findings suggest that hypothalamic growth hormone-releasing factor may regulate its own neurosecretion through an "ultrashort-loop" negative feedback mechanism and may have important neurotransmitter and neuromodulatory functions in the brain.
Microtubules from neurons are preserved in homogenates of mammalian brain by medium containing organic solvents at acidic pH. By means of negative staining and electron microscopy, the relative concentration of microtubules in suspensions can be assayed. Microtubules from brain have a filamentous and substructure.
Receptors for N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) are involved in many plastic and pathological processes in the brain. Glycine has been reported to potentiate NMDA responses in neurons and in Xenopus oocytes injected with rat brain messenger RNA. Glycine is now shown to be absolutely required for activation of NMDA receptors in oocytes. In voltage-clamped oocytes, neither perfusion nor rapid pressure application of NMDA onto messenger RNA-injected oocytes caused a distinct ionic current without added glycine. When glycine was added, however, NMDA evoked large inward currents. The concentration of glycine required to produce a half-maximal response was 670 nanomolar, and the glycine dose-response curve extrapolated to zero in the absence of glycine. Several analogs of glycine could substitute for glycine, among which D-serine and D-alanine were the most effective. The observation that D-amino acids are effective will be important in developing drugs targeted at the glycine site.
Cholinergic muscarinic, serotonergic, opioid and several other G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter receptors activate inwardly rectifying K+ channels of the GIRK family, slowing the heartbeat and decreasing the excitability of neuronal cells. Inhibitory modulation of GIRKs by G-protein-coupled receptors may have important implications in cardiac and brain physiology. Previously G alpha and G beta gamma subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins have both been implicated in channel opening, but recent studies attribute this role primarily to the G beta gamma dimer that activates GIRKs in a membrane-delimited fashion, probably by direct binding to the channel protein. We report here that free GTP gamma S-activated G alpha i 1, but not G alpha i 2 or G alpha i 3, potently inhibits G beta 1 gamma 2-induced GIRK activity in excised membrane patches of Xenopus oocytes expressing GIRK1. High-affinity but partial inhibition is produced by G alpha s-GTP gamma S. G alpha i 1-GTP gamma S also inhibits G beta 1 gamma 2-activated GIRK in atrial myocytes. Antagonistic interactions between G alpha and G beta gamma may be among the mechanisms determining specificity of G protein coupling to GIRKs.
Direct stimulation of the pyramidal tract increases the size of the excitatory receptive fields of neurons in the somatosensory cortex of the cat. This effect reflects greater transmission of cutaneous information through the dorsal column nuclei as a result of the facilitation of cells in these nuclei by pyramidal tract fibers.
The mammalian neocortex is generated by waves of migrating cells originating from the ventricular zone. Radial migration along radial glia has been proposed as the dominant mechanism for this process. The radial unit hypothesis is poorly supported by retroviral lineage studies, however, and although some clones show limited radial organization, the emphasis appears to be on widespread tangential dispersion. Here we investigate the pattern of cortical cell dispersion using transgenic mice in which roughly half of the brain cells are coloured by a transgene. We find that the neocortex is randomly divided into diffused bands, the majority of cells within each band have the same colour, and their radial orientation suggests radial dispersion. Superimposed upon this was a significant contribution by tangentially dispersed cells that did not respect clonal borders. These observations indicate that cortical specification is not dependent upon a single mechanism of cell allocation, but that both radial mosaicism and tangential cell migration are involved.
The cerebral metabolic rate for glucose, as measured with positron emission tomography and fluorine-18-labeled 2-deoxy-D-glucose, was significantly higher in four healthy young subjects with trisomy 21 syndrome (Down's syndrome) than the mean rate in healthy young controls. The rate of cerebral glucose utilization in the frontal lobe of a 51-year-old subject with Down's syndrome was significantly lower than the rate in the young subjects with this syndrome, but approximated the rate in middle-aged controls. Thus glucose utilization by the brain appears to be excessive in young adults with Down's syndrome but may decline with age in some brain regions.
Human fetal cerebellar cortex was maintained up to 5 months in vitro. Important features included early migration of granule neurons followed by maturation of Purkinje and granule neurons. Unique areas of organization developed in which a rim of leptomeningeal cells surrounded an explant and its outgrowth zone; these areas subsequently grew as well-defined units.
The refrcactory period of neurons mediating an electrically elicited behavior (self-stimulation) was estimated by varying the intrapair pulse separation in a stimulating train made up of pulse pairs and measuring the intensity of the elicited behavior. Two neuronal systems with different refractory periods were indicated. Single-unit recording in acute preparations stimulated through self-stimulation electrodes revealed primarily two classes of units. Each class gave refractory period estimates characteristic of one of the behaviorally indicated systems. The experiments illustrate a technique for establishing functional relations between single units in the brain and gross behavior.
Mice were trained to discriminate between scented and unscented air. After olfactory bulbs were removed, discrimination was lost, but returned with the formation of synaptic connections between regenerated primary olfactory neurons and the cortex of the forebrain. The acquisition of a second olfactory-mediated task by long-term bulbectomized mice and controls was indistinguishable. The results emphasize the plasticity of the nervous system, correlate the presence of neural connections between olfactory mucosa and forebrain with the recovery of olfactory function, suggest that olfactory-mediated memory resides at least in part outside the olfactory bulbs, and demonstrate that the bulbs are not required for the acquisition of olfactory tasks.
Neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2) is a transcription factor expressed primarily in the mammalian forebrain. NPAS2 is highly related in primary amino acid sequence to Clock, a transcription factor expressed in the suprachiasmatic nucleus that heterodimerizes with BMAL1 and regulates circadian rhythm. To investigate the biological role of NPAS2, we prepared a neuroblastoma cell line capable of conditional induction of the NPAS2:BMAL1 heterodimer and identified putative target genes by representational difference analysis, DNA microarrays, and Northern blotting. Coinduction of NPAS2 and BMAL1 activated transcription of the endogenous Per1, Per2, and Cry1 genes, which encode negatively activating components of the circadian regulatory apparatus, and repressed transcription of the endogenous BMAL1 gene. Analysis of the frontal cortex of wild-type mice kept in a 24-hour light-dark cycle revealed that Per1, Per2, and Cry1 mRNA levels were elevated during darkness and reduced during light, whereas BMAL1 mRNA displayed the opposite pattern. In situ hybridization assays of mice kept in constant darkness revealed that Per2 mRNA abundance did not oscillate as a function of the circadian cycle in NPAS2-deficient mice. Thus, NPAS2 likely functions as part of a molecular clock operative in the mammalian forebrain.
Arthropod head segments offer a paradigm for understanding the diversification of form during evolution, as a variety of morphologically diverse appendages have arisen from them. There has been long-running controversy, however, concerning which head appendages are homologous among arthropods, and from which ancestral arrangement they have been derived. This controversy has recently been rekindled by the proposition that the probable ancestral arrangement, with appendages on the first head segment, has not been lost in all extant arthropods as previously thought, but has been retained in the pycnogonids, or sea spiders. This proposal was based on the neuroanatomical analysis of larvae from the sea spider Anoplodactylus sp., and suggested that the most anterior pair of appendages, the chelifores, are innervated from the first part of the brain, the protocerebrum. Our examination of Hox gene expression in another sea spider, Endeis spinosa, refutes this hypothesis. The anterior boundaries of Hox gene expression domains place the chelifore appendages as clearly belonging to the second head segment, innervated from the second part of the brain, the deutocerebrum. The deutocerebrum must have been secondarily displaced towards the protocerebrum in pycnogonid ancestors. As anterior-most appendages are also deutocerebral in the other two arthropod groups, the Euchelicerata and the Mandibulata, we conclude that the protocerebral appendages have been lost in all extant arthropods.
A definite relation is shown between interhemispheric transfer and speed of learning. Split-brain cats were trained in a variety of discriminations, and the success or failure of interhemispheric transfer was evaluated with regard to rate of learning. When interhemispheric transfer succeeds, learning time is normal; when interhemispheric transfer fails, learning time is prolonged, becoming at least twice that of normal. Retention is also poor in those animals that exhibit prolonged learning. A normal learning curve appears to be the product of interaction between both cerebral hemispheres during learning.
Motility is a universal property of newly generated neurons. How cell migration is coordinately regulated with other aspects of neuron production is not well understood. Here we show that the proneural protein neurogenin 2 (Neurog2), which controls neurogenesis in the embryonic cerebral cortex, directly induces the expression of the small GTP-binding protein Rnd2 (ref. 3) in newly generated mouse cortical neurons before they initiate migration. Rnd2 silencing leads to a defect in radial migration of cortical neurons similar to that observed when the Neurog2 gene is deleted. Remarkably, restoring Rnd2 expression in Neurog2-mutant neurons is sufficient to rescue their ability to migrate. Our results identify Rnd2 as a novel essential regulator of neuronal migration in the cerebral cortex and demonstrate that Rnd2 is a major effector of Neurog2 function in the promotion of migration. Thus, a proneural protein controls the complex cellular behaviour of cell migration through a remarkably direct pathway involving the transcriptional activation of a small GTP-binding protein.
Connections in the developing nervous system are thought to be formed initially by an activity-independent process of axon pathfinding and target selection and subsequently refined by neural activity. Blockade of sodium action potentials by intracranial infusion of tetrodotoxin in cats during the early period when axons from the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) were in the process of selecting visual cortex as their target altered the pattern and precision of this thalamocortical projection. The majority of LGN neurons, rather than projecting to visual cortex, elaborated a significant projection within the subplate of cortical areas normally bypassed. Those axons that did project to their correct target were topographically disorganized. Thus, neural activity is required for initial targeting decisions made by thalamic axons as they traverse the subplate.
Development of the vertebrate eye requires a series of steps including specification of the anterior neural plate, evagination of the optic vesicles from the ventral forebrain, and the cellular differentiation of the lens and retina. Homeobox-containing genes, especially the transcription regulator Pax6, play a critical role in vertebrate and invertebrate eye formation. Mutations in Pax6 function result in eye malformations known as Aniridia in humans and Small eye syndrome in mice. The Drosophila homologue of Pax6, eyeless, is also necessary for correct invertebrate eye development, and its misexpression leads to formation of ectopic eyes in Drosophila. Here we show that a conserved vertebrate homeobox gene, Rx, is essential for normal eye development, and that its misexpression has profound effects on eye morphology. Xenopus embryos injected with synthetic Rx RNA develop ectopic retinal tissue and display hyperproliferation in the neuroretina. Mouse embryos carrying a null allele of this gene do not form optic cups and so do not develop eyes. The Rx gene family plays an important role in the establishment and/or proliferation of retinal progenitor cells.
In the primate cerebral cortex there are at least two somatotopically organized, nonprimary motor fields rostral to the primary motor area. To understand the functions of these multiple motor representations we have compared the neuronal activity in each of these fields while monkeys performed a trained motor task, using right, left or both hands. In the nonprimary motor cortex, activity in a number of neurons was related to the movement the animal chose and performed, whereas in the primary motor cortex, changes in the firing of most neurons were simply related to activity in the contralateral muscles. This result indicates that the nonprimary motor cortex is involved in higher-order coding of the laterality of the motor response, implying that it exerts its motor control function at a higher hierarchical level than its counterpart in the primary motor cortex.
The adult brain has a remarkable ability to adjust to changes in sensory input. Removal of afferent input to the somatosensory, auditory, motor or visual cortex results in a marked change of cortical topography. Changes in sensory activity can, over a period of months, alter receptive field size and cortical topography. Here we remove visual input by focal binocular retinal lesions and record from the same cortical sites before and within minutes after making the lesion and find immediate striking increases in receptive field size for cortical cells with receptive fields near the edge of the retinal scotoma. After a few months even the cortical areas that were initially silenced by the lesion recover visual activity, representing retinotopic loci surrounding the lesion. At the level of the lateral geniculate nucleus, which provides the visual input to the striate cortex, a large silent region remains. Furthermore, anatomical studies show that the spread of geniculocortical afferents is insufficient to account for the cortical recovery. The results indicate that the topographic reorganization within the cortex was largely due to synaptic changes intrinsic to the cortex, perhaps through the plexus of long-range horizontal connections.
Language acquisition is one of the most fundamental human traits, and it is obviously the brain that undergoes the developmental changes. During the years of language acquisition, the brain not only stores linguistic information but also adapts to the grammatical regularities of language. Recent advances in functional neuroimaging have substantially contributed to systems-level analyses of brain development. In this Viewpoint, I review the current understanding of how the "final state" of language acquisition is represented in the mature brain and summarize new findings on cortical plasticity for second language acquisition, focusing particularly on the function of the grammar center.
Glucocorticoids are released in response to stressful experiences and serve many beneficial homeostatic functions. However, dysregulation of glucocorticoids is associated with cognitive impairments and depressive illness. In the hippocampus, a brain region densely populated with receptors for stress hormones, stress and glucocorticoids strongly inhibit adult neurogenesis. Decreased neurogenesis has been implicated in the pathogenesis of anxiety and depression, but direct evidence for this role is lacking. Here we show that adult-born hippocampal neurons are required for normal expression of the endocrine and behavioural components of the stress response. Using either transgenic or radiation methods to inhibit adult neurogenesis specifically, we find that glucocorticoid levels are slower to recover after moderate stress and are less suppressed by dexamethasone in neurogenesis-deficient mice than intact mice, consistent with a role for the hippocampus in regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Relative to controls, neurogenesis-deficient mice also showed increased food avoidance in a novel environment after acute stress, increased behavioural despair in the forced swim test, and decreased sucrose preference, a measure of anhedonia. These findings identify a small subset of neurons within the dentate gyrus that are critical for hippocampal negative control of the HPA axis and support a direct role for adult neurogenesis in depressive illness.
The effect of treatment with the factor that inhibits the release of melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) identified as 1-prolyl-1-leucylglycinamide (MIF) on brain catecholamine synthesis was examined in normal and hypophysectomized rats. The tripeptide induced a dose-related increase in striatal dopamine synthesis in slices obtained from treated normal animals but not in hypophysectomized animals. Hypothalamic norepinephrine synthesis was unaltered by MIF treatment in normal as well as in hypophysectomized rats. In addition, dopamine and norepinephrine syntheses were depressed in untreated hypophysectomized animals, as compared to normal controls. These results constitute the first direct demonstration of a central neurochemical effect of a hypothalamic factor.
Great emphasis is being placed on identification of neurotransmitter systems involved in the symptomatic manifestations of neurological and psychiatric disorders. In the case of Alzheimer's disease, which now seems to be one of the most common causes of mental deterioration in the elderly, compelling evidence has been developed that acetylcholine-releasing neurons, whose cell bodies lie in the basal forebrain, selectively degenerate. These cholinergic neurons provide widespread innervation of the cerebral cortex and related structures and appear to play an important role in cognitive functions, especially memory. These advances reflect a close interaction between experimental and clinical neuroscientists in which information derived from basic neurobiology is rapidly utilized to analyze disorders of the human brain.
Mating behavior in ovariectomized female rats treated with estrogen can be greatly enhanced by subcutaneous injections of progesterone. Application of potassium chloride to the cortex of females previously treated with estrogen can also induce greatly increased sexual receptivity as indicated by the lordosis response. This facilitation of mating behavior by a treatment known to cause functional decortication suggests that mechanisms mediating female mating behavior are under tonic inhibition by an inhibitory system which involves the cerebral cortex.
The hippocampus receives a dense serotonin-containing innervation from the divisions of the raphe nucleus. Serotonin applied to hippocampal neurons to mimic the action of endogenous transmitter often produces complex and variable responses (see for example ref. 3). Using voltage-clamp methods and new ligands that are selective for subtypes of serotonin receptors, we have been able to clarify the mechanism of serotonin action on CA1 cells in rat hippocampal slices. We describe three distinct actions of serotonin (or 5-HT) on identified K-conductances in these cells. First, it activates a Ca-independent K-current which is responsible for neuronal hyperpolarization and is inhibitory. Second, it simultaneously suppresses the slow Ca-dependent K-conductance that is largely responsible for the accommodation of cell firing in CA1 neurons: this produces a paradoxical increase in neuronal discharge in response to a depolarizing input. Third, serotonin produces a more slowly developing and long-lasting suppression of an intrinsic voltage-dependent K-conductance, Im (ref. 9), leading to neuronal depolarization and excitation. The hyperpolarizing response is mediated by class 1A serotonin receptors, whereas the other responses are not. Modulation of these different conductances by endogenously released serotonin could therefore change the probability or the duration (or both) of neuronal firing in the mammalian brain in different ways to give inhibitory, excitatory or mixed effects.
Sinigle neurons in cat visual cortex were driven by afferent stimuli to determine the effects of drugs liberated from multibarreled micropipettes on synaptic transmission. Acetylcholine increased, and atropine decreased, the number of neuron discharges fired in response to stimulation of the mesencephalic reticular formation without necessarily affecting responses to other stimuli or affecting spontaneous firing.
A proteolipid isolated from a lipid extract of mouse brain demonstrates stereospecific binding properties for levorphanol. It is present only in neuronal tissue and most abundant in the rhombencephalon. One component saturates at a concentration corresponding to maximum pharmacologic effect in vivo. The estimated mass is 60,000 daltons per bound opiate molecule.
A study of the anatomical distribution of the endogenous opioid dynorphin in rat brain showed that the peptide is localized in a widespread system with multiple cell groups and projections. This network is revealed by the use of multiple antiserums against dynorphin and can be distinguished from the system containing methionine-enkephalin and leucine-enkephalin, which is mapped by the use of antiserums against the enkephalins and biosynthetically related peptides in the adrenal. It thus appears that the brain contains at least three separate opioid neuronal networks: an enkephalin family with components similar to those found in the adrenal, a beta-endorphin family, and a dynorphin family.
The neurotransmitter glutamate mediates excitatory synaptic transmission throughout the brain. A family of genes encoding subunits of the non-N-methyl-D-aspartate (non-NMDA) type of glutamate receptor has been cloned. Some combinations of these subunits assemble into receptors with a substantial permeability to calcium, whereas others do not. To investigate the structural features that control ion permeation through these ligand-gated channels, mutant receptor subunits with single-amino acid changes were constructed. Mutation of a certain amino acid that results in a net charge change (from glutamine to arginine or vice versa) alters both the current-voltage relation and the calcium permeability of non-NMDA receptors. A site has thus been identified that regulates the permeation properties of these glutamate receptors.
Cognitive and behavioral responses to environmental stimuli depend on an evaluation of sensory signals within the cerebral cortex. The mechanism by which this occurs in a specific visual task was investigated with a combination of physiological and psychophysical techniques. Rhesus monkeys discriminated among eight possible directions of motion while directional signals were manipulated in visual area MT. One directional signal was generated by a visual stimulus and a second signal was introduced by electrically stimulating neurons that encoded a specific direction of motion. The decisions made by the monkeys in response to the two signals allowed a distinction to be made between two possible mechanisms for interpreting directional signals in MT. The monkeys tended to cast decisions in favor of one or the other signal, indicating that the signals exerted independent effects on performance and that an interactive mechanism such as vector averaging of the two signals was not operative. Thus, the data suggest a mechanism in which monkeys chose the direction encoded by the largest signal in the representation of motion direction, a "winner-take-all" decision process.
The degeneration of dopamine neurons in the nigrostriatal pathway of the brain results in the debilitating motor deficits of Parkinson's disease. In a Perspective, Olson discusses a new study (Kordower et al.) demonstrating that injection of a lentiviral vector containing the gene encoding GDNF (a trophic factor for dopamine neurons) into the nigrostriatal pathway of monkeys with PD prevents neuronal loss and reverses some of the motor deficits of this disease.
The retinal ganglion cells are third-order, spike-generating neurones whose axons transmit the output of the retina to the rest of the brain. It has long been believed that the dendrites of the retinal ganglion cells, like the dendrites of most other Golgi type I neurones, are only postsynaptic. Here we have studied the synapses made onto the ganglion cells in the catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), and we report that the distal dendrites of large-field ganglion cells make conventional chemical synapses onto other inner plexiform layer processes. We have also found that, more than 100 microns away from the cell perikaryon, the synapses made onto and by these ganglion cell dendrites are often tightly clustered. These synaptic clusters appear to be quite regularly spaced along the dendrites. Our results have important implications for the identification of ganglion cell dendrites within the inner plexiform layer as well as for the understanding of the ganglion cell response and receptive field generation.
Signals derived from the rat motor cortex can be used for controlling one-dimensional movements of a robot arm. It remains unknown, however, whether real-time processing of cortical signals can be employed to reproduce, in a robotic device, the kind of complex arm movements used by primates to reach objects in space. Here we recorded the simultaneous activity of large populations of neurons, distributed in the premotor, primary motor and posterior parietal cortical areas, as non-human primates performed two distinct motor tasks. Accurate real-time predictions of one- and three-dimensional arm movement trajectories were obtained by applying both linear and nonlinear algorithms to cortical neuronal ensemble activity recorded from each animal. In addition, cortically derived signals were successfully used for real-time control of robotic devices, both locally and through the Internet. These results suggest that long-term control of complex prosthetic robot arm movements can be achieved by simple real-time transformations of neuronal population signals derived from multiple cortical areas in primates.
Arginine-vasopressin (AVP) is a neurohypophysial nonapeptide with antidiuretic activity involved in the control of blood volume and plasma osmolality. Recently, by immunological methods, the presence of AVP has been demonstrated in extrahypothalamic areas of the brain, in the spinal cord and in the ovary, testis and adrenal gland. The Brattleboro rat is regarded as having an autosomal recessively inherited lack of neurohypophysial vasopressin and its associated neurophysin. Since its discovery over 20 years ago this animal has been widely used in studies on the physiological role of vasopressin. We have recently investigated the presence of immunoreactive vasopressin and the related nonapeptide oxytocin in the adrenal glands of the human, rat and cow, and report here the isolation from the Brattleboro rat adrenal of material with similar immunological, physical and biological properties to synthetic vasopressin.
Despite considerable knowledge about brain dopamine in drug-induced and pathological states, the dynamic relationship of dopamine to voluntary motor behaviour is not established. In an effort to produce selective, lateralized changes in brain dopamine metabolism associated with movement, we have now developed an animal model in which normal rats were trained to circle for a sucrose/water reward. Turning direction was randomly assigned. The effect of circling on dopamine metabolism was studied by killing animals during the reinforcement period and measuring caudate dopamine and dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) concentrations in both sides of brain. Prior to turning, caudate dopamine and DOPAC levels were the same bilaterally. By contrast, animals killed after 20 min of circling showed a 67% increase in dopamine and a 46% increase in DOPAC concentrations in the caudate contralateral to the turning direction while the ipsilateral caudate showed no concentration changes. Such a rapid, massive unilateral increase in caudate dopamine metabolism suggests that dopamine neurones in contralateral caudate are selectively activated during circling behaviour. This model should be useful for further study of the relationships between neurotransmitter activity, regional brain physiology and voluntary movement, without the need for drugs or brain lesions.
The undecapeptide substance P is a neurotransmitter candidate in the mammalian central and peripheral nervous system. Although the distribution of substance P-like immunoreactivity within the central nervous system (CNS) is well established, the recent identification and autoradiographic localization of specific substance P-binding sites has revealed numerous areas of mismatch between peptide levels and numbers of such sites. Previous studies have shown that substance P stimulates the hydrolysis of inositol phospholipids in peripheral tissues and in the hypothalamus, probably through stimulation of a polyphosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (refs 9-11). Inositol phospholipid hydrolysis has been implicated in the mobilization of cytosolic calcium following receptor activation in several neurotransmitter and hormonal systems. We have therefore investigated the distribution of 3H-labelled substance P binding sites within various rat brain regions and correlated this with the rate of substance P-induced hydrolysis of inositol phospholipids in the same areas of the CNS. We found that the rate of inositol phospholipid hydrolysis was proportional to the number of binding sites specific for 3H-substance P, suggesting that binding sites revealed by 3H-substance P autoradiography correspond to functional substance P receptors.
Humans and animals confuse lateral mirror images, such as the letters "b" and "d," more often than vertical mirror images, such as the letters "b" and "p." Experiments were performed to find a neural correlate of this phenomenon. Visually responsive pattern-selective neurons in the inferotemporal cortex of macaque monkeys responded more similarly to members of a lateral mirror-image pair than to members of a vertical mirror-image pair. The phenomenon developed within 20 milliseconds of the onset of the visual response and persisted to its end. It occurred during presentation of stimuli both at the fovea and in the periphery.
Excitatory amino acids such as L-glutamate and L-aspartate are well established as neurotransmitter candidates in the mammalian central nervous system, and three types of receptor for these substances have been proposed, characterized by the agonists N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), kainate and quisqualate. All these receptors have been suggested to have synaptic roles in excitatory transmission in the brain. Here I demonstrate that NMDA receptors play a crucial role in the observed response of ventrobasal thalamus (VB) neurones to natural stimulation of somatosensory afferents, but do not appear to be responsible for the short-latency excitation seen on electrical stimulation of the afferents which is apparently mediated by excitatory amino-acid receptors of the non-NMDA type. This result indicates an involvement of NMDA and non-NMDA receptors in the responses of VB neurones to stimulation of somatosensory somatosensory afferents, depending on the mode of stimulation of the pathway.
Brain injury induced by fluid percussion in rats caused a marked elevation in extracellular glutamate and aspartate adjacent to the trauma site. This increase in excitatory amino acids was related to the severity of the injury and was associated with a reduction in cellular bioenergetic state and intracellular free magnesium. Treatment with the noncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist dextrophan or the competitive antagonist 3-(2-carboxypiperazin-4-yl)propyl-1-phosphonic acid limited the resultant neurological dysfunction; dextrorphan treatment also improved the bioenergetic state after trauma and increased the intracellular free magnesium. Thus, excitatory amino acids contribute to delayed tissue damage after brain trauma; NMDA antagonists may be of benefit in treating acute head injury.
Transections of the brain of rabbit reveal that electroencephalographic arousal produced by injections of adrenaline takes place at the midbrain level, while mescaline and 3,4-dimethoxyphenylethylamine induce such arousal lower in the brainstem, at the medullary level.
Parkin is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in the ubiquitination of proteins that are important in the survival of dopamine neurons in Parkinson's disease (PD). We show that parkin is S-nitrosylated in vitro, as well as in vivo in a mouse model of PD and in brains of patients with PD and diffuse Lewy body disease. Moreover, S-nitrosylation inhibits parkin's ubiquitin E3 ligase activity and its protective function. The inhibition of parkin's ubiquitin E3 ligase activity by S-nitrosylation could contribute to the degenerative process in these disorders by impairing the ubiquitination of parkin substrates.
The binding of serotonin to nerve-ending particles and other preparations from rat brain has been examined. By investigating the amount bound as a function of serotonin concentration from 10(-7)M to 1O(-2)M, it was possible to identify three major components having K(assoc) (association constant) values of 2 x 10(6), 5 x 10(4), and 5 x 10(2). The component having the highest binding constant was not present in liver and appeared to be confined to the cortex and midbrain regions. This component is inhibited by d-lysergic acid diethylamide at low concentrations. Solubilization of this binding component has been achieved.
Positron emission tomography (PET) measurements of brain blood flow were used to monitor changes in the human primary and secondary somatosensory cortices during the period when somatosensory stimuli were expected. In anticipation of either focal or innocuous touching, or localized, painful shocks, blood flow decreased in parts of the primary somatosensory cortex map located outside the representation of the skin area that was the target of the expected stimulus. Specifically, attending to an impending stimulus to the fingers produced a significant decrease in blood flow in the somatosensory zones for the face, whereas attending to stimulation of the toe produced decreases in the zones for the fingers and face. Decreases were more prominent in the side ipsilateral to the location of the expected stimulus. No significant changes in blood flow occurred in the region of the cortex representing the skin locus of the awaited stimulation. These results are concurrent with a model of spatial attention in which potential signal enhancement may rely on generalized suppression of background activity.
Sheep learn to recognize the odours of their lambs within two hours of giving birth, and this learning involves synaptic changes within the olfactory bulb. Specifically, mitral cells become increasingly responsive to the learned odour, which stimulates release of both glutamate and GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) neurotransmitters from the reciprocal synapses between the excitatory mitral cells and inhibitory granule cells. Nitric oxide (NO) has been implicated in synaptic plasticity in other regions of the brain as a result of its modulation of cyclic GMP levels. Here we investigate the possible role of NO in olfactory learning. We find that the neuronal enzyme nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) is expressed in both mitral and granule cells, whereas the guanylyl cyclase subunits that are required for NO stimulation of cGMP formation are expressed only in mitral cells. Immediately after birth, glutamate levels rise, inducing formation of NO and cGMP, which potentiate glutamate release at the mitral-to-granule cell synapses. Inhibition of nNOS or guanylyl cyclase activity prevents both the potentiation of glutamate release and formation of the olfactory memory. The effects of nNOS inhibition can be reversed by infusion of NO into the olfactory bulb. Once memory has formed, however, inhibition of nNOS or guanylyl cyclase activity cannot impair either its recall or the neurochemical release evoked by the learned lamb odour. Nitric oxide therefore seems to act as a retrograde and/or intracellular messenger, being released from both mitral and granule cells to potentiate glutamate release from mitral cells by modulating cGMP concentrations. We propose that the resulting changes in the functional circuitry of the olfactory bulb underlie the formation of olfactory memories.
Glycoprotein adhesion receptors such as selectins contribute to tissue injury in stroke. Ischemic neurons strongly expressed C1q, which may target them for complement-mediated attack or C1qRp-mediated clearance. A hybrid molecule was used to simultaneously inhibit both complement activation and selectin-mediated adhesion. The extracellular domain of soluble complement receptor-1 (sCR1) was sialyl Lewis x glycosylated (sCR1sLex) to inhibit complement activation and endothelial-platelet-leukocyte interactions. sCR1 and sCR1sLex colocalized to ischemic cerebral microvessels and C1q-expressing neurons, inhibited neutrophil and platelet accumulation, and reduced cerebral infarct volumes. Additional benefit was conferred by sialyl Lewis x glycosylation of the unmodified parent sCR1 molecule.
In an autoradiographic investigation, the production of brain lesions in rats was combined with intracranial injection of thymidine-H(3). Nuclei of numerous glia cells were found labeled in brain regions associated with the traumatized areas. In addition, some neurons and neuroblasts showed labeling, suggesting the possibility of proliferation of neurons in adult rats.
A radioiodinated ligand that binds to muscarinic acetylcholine receptors was shown to distribute in the brain by a receptor-mediated process. With single-photon-emission imaging techniques, radioactivity was detected in the cerebrum but not in the cerebellum, whereas with a flow-limited radiotracer, radioactivity was detected in cerebrum and cerebellum. Single-photon-emission computed tomography showed good definition of the caudate putamen and cortex in man.
In humans the two cerebral hemispheres of the brain are functionally specialized with the left hemisphere predominantly mediating language skills. The basis of this lateralization has been proposed to be differential localization of the linguistic, the motoric, or the symbolic properties of language. To distinguish among these possibilities, lateralization of spoken language, signed language, and nonlinguistic gesture have been compared in deaf and hearing individuals. This analysis, plus additional clinical findings, support a linguistic basis of left hemisphere specialization.
How the intention to act results in movement is a fundamental question of brain organization. Recent work has shown that this operation involves the cooperative interaction of large neuronal populations. A population vector method, by transforming neuronal activity to the spatial domain, was used to visualize the motor cortical representation of the hand's trajectory made by rhesus monkeys as they drew spirals. Hand path was accurately reflected by a series of population vectors calculated throughout the task. A psychophysical rule relating speed to curvature, the "power law," was found in this cortical representation. The relative timing between each population vector and the corresponding portion of the movement was variable. The population vectors only preceded the movement in a predictive manner in portions of the spiral where the radius of curvature was greater than 6 centimeters. These results show that the movement trajectory is an important determinant of motor cortical activity and that this aspect of motor cortical activity may contribute only to discrete portions of the drawing movement.
Slices of cerebral cortex from the adult rat were incubated with and without hydrocortisone succinate, and their subsequent uptake of isotopically labeled norepinephrine was measured. Preincubation with hydrocortisone resulted in a statistically significant increase in the amount of exogenous norepinephrine taken up by the slices. Preincubation with corresponding concentrations of sodium succinate was without effect. The principal effect of the hydrocortisone-mediated increase in norepinephrine concentration is apparently on an active transport mechanism.
The primary structures of two types of bovine brain substance P precursors have been determined. One precursor contains a sequence homologous to that of the amphibian peptide kassinin. This new tachykinin sequence is bounded by paired basic amino acids Lys-Arg, which suggests that, like substance P, it can be liberated from the precursor and may serve as an endogenous hormone or neuromediator in mammalian organisms.
When you see a red ball rolling across the floor, the ball's redness, roundness and motion appear to be unified and inseparably bound together as features of the ball. But neurophysiological evidence indicates that visual features such as colour, shape and motion are processed in separate regions of the brain. Here we describe an illusion that exploits this separation, causing colour and motion to be recombined incorrectly while a stable stimulus is being viewed continuously.
Right-handed subjects tend to look to the left when answering affective questions. The relative shift in gaze from right to left is accentuated when the questions also involve spatial manipulation and attenuated when the questions require verbal manipulation. The data support the hypothesis that the right hemisphere has a special role in emotion in the intact brain, and that predictable patterning of hemispheric activity can occur when specific combinations of cognitive and affective processes interact.
The neocortex of the brain develops from a simple germinal layer into a complex multilayer structure. To investigate cellular interactions during early neocortical development, whole-cell patch clamp recordings were made from neuroblasts in the ventricular zone of fetal rats. During early corticogenesis, neuroblasts are physiologically coupled by gap junctions into clusters of 15 to 90 cells. The coupled cells form columns within the ventricular zone and, by virtue of their membership in clusters, have low apparent membrane resistances and generate large responses to the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid. As neuronal migration out of the ventricular zone progresses, the number of cells within the clusters decreases. These clusters allow direct cell to cell interaction at the earliest stages of corticogenesis.
beta-Endorphin (beta-LPH61-91) is a well known endogenous opioid ligand. It and related peptides have recently been implicated in the control of adaptive behaviour. Smaller beta-endorphin fragments appeared to be more active moieties than the parent molecule in a number of behavioural situations. Their effects seemed to occur independently of interaction with opiate receptor sites in the brain. Moreover, elimination of the opiate-like properties of gamma-endorphin (beta-LPH61-77) by removing the N-terminal amino acid yielded des-tyrosine-gamma-endorphin (beta-LPH62-77, dT gamma E) which had greater behavioural activity than gamma-endorphin. The CNS effects of dT gamma E resembled those of neuroleptic drugs in several test systems. alpha-Endorphin (beta-LPH61-76) exerted effects opposite to those of dT gamma E and in some aspects its activity was comparable to that of psychostimulant drugs. This opposition of effects suggests that a balance between gamma- and alpha-type endorphins is involved in the control of brain function. We report here that either gamma-endorphin and dT gamma E or alpha-endorphin and des-tyrosine-alpha-endorphin (beta-LPH62-76, DT alpha E) can be formed preferentially from beta-endorphin by enzymes associated with an enriched synaptosomal plasma membrane fraction from brain. It is suggested that these enzymes have a role in brain homeostatic mechanisms by regulating the generation of these substances.
A complementary DNA clone (designated GAT-1) encoding a transporter for the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) has been isolated from rat brain, and its functional properties have been examined in Xenopus oocytes. Oocytes injected with GAT-1 synthetic messenger RNA accumulated [3H]GABA to levels above control values. The transporter encoded by GAT-1 has a high affinity for GABA, is sodium-and chloride-dependent, and is pharmacologically similar to neuronal GABA transporters. The GAT-1 protein shares antigenic determinants with a native rat brain GABA transporter. The nucleotide sequence of GAT-1 predicts a protein of 599 amino acids with a molecular weight of 67 kilodaltons. Hydropathy analysis of the deduced protein suggests multiple transmembrane regions, a feature shared by several cloned transporters; however, database searches indicate that GAT-1 is not homologous to any previously identified proteins. Therefore, GAT-1 appears to be a member of a previously uncharacterized family of transport molecules.
The roles of endocannabinoid signaling during central nervous system development are unknown. We report that CB(1) cannabinoid receptors (CB(1)Rs) are enriched in the axonal growth cones of gamma-aminobutyric acid-containing (GABAergic) interneurons in the rodent cortex during late gestation. Endocannabinoids trigger CB(1)R internalization and elimination from filopodia and induce chemorepulsion and collapse of axonal growth cones of these GABAergic interneurons by activating RhoA. Similarly, endocannabinoids diminish the galvanotropism of Xenopus laevis spinal neurons. These findings, together with the impaired target selection of cortical GABAergic interneurons lacking CB(1)Rs, identify endocannabinoids as axon guidance cues and demonstrate that endocannabinoid signaling regulates synaptogenesis and target selection in vivo.
Embryonal tumours of the central nervous system (CNS) represent a heterogeneous group of tumours about which little is known biologically, and whose diagnosis, on the basis of morphologic appearance alone, is controversial. Medulloblastomas, for example, are the most common malignant brain tumour of childhood, but their pathogenesis is unknown, their relationship to other embryonal CNS tumours is debated, and patients' response to therapy is difficult to predict. We approached these problems by developing a classification system based on DNA microarray gene expression data derived from 99 patient samples. Here we demonstrate that medulloblastomas are molecularly distinct from other brain tumours including primitive neuroectodermal tumours (PNETs), atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumours (AT/RTs) and malignant gliomas. Previously unrecognized evidence supporting the derivation of medulloblastomas from cerebellar granule cells through activation of the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathway was also revealed. We show further that the clinical outcome of children with medulloblastomas is highly predictable on the basis of the gene expression profiles of their tumours at diagnosis.
The detection and discrimination of temporal sequences is fundamental to brain function and underlies perception, cognition, and motor output. By applying patterned, two-photon glutamate uncaging, we found that single dendrites of cortical pyramidal neurons exhibit sensitivity to the sequence of synaptic activation. This sensitivity is encoded by both local dendritic calcium signals and somatic depolarization, leading to sequence-selective spike output. The mechanism involves dendritic impedance gradients and nonlinear synaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activation and is generalizable to dendrites in different neuronal types. This enables discrimination of patterns delivered to a single dendrite, as well as patterns distributed randomly across the dendritic tree. Pyramidal cell dendrites can thus act as processing compartments for the detection of synaptic sequences, thereby implementing a fundamental cortical computation.
Magnetoencephalography is the detection of the magnetic field distribution across the surface of the head, which is generated by a neuronal discharge within the brain. Magnetoencephalography is used in clinical epilepsy to localize the epileptogenic region prior to its surgical removal. A discussion of the instrumentation based on the superconducting quantum interference device that is used for detecting the magnetic field distribution, the analytical techniques, current research, and future directions of magnetoencephalography in epilepsy research is presented.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) causes adult-onset, progressive motor neuron degeneration in the brain and spinal cord, resulting in paralysis and death three to five years after onset in most patients. ALS is still incurable, in part because its complex aetiology remains insufficiently understood. Recent reports have indicated that reduced levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which is essential in angiogenesis and has also been implicated in neuroprotection, predispose mice and humans to ALS. However, the therapeutic potential of VEGF for the treatment of ALS has not previously been assessed. Here we report that a single injection of a VEGF-expressing lentiviral vector into various muscles delayed onset and slowed progression of ALS in mice engineered to overexpress the gene coding for the mutated G93A form of the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1(G93A)) (refs 7-10), even when treatment was only initiated at the onset of paralysis. VEGF treatment increased the life expectancy of ALS mice by 30 per cent without causing toxic side effects, thereby achieving one of the most effective therapies reported in the field so far.
The subthalamic nucleus of the basal ganglia (STN) is important for normal movement as well as in movement disorders. Lesioning or deep-brain stimulation of the STN can alleviate resting tremor in Parkinson's disease. The STN and its target nuclei display synchronized oscillatory burst discharge at low frequencies, some of which correlate with tremor, but the mechanism underlying this synchronized bursting is unknown. Here we show that the excitatory STN and inhibitory, external globus pallidus (GPe) form a feedback system that engages in synchronized bursting. In mature organotypic cortex-striatum-STN-GPe cultures, neurons in the STN and GPe spontaneously produce synchronized oscillating bursts at 0.4, 0.8 and 1.8 Hz. Pallidal lesion abolishes this bursting, whereas cortical lesion favours bursting at 0.8 Hz. Pallidal bursts, although weaker than STN bursts, were required for synchronized oscillatory burst generation by recruitment of subthalmic rebound excitation. We propose that the STN and GPe constitute a central pacemaker modulated by striatal inhibition of GPe neurons. This pacemaker could be responsible for synchronized oscillatory activity in the normal and pathological basal ganglia.
By Fourier's theorem, signals can be decomposed into a sum of sinusoids of different frequencies. This is especially relevant for hearing, because the inner ear performs a form of mechanical Fourier transform by mapping frequencies along the length of the cochlear partition. An alternative signal decomposition, originated by Hilbert, is to factor a signal into the product of a slowly varying envelope and a rapidly varying fine time structure. Neurons in the auditory brainstem sensitive to these features have been found in mammalian physiological studies. To investigate the relative perceptual importance of envelope and fine structure, we synthesized stimuli that we call 'auditory chimaeras', which have the envelope of one sound and the fine structure of another. Here we show that the envelope is most important for speech reception, and the fine structure is most important for pitch perception and sound localization. When the two features are in conflict, the sound of speech is heard at a location determined by the fine structure, but the words are identified according to the envelope. This finding reveals a possible acoustic basis for the hypothesized 'what' and 'where' pathways in the auditory cortex.
The hypothesis that norepinephrine is a transmitter in the temperature regulating center of the hypothalamus is based on observations of changes in the rectal temperatures of animals after injections of norepinephrine into the hypothalamus. By introducing tritiated norepinephrine as a label into the endogenous norepinephrine stores in the brain and then measuring the disappearance of tritiated norepinephrine from discrete areas, one can monitor the activity of norepinephrine-containing neurons in those areas. In the rat exposed to heat, the turnover of endogenous norepinephrine appears to be increased selectively in the hypothalamus, whereas exposure to cold has no effect.
The human visual system is capable of detecting a vernier misalignment with extraordinary accuracy. Since this remarkable precision in spatial localization is better than can be naively predicted by simple optical or anatomical considerations it has been termed a hyperacuity. So far no single neurone model seems capable of accounting for hyperacuity, and the retinal image might require reconstitution in a finer grained from in the visual cortex. We report here an electrophysiological correlate of hyperacuity recorded from the human visual cortex. The amplitude of the visually evoked potentials (v.e.ps) elicited by the appearance of a vernier offset varied systematically with the magnitude of the offset. Extrapolation of the function relating v.e.p. amplitude and log offset to zero voltage resulted in an electrophysiological estimate of vernier acuity that was similar to the observer's psychophysical threshold.
In Drosophila, a 'clock' situated in the brain controls circadian rhythms of locomotor activity. This clock relies on several groups of neurons that express the Period (PER) protein, including the ventral lateral neurons (LN(v)s), which express the Pigment-dispersing factor (PDF) neuropeptide, and the PDF-negative dorsal lateral neurons (LN(d)s). In normal cycles of day and night, adult flies exhibit morning and evening peaks of activity; however, the contribution of the different clock neurons to the rest-activity pattern remains unknown. Here, we have used targeted expression of PER to restore the clock function of specific subsets of lateral neurons in arrhythmic per(0) mutant flies. We show that PER expression restricted to the LN(v)s only restores the morning activity, whereas expression of PER in both the LN(v)s and LN(d)s also restores the evening activity. This provides the first neuronal bases for 'morning' and 'evening' oscillators in the Drosophila brain. Furthermore, we show that the LN(v)s alone can generate 24 h activity rhythms in constant darkness, indicating that the morning oscillator is sufficient to drive the circadian system.
Dense, focal injections of wheat germ agglutinin conjugated-horseradish peroxidase in the locus coeruleus of rats labeled afferent neurons in unexpectedly few brain regions. Major inputs emanate from only two nuclei--the paragigantocellularis and the prepositus hypoglossi, both in the rostral medulla. The dorsal cap of the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus and the spinal intermediate gray are possible minor afferents to locus coeruleus. Other areas reported to project to locus coeruleus (for example, amygdala, nucleus tractus solitarius, and spinal dorsal horn) did not exhibit consistent retrograde labeling. Anterograde tracing and electrophysiologic experiments confirmed the absence of input to locus coeruleus from these areas, which instead terminate in targets adjacent to locus coeruleus. These findings redefine the anatomic organization of the locus coeruleus, and have implications for hypotheses concerning the functions of this noradrenergic brain nucleus.
Although astrocytes have been considered to be supportive, rather than transmissive, in the adult nervous system, recent studies have challenged this assumption by demonstrating that astrocytes possess functional neurotransmitter receptors. Astrocytes are now shown to directly modulate the free cytosolic calcium, and hence transmission characteristics, of neighboring neurons. When a focal electric field potential was applied to single astrocytes in mixed cultures of rat forebrain astrocytes and neurons, a prompt elevation of calcium occurred in the target cell. This in turn triggered a wave of calcium increase, which propagated from astrocyte to astrocyte. Neurons resting on these astrocytes responded with large increases in their concentration of cytosolic calcium. The gap junction blocker octanol attenuated the neuronal response, which suggests that the astrocytic-neuronal signaling is mediated through intercellular connections rather than synaptically. This neuronal response to local astrocytic stimulation may mediate local intercellular communication within the brain.
State-dependent learning is a phenomenon in which the retrieval of newly acquired information is possible only if the subject is in the same sensory context and physiological state as during the encoding phase. In spite of extensive behavioural and pharmacological characterization, no cellular counterpart of this phenomenon has been reported. Here we describe a neuronal analogue of state-dependent learning in which cortical neurons show an acetylcholine-dependent expression of an acetylcholine-induced functional plasticity. This was demonstrated on neurons of rat somatosensory 'barrel' cortex, whose tunings to the temporal frequency of whisker deflections were modified by cellular conditioning. Pairing whisker stimulation with acetylcholine applied iontophoretically yielded selective lasting modification of responses, the expression of which depended on the presence of exogenous acetylcholine. Administration of acetylcholine during testing revealed frequency-specific changes in response that were not expressed when tested without acetylcholine or when the muscarinic antagonist, atropine, was applied concomitantly. Our results suggest that both acquisition and recall can be controlled by the cortical release of acetylcholine.
There is a growing body of evidence in support of the view of schizophrenia as a dysfunction of the left temporal lobe. This hypothesis, first proposed by Flor-Henry, stemmed from the frequently observed association of schizophreniform psychoses with left-sided temporal lobe epilepsy. As yet the evidence is solely clinical, with a wide range of psychological and physiological measurements indicating a left hemisphere disorder in patients with schizophrenia. It is not, however, inconsistent with the major neurochemical hypothesis of schizophrenia, which proposes an increase in dopaminergic neurotransmission which can be blocked by neuroleptic drugs. One region of the medial temporal lobe, the amygdala, receives a major dopaminergic innervation from the ventral tegmental area. In fact this meso-limbic dopaminergic tract, which also innervates the nucleus accumbens and olfactory tubercule, has been implicated in psychosis and in antipsychotic drug action. We have attempted here to test whether there is a neurochemical correlate of the Flor-Henry hypothesis using brain tissue collected post mortem from schizophrenic patients and controls. The results indicate that a specific increase of dopamine is found in the amygdalae in the left cerebral hemisphere of the schizophrenic group.
Protein kinase C (PKC), a calcium-dependent phospholipid-sensitive kinase which is selectively activated by phorbol esters, is thought to play an important role in several cellular processes. In mammalian brain PKC is present in high concentrations and has been shown to phosphorylate several substrate phosphoproteins, one of which may be involved in the generation of long-term potentiation (LTP), a long-lasting increase in synaptic efficacy evoked by brief, high-frequency stimulation. Since the hippocampus contains one of the brain's highest levels of binding sites for phorbol esters and is the site where LTP has been most thoroughly characterized, we examined the effects of phorbol esters on hippocampal synaptic transmission and LTP. We found that phorbol esters profoundly potentiate excitatory synaptic transmission in the hippocampus in a manner that appears indistinguishable from LTP. Furthermore, after maximal synaptic enhancement by phorbol esters, LTP can no longer be elicited. Although the site of synaptic enhancement during LTP is not clearly established, phorbol esters appear to potentiate synaptic transmission by acting primarily at a presynaptic locus since changes in the postsynaptic responses to the putative transmitter, glutamate, cannot account for the increased synaptic responses induced by phorbol esters. These findings, in conjunction with previous biochemical studies, raise the possibility that, in mammalian brain, PKC plays a role in controlling the release of neurotransmitter and may be involved in the generation of LTP.
Bursts of impulses in groups of brain cells of the nudibranch Tritonia trigger prolonged swimming that is identical to the natural escape response. The cells in which the activity occurs form two bilaterally symmetrical groups of at least 30 cells in each pleural ganglion. These neurons are interconnected by pathways that have a low electrical resistance, both within a ganglion and across the brain. Together they form a network that determinies whether a swimming escape response will occur or not by filtering out weak neural activity yet responding with a burst of impulses to intensive specific input to either group.
Economics, psychology, and neuroscience are converging today into a single, unified discipline with the ultimate aim of providing a single, general theory of human behavior. This is the emerging field of neuroeconomics in which consilience, the accordance of two or more inductions drawn from different groups of phenomena, seems to be operating. Economists and psychologists are providing rich conceptual tools for understanding and modeling behavior, while neurobiologists provide tools for the study of mechanism. The goal of this discipline is thus to understand the processes that connect sensation and action by revealing the neurobiological mechanisms by which decisions are made. This review describes recent developments in neuroeconomics from both behavioral and biological perspectives.
It has been well documented that neurons in the auditory cortex of anaesthetized animals generally display transient responses to acoustic stimulation, and typically respond to a brief stimulus with one or fewer action potentials. The number of action potentials evoked by each stimulus usually does not increase with increasing stimulus duration. Such observations have long puzzled researchers across disciplines and raised serious questions regarding the role of the auditory cortex in encoding ongoing acoustic signals. Contrary to these long-held views, here we show that single neurons in both primary (area A1) and lateral belt areas of the auditory cortex of awake marmoset monkeys (Callithrix jacchus) are capable of firing in a sustained manner over a prolonged period of time, especially when they are driven by their preferred stimuli. In contrast, responses become more transient or phasic when auditory cortex neurons respond to non-preferred stimuli. These findings suggest that when the auditory cortex is stimulated by a sound, a particular population of neurons fire maximally throughout the duration of the sound. Responses of other, less optimally driven neurons fade away quickly after stimulus onset. This results in a selective representation of the sound across both neuronal population and time.
Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) affects 33 million individuals worldwide and is a leading cause of blindness. In a study of 54 families with autosomal dominantly inherited adult-onset POAG, we identified the causative gene on chromosome 10p14 and designated it OPTN (for "optineurin"). Sequence alterations in OPTN were found in 16.7% of families with hereditary POAG, including individuals with normal intraocular pressure. The OPTN gene codes for a conserved 66-kilodalton protein of unknown function that has been implicated in the tumor necrosis factor-alpha signaling pathway and that interacts with diverse proteins including Huntingtin, Ras-associated protein RAB8, and transcription factor IIIA. Optineurin is expressed in trabecular meshwork, nonpigmented ciliary epithelium, retina, and brain, and we speculate that it plays a neuroprotective role.
Local rates of cerebral glucose utilization were measured in rats by the quantitative 2-deoxy-D-[14C]glucose autoradiographic method during electrical stimulation of the ventral tegmental area. Rats trained in intracranial self-stimulation showed a pattern of changes in forebrain metabolic activity distinctly different from the pattern seen in rats stimulated by the experimenter. These findings provide information about the distribution of local cerebral activity specific to reinforced instrumental behavior.
Switching between exploratory and defensive behaviour is fundamental to survival of many animals, but how this transition is achieved by specific neuronal circuits is not known. Here, using the converse behavioural states of fear extinction and its context-dependent renewal as a model in mice, we show that bi-directional transitions between states of high and low fear are triggered by a rapid switch in the balance of activity between two distinct populations of basal amygdala neurons. These two populations are integrated into discrete neuronal circuits differentially connected with the hippocampus and the medial prefrontal cortex. Targeted and reversible neuronal inactivation of the basal amygdala prevents behavioural changes without affecting memory or expression of behaviour. Our findings indicate that switching between distinct behavioural states can be triggered by selective activation of specific neuronal circuits integrating sensory and contextual information. These observations provide a new framework for understanding context-dependent changes of fear behaviour.
The zebra finch is an important model organism in several fields with unique relevance to human neuroscience. Like other songbirds, the zebra finch communicates through learned vocalizations, an ability otherwise documented only in humans and a few other animals and lacking in the chicken-the only bird with a sequenced genome until now. Here we present a structural, functional and comparative analysis of the genome sequence of the zebra finch (Taeniopygia guttata), which is a songbird belonging to the large avian order Passeriformes. We find that the overall structures of the genomes are similar in zebra finch and chicken, but they differ in many intrachromosomal rearrangements, lineage-specific gene family expansions, the number of long-terminal-repeat-based retrotransposons, and mechanisms of sex chromosome dosage compensation. We show that song behaviour engages gene regulatory networks in the zebra finch brain, altering the expression of long non-coding RNAs, microRNAs, transcription factors and their targets. We also show evidence for rapid molecular evolution in the songbird lineage of genes that are regulated during song experience. These results indicate an active involvement of the genome in neural processes underlying vocal communication and identify potential genetic substrates for the evolution and regulation of this behaviour.
A massive neuronal system was detected by immunocytochemistry and radioimmunoassay with antibodies to neuropeptide Y, the recently isolated peptide of the pancreatic polypeptide family. Immunoreactive cell bodies and fibers were most prevalent in cortical, limbic, and hypothalamic regions. Neuropeptide Y was extracted in concentrations higher than those of any other peptide hitherto discovered in the mammalian brain. Column chromatography of brain extracts and double immunostaining experiments indicate that neuropeptide Y is the endogenous brain peptide responsible for immunostaining of pancreatic polypeptide-like immunoreactivity in the mammalian brain.
Noradrenergic neurons in the hypothalamus involved in feeding and satiety are activated by gastrointestinal receptors. In the unrestrained rat, sites were first identified at which norepinephrine injected in the medial hypothalamus caused spontaneous feeding, or in the lateral hypothalamus caused no response. The activity of in vivo norepinephrine at these two sites was characterized by localized push-pull perfusion. When a nutrient was infused directly into the rat's duodenum, the synaptic release of hypothalamic norepinephrine was enhanced at lateral sites insensitive to norepinephrine, but suppressed at medial sites reactive to norepinephrine. Thus, signals from duodenal receptors are conceivably sent to the rat's brain to end feeding by way of noradrenergic inhibitory neurons in the hypothalamus.
Neurotrophins have been implicated in activity-dependent synaptic plasticity, but the underlying intracellular mechanisms remain largely unknown. Synaptic potentiation induced by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), but not neurotrophin 3, was prevented by blockers of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) signaling. Activators of cAMP signaling alone were ineffective in modifying synaptic efficacy but greatly enhanced the potentiation effect of BDNF. Blocking cAMP signaling abolished the facilitation of BDNF-induced potentiation by presynaptic activity. Thus synaptic actions of BDNF are gated by cAMP. Activity and other coincident signals that modulate cAMP concentrations may specify the action of secreted neurotrophins on developing nerve terminals.
Humans, like other animals, alter their behavior depending on whether a threat is close or distant. We investigated spatial imminence of threat by developing an active avoidance paradigm in which volunteers were pursued through a maze by a virtual predator endowed with an ability to chase, capture, and inflict pain. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we found that as the virtual predator grew closer, brain activity shifted from the ventromedial prefrontal cortex to the periaqueductal gray. This shift showed maximal expression when a high degree of pain was anticipated. Moreover, imminence-driven periaqueductal gray activity correlated with increased subjective degree of dread and decreased confidence of escape. Our findings cast light on the neural dynamics of threat anticipation and have implications for the neurobiology of human anxiety-related disorders.
Malignant neoplasms that develop in 12 recessive-lethal, larval mutants of Drosophila melanogaster are discussed. These mutations affect the adult optic neuroblasts and ganglion-mother cells in the larval brain, the imaginal discs, and the hematopoietic organs. The malignant neoplasms exhibit fast, autonomous growth, loss of the capacity for differentiation, increased mobility and invasiveness, lethality in situ and after transplantation, and histological, fine structural, and karyotypic abnormalities. Intermediate neoplasms are also found. These combine both benign and malignant qualities. They grow in a noninvasive, compact fashion, typical of benign tumors, yet they also exhibit malignant qualities such as fast, autonomous, and lethal growth, loss of differentiation capacity, changes in cellular morphology, and lethal growth after transplantation into wild-type hosts. Thus Drosophila and vertebrate neoplasms show striking similarities.
The anterior prefrontal cortex (APC) confers on humans the ability to simultaneously pursue several goals. How does the brain's motivational system, including the medial frontal cortex (MFC), drive the pursuit of concurrent goals? Using brain imaging, we observed that the left and right MFC, which jointly drive single-task performance according to expected rewards, divide under dual-task conditions: While the left MFC encodes the rewards driving one task, the right MFC concurrently encodes those driving the other task. The same dichotomy was observed in the lateral frontal cortex, whereas the APC combined the rewards driving both tasks. The two frontal lobes thus divide for representing simultaneously two concurrent goals coordinated by the APC. The human frontal function seems limited to driving the pursuit of two concurrent goals simultaneously.
The signalling pathways controlling both the evolution and development of language in the human brain remain unknown. So far, the transcription factor FOXP2 (forkhead box P2) is the only gene implicated in Mendelian forms of human speech and language dysfunction. It has been proposed that the amino acid composition in the human variant of FOXP2 has undergone accelerated evolution, and this two-amino-acid change occurred around the time of language emergence in humans. However, this remains controversial, and whether the acquisition of these amino acids in human FOXP2 has any functional consequence in human neurons remains untested. Here we demonstrate that these two human-specific amino acids alter FOXP2 function by conferring differential transcriptional regulation in vitro. We extend these observations in vivo to human and chimpanzee brain, and use network analysis to identify novel relationships among the differentially expressed genes. These data provide experimental support for the functional relevance of changes in FOXP2 that occur on the human lineage, highlighting specific pathways with direct consequences for human brain development and disease in the central nervous system (CNS). Because FOXP2 has an important role in speech and language in humans, the identified targets may have a critical function in the development and evolution of language circuitry in humans.
Clocks tick, bridges and skyscrapers vibrate, neuronal networks oscillate. Are neuronal oscillations an inevitable by-product, similar to bridge vibrations, or an essential part of the brain's design? Mammalian cortical neurons form behavior-dependent oscillating networks of various sizes, which span five orders of magnitude in frequency. These oscillations are phylogenetically preserved, suggesting that they are functionally relevant. Recent findings indicate that network oscillations bias input selection, temporally link neurons into assemblies, and facilitate synaptic plasticity, mechanisms that cooperatively support temporal representation and long-term consolidation of information.
Our capacity to process and respond behaviourally to multiple incoming stimuli is very limited. To optimize the use of this limited capacity, attentional mechanisms give priority to behaviourally relevant stimuli at the expense of irrelevant distractors. In visual areas, attended stimuli induce enhanced responses and an improved synchronization of rhythmic neuronal activity in the gamma frequency band (40-70 Hz). Both effects probably improve the neuronal signalling of attended stimuli within and among brain areas. Attention also results in improved behavioural performance and shortened reaction times. However, it is not known how reaction times are related to either response strength or gamma-band synchronization in visual areas. Here we show that behavioural response times to a stimulus change can be predicted specifically by the degree of gamma-band synchronization among those neurons in monkey visual area V4 that are activated by the behaviourally relevant stimulus. When there are two visual stimuli and monkeys have to detect a change in one stimulus while ignoring the other, their reactions are fastest when the relevant stimulus induces strong gamma-band synchronization before and after the change in stimulus. This enhanced gamma-band synchronization is also followed by shorter neuronal response latencies on the fast trials. Conversely, the monkeys' reactions are slowest when gamma-band synchronization is high in response to the irrelevant distractor. Thus, enhanced neuronal gamma-band synchronization and shortened neuronal response latencies to an attended stimulus seem to have direct effects on visually triggered behaviour, reflecting an early neuronal correlate of efficient visuo-motor integration.
Specification of the appropriate neurotransmitter is a crucial step in neuronal differentiation because it enables signalling among populations of neurons. Experimental manipulations demonstrate that both autonomous and activity-dependent genetic programs contribute to this process during development, but whether natural environmental stimuli specify transmitter expression in a neuronal population is unknown. We investigated neurons of the ventral suprachiasmatic nucleus that regulate neuroendocrine pituitary function in response to light in teleosts, amphibia and primates. Here we show that altering light exposure, which changes the sensory input to the circuit controlling adaptation of skin pigmentation to background, changes the number of neurons expressing dopamine in larvae of the amphibian Xenopus laevis in a circuit-specific and activity-dependent manner. Neurons newly expressing dopamine then regulate changes in camouflage colouration in response to illumination. Thus, physiological activity alters the numbers of behaviourally relevant amine-transmitter-expressing neurons in the brain at postembryonic stages of development. The results may be pertinent to changes in cognitive states that are regulated by biogenic amines.
The effects of early brain damage are often, but not always, milder than the effects of comparable damage in adults, depending on the age at which injury occurred, the region of the brain damaged, and the brain functions involved. Studies of the impact of early brain damage have generally focused on functions primarily associated with the neural structures injured, even though the development and function of distant but interconnected neural systems might also show effects. Here we examine the regulation of striatal dopamine by the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, in adult monkeys that had had either neonatal or adult lesions of the medial-temporal lobe and in normal animals. We use microdialysis to measure the dopamine response in the caudate nucleus after the infusion of amphetamine into the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Normal animals and those with adult lesions showed a reduction in dopamine overflow; in contrast, monkeys with neonatal lesions showed increased dopamine release. Thus, early injury to the primate medial-temporal lobe disrupts the normal regulation of striatal dopamine activity by the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during adulthood. Early focal lesions may have substantial and long-lasting impacts on the function of a distant neural system.
Drug addiction results from adaptations in specific brain neurons caused by repeated exposure to a drug of abuse. These adaptations combine to produce the complex behaviors that define an addicted state. Progress is being made in identifying such time-dependent, drug-induced adaptations and relating them to specific behavioral features of addiction. Current research needs to understand the types of adaptations that underlie the particularly long-lived aspects of addiction, such as drug craving and relapse, and to identify specific genes that contribute to individual differences in vulnerability to addiction. Understanding the molecular and cellular basis of addictive states will lead to major changes in how addiction is viewed and ultimately treated.
The (Na(+)+K+)ATPase, an integral membrane protein located in virtually all animal cells, couples the hydrolysis of ATP to the countertransport of Na+ and K+ ions across the plasma membrane. In neurons, a large portion of cellular energy is expended by this enzyme to maintain the ionic gradients that underlie resting and action potentials. Although neurotransmitter regulation of the enzyme in brain has been reported, such regulation has been characterized either as a nonspecific phenomenon or as an indirect effect of neurotransmitter-induced changes in ionic gradients. We report here that the neurotransmitter dopamine, through a synergistic effect on D1 and D2 receptors, inhibits the (Na(+)+K+)ATPase activity of isolated striatal neurons. Our data provide unequivocal evidence for regulation by a neurotransmitter of a neuronal ion pump. They also demonstrate that synergism between D1 and D2 receptors, which underlies many of the electrophysical and behavioural effects of dopamine in the mammalian brain, can occur on the same neuron. In addition, the results support the possibility that dopamine and other neurotransmitters can regulate neuronal excitability through the novel mechanism of pump inhibition.
Astrocytes provide structural and metabolic support for neuronal networks, but direct evidence demonstrating their active role in complex behaviors is limited. Central respiratory chemosensitivity is an essential mechanism that, via regulation of breathing, maintains constant levels of blood and brain pH and partial pressure of CO2. We found that astrocytes of the brainstem chemoreceptor areas are highly chemosensitive. They responded to physiological decreases in pH with vigorous elevations in intracellular Ca2+ and release of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP propagated astrocytic Ca2+ excitation, activated chemoreceptor neurons, and induced adaptive increases in breathing. Mimicking pH-evoked Ca2+ responses by means of optogenetic stimulation of astrocytes expressing channelrhodopsin-2 activated chemoreceptor neurons via an ATP-dependent mechanism and triggered robust respiratory responses in vivo. This demonstrates a potentially crucial role for brain glial cells in mediating a fundamental physiological reflex.
Studies in animals suggest that fetal neural grafts might restore lost neurological function in Parkinson's disease. In monkeys, such grafts survive for many months and reverse signs of parkinsonism, without attendant graft rejection. The successful and reliable application of a similar transplantation procedure to human patients, however, will require neural tissue obtained from human fetal cadavers, with demonstrated cellular identity, viability, and biological safety. In this report, human fetal neural tissue was successfully grafted into the brains of monkeys. Neural tissue was collected from human fetal cadavers after 9 to 12 weeks of gestation and cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen. Viability after up to 2 months of storage was demonstrated by cell culture and by transplantation into monkeys. Cryopreservation and storage of human fetal neural tissue would allow formation of a tissue bank. The stored cells could then be specifically tested to assure their cellular identity, viability, and bacteriological and virological safety before clinical use. The capacity to collect and maintain viable human fetal neural tissue would also facilitate research efforts to understand the development and function of the human brain and provide opportunities to study neurological diseases.
Conditioned fear responses to a tone previously paired with a shock diminish if the tone is repeatedly presented without the shock, a process known as extinction. Since Pavlov it has been hypothesized that extinction does not erase conditioning, but forms a new memory. Destruction of the ventral medial prefrontal cortex, which consists of infralimbic and prelimbic cortices, blocks recall of fear extinction, indicating that medial prefrontal cortex might store long-term extinction memory. Here we show that infralimbic neurons recorded during fear conditioning and extinction fire to the tone only when rats are recalling extinction on the following day. Rats that froze the least showed the greatest increase in infralimbic tone responses. We also show that conditioned tones paired with brief electrical stimulation of infralimbic cortex elicit low freezing in rats that had not been extinguished. Thus, stimulation resembling extinction-induced infralimbic tone responses is able to simulate extinction memory. We suggest that consolidation of extinction learning potentiates infralimbic activity, which inhibits fear during subsequent encounters with fear stimuli.
Neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1) respond in well defined ways to stimuli within their classical receptive field, but these responses can be modified by stimuli overlying the surrounding area. For example patch-suppressed cells respond to gratings of a specific orientation within their classical receptive field, but the response diminishes if the grating is expanded to cover the surrounding area. We report here more complex effects in many such cells. When stimulated at their optimal orientation, introducing a surrounding field at a significantly different (for example, orthogonal) orientation enhanced their output by both a disinhibitory mechanism and an active facilitatory mechanism producing 'supra-optimal' responses. Importantly, some cells responded well if the orientations of centre and surround stimuli were swapped. The output reflected the discontinuity because neither stimulus component alone was effective. Under these stimulus conditions simultaneously recorded cells with orthogonally oriented receptive fields showed correlated firing consistent with neuronal binding to the configuration. We propose a mechanism integrating orientation-dependent information over adjacent areas of visual space to represent focal orientation discontinuities such as junctions or corners.
The position of selected chromosomes was assessed in samples of normal and epileptic human cortex with biotinylated probes specific for individual chromosome domains. Optical sectioning provided a rapid method for three-dimensional resolution of in situ hybridization signals in interphase cells, and solid models were reconstructed from digitized images for detailed rotational studies. There was a dramatic repositioning of the X chromosome in neurons of both males and females in electrophysiologically defined seizure foci. Other chromosomes (1, 9, and Y) showed more subtle positional changes. Specifically altered nuclear patterns involving the X chromosome may become established and create the genetic memory for intractable seizure activity.
The process of segmentation, in which repeated homologous structures are generated along the anterior-posterior axis of the embryo is a widespread mechanism in animal development. In vertebrates, segmentation is most apparent in the somites and the peripheral nervous system, but the existence of repetitive bulges, termed neuromeres, in the early neural epithelium of vertebrates suggests that the CNS may also be segmented. Consistent with this, cranial ganglia and certain neurons are associated with specific hindbrain neuromeres. Here, we report that Krox-20, a zinc-finger gene, is expressed in two alternate neuromeres in the mouse early hindbrain. This pattern subsequently decays and Krox-20 is transiently expressed in specific hindbrain nuclei. In addition, Krox-20 is expressed in early neural crest cells, and then in the neural crest-derived boundary caps, glial components of the cranial and spinal ganglia. The demonstration that neuromeres are domains of gene expression provides molecular evidence for the segmentation of the CNS.
Electrolytic lesions of the nucleus raphe dorsalis and medianus reduce the concentration of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) within rat brain intraparenchymal blood vessels. The concentration of serotonin within these vessels increases or decreases after the administration of drugs that modify the biosynthesis and degradation of serotonin or destroy nerve terminals by an uptake-dependent mechanism. These studies provide evidence for the existence of a serotonin-containing pathway seemingly analogous to the neuronal projection that terminates on small parenchymal blood vessels from noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus.
The neural encoding of serial order was studied in the motor cortex of monkeys performing a context-recall memory scanning task. Up to five visual stimuli were presented successively on a circle (list presentation phase), and then one of them (test stimulus) changed color; the monkeys had to make a single motor response toward the stimulus that immediately followed the test stimulus in the list. Correct performance in this task depends on memorization of the serial order of the stimuli during their presentation. It was found that changes in neural activity during the list presentation phase reflected the serial order of the stimuli; the effect on cell activity of the serial order of stimuli during their presentation was at least as strong as the effect of motor direction on cell activity during the execution of the motor response. This establishes the serial order of stimuli in a motor task as an important determinant of motor cortical activity during stimulus presentation and in the absence of changes in peripheral motor events, in contrast to the commonly held view of the motor cortex as just an "upper motor neuron."
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) has been implicated in the mediation of the stress-like and negative affective consequences of withdrawal from drugs of abuse, such as alcohol, cocaine, and opiates. This study sought to determine whether brain CRF systems also have a role in cannabinoid dependence. Rats were treated daily for 2 weeks with the potent synthetic cannabinoid HU-210. Withdrawal, induced by the cannabinoid antagonist SR 141716A, was accompanied by a marked elevation in extracellular CRF concentration and a distinct pattern of Fos activation in the central nucleus of the amygdala. Maximal increases in CRF corresponded to the time when behavioral signs resulting from cannabinoid withdrawal were at a maximum. These data suggest that long-term cannabinoid administration alters CRF function in the limbic system of the brain, in a manner similar to that observed with other drugs of abuse, and also induces neuroadaptive processes that may result in future vulnerability to drug dependence.
Surgical sectioning of the corpus callosum in epileptic patients has provided a unique opportunity to study separately the competence and processing capacities of the two cerebral hemispheres, each of which is able to perceive, think, memorize and learn independently and essentially outside the realm of awareness of the other. While research has focused on this 'disconnection syndrome', split-brain patients nonetheless behave as unified individuals in their normal environment, and the present study investigated this aspect of their behaviour in an experimental setting. The two hemispheres of a callosotomized patient were simultaneously presented with information associated with conflicting responses, and the subject was requested to produce a single response. In all combinations of hemisphere stimulation and hand responding, the subject was capable of perfect accuracy, suggesting that he could integrate and resolve the conflicting information before the production of his response, and that his two disconnected hemispheres were simultaneously aiming at the same goal.
Little is known about how patterns of cell types are organized to form brain structures of appropriate size and shape. To study this process, we employed in vivo electroporation during midbrain development to create ectopic sources of Sonic Hedgehog, a signaling molecule previously shown to specify different neuronal cell types in a concentration-dependent manner in vitro. We provide direct evidence that a Sonic Hedgehog source can control pattern at a distance in brain development and demonstrate that the size, shape, and orientation of the cell populations produced depend on the geometry of the morphogen source. Thus, a single regulatory molecule can coordinate tissue size and shape with cell-type identity in brain development.
Deposition of amyoid-beta peptide in the central nervous system is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease and a possible cause of neurodegeneration. The factors that initiate or promote deposition of amyloid-beta peptide are not known. The transforming growth factor TGF-beta1 plays a central role in the response of the brain to injury, and increased TGF-beta1 has been found in the central nervous system of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Here we report that TGF-beta1 induces amyloid-beta deposition in cerebral blood vessels and meninges of aged transgenic mice overexpressing this cytokine from astrocytes. Co-expression of TGF-beta1 in transgenic mice overexpressing amyloid-precursor protein, which develop Alzheimer's like pathology, accelerated the deposition of amyloid-beta peptide. More TGF-beta1 messenger RNA was present in post-mortem brain tissue of Alzheimer's patients than in controls, the levels correlating strongly with amyloid-beta deposition in the damaged cerebral blood vessels of patients with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. These results indicate that overexpression of TGF-beta1 may initiate or promote amyloidogenesis in Alzheimer's disease and in experimental models and so may be a risk factor for developing Alzheimer's disease.
Neurons in the visual cortex that respond preferentially to diagonal contours are present only in cats exposed to diagonal lines early in life. In contrast, cells that prefer horizontal or vertical contours are found following exposure to horizontal, to vertical, and to diagonal lines. Such cells do not require a specific visual input for maintenance or for development; neurons responding preferentially to diagonal lines do.
The mammalian neocortex contains two major classes of neurons, projection and local circuit neurons. Projection neurons contain the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, while local circuit neurons are inhibitory, containing GABA. The complex function of neocortical circuitry depends on the number and diversity of GABAergic (gamma-aminobutyric-acid-releasing) local circuit neurons. Using retroviral labelling in organotypic slice cultures of the embryonic human forebrain, we demonstrate the existence of two distinct lineages of neocortical GABAergic neurons. One lineage expresses Dlx1/2 and Mash1 transcription factors, represents 65% of neocortical GABAergic neurons in humans, and originates from Mash1-expressing progenitors of the neocortical ventricular and subventricular zone of the dorsal forebrain. The second lineage, characterized by the expression of Dlx1/2 but not Mash1, forms around 35% of the GABAergic neurons and originates from the ganglionic eminence of the ventral forebrain. We suggest that modifications in the expression pattern of transcription factors in the forebrain may underlie species-specific programmes for the generation of neocortical local circuit neurons and that distinct lineages of cortical interneurons may be differentially affected in genetic and acquired diseases of the human brain.
The motion aftereffect is a much studied and well documented phenomenon. After viewing a moving visual pattern for a period of time, the same pattern appears to drift in the opposite direction when it is stopped. Psychophysical experiments involving interocular transfer, dichoptic stimulation, and motion aftereffects contingent upon other visual parameters such as colour, orientation and texture, imply that the motion aftereffect is generated at the level of the visual cortex. It has been hypothesized that cortical neurons specialized for the detection of motion along a particular direction become 'fatigued' during the adaptation period so that the resting equilibrium subsequently shifts in the opposite direction to that of the adapting stimulus, giving rise to the sensation of the aftereffect. I have found that if observers are engaged in a separate discrimination task superimposed on a moving textured background, the subsequent motion aftereffect to the background is considerably reduced. It seems that motion aftereffects are susceptible to attentional mechanisms.
Monocular deprivation during early postnatal development remodels the circuitry of the primary visual cortex so that most neurons respond poorly to stimuli presented to the deprived eye. This rapid physiological change is ultimately accompanied by a matching anatomical loss of input from the deprived eye. This remodeling is thought to be initiated at the thalamocortical synapse. Ocular dominance plasticity after brief (24 hours) monocular deprivation was analyzed by intrinsic signal optical imaging and by targeted extracellular unit recordings. Deprived-eye responsiveness was lost in the extragranular layers, whereas normal binocularity in layer IV was preserved. This finding supports the hypothesis that thalamocortical organization is guided by earlier changes at higher stages.
Common diseases are often complex because they are genetically heterogeneous, with many different genetic defects giving rise to clinically indistinguishable phenotypes. This has been amply documented for early-onset cognitive impairment, or intellectual disability, one of the most complex disorders known and a very important health care problem worldwide. More than 90 different gene defects have been identified for X-chromosome-linked intellectual disability alone, but research into the more frequent autosomal forms of intellectual disability is still in its infancy. To expedite the molecular elucidation of autosomal-recessive intellectual disability, we have now performed homozygosity mapping, exon enrichment and next-generation sequencing in 136 consanguineous families with autosomal-recessive intellectual disability from Iran and elsewhere. This study, the largest published so far, has revealed additional mutations in 23 genes previously implicated in intellectual disability or related neurological disorders, as well as single, probably disease-causing variants in 50 novel candidate genes. Proteins encoded by several of these genes interact directly with products of known intellectual disability genes, and many are involved in fundamental cellular processes such as transcription and translation, cell-cycle control, energy metabolism and fatty-acid synthesis, which seem to be pivotal for normal brain development and function.
d-Amphetamine is markedly more potent an inhibitor of catecholamine uptake by norepinephrine neurons in the brain than is 1-amphetamine, whereas the two isomers are equally active in inhibiting catecholamine uptake by the dopamine neurons of the corpus striatum. In behavioral studies, d-amphetamine is ten times as potent as 1-amphetamine in enhancing locomotor activity, while it is only twice as potent in eliciting a compulsive gnawing syndrome. This suggests that the locomotor stimulation induced by amphetamine involves central norepinephrine, while dopamine neurons play an important role in the induced compulsive gnawing behavior. Assessment of differential actions of d- and 1-amphetamine may be an efficient method to differentiate behaviors involving norepinephrine or dopamine in the brain.
Verbal and nonverbal memorization skills were tested before and after electroconvulsive shocks to the left, right, or both cerebral hemispheres of neurologically normal patients. As predicted, decrements for the left-hemisphere-shocked group were larger on the verbal than nonverbal tasks, while the reverse was true for the right-hemisphere-shocked group. Largest decrements on both tasks were shown by the bilaterally shocked group.
How a cell chooses to proliferate or to differentiate is an important issue in stem cell and cancer biology. Drosophila neuroblasts undergo self-renewal with every cell division, producing another neuroblast and a differentiating daughter cell, but the mechanisms controlling the self-renewal/differentiation decision are poorly understood. Here we tested whether cell polarity genes, known to regulate embryonic neuroblast asymmetric cell division, also regulate neuroblast self-renewal. Clonal analysis in larval brains showed that pins mutant neuroblasts rapidly fail to self-renew, whereas lethal giant larvae (lgl) mutant neuroblasts generate multiple neuroblasts. Notably, lgl pins double mutant neuroblasts all divide symmetrically to self-renew, filling the brain with neuroblasts at the expense of neurons. The lgl pins neuroblasts show ectopic cortical localization of atypical protein kinase C (aPKC), and a decrease in aPKC expression reduces neuroblast numbers, suggesting that aPKC promotes neuroblast self-renewal. In support of this hypothesis, neuroblast-specific overexpression of membrane-targeted aPKC, but not a kinase-dead version, induces ectopic neuroblast self-renewal. We conclude that cortical aPKC kinase activity is a potent inducer of neuroblast self-renewal.
The cerebral cortex receives sensory input from the periphery by means of thalamic relay nuclei, but the flow of information goes both ways. Each cortical area sends a reciprocal projection back to the thalamus. In the visual system, the synaptic relations that govern the influence of thalamic afferents on orientation selectivity in the cortex have been studied extensively. It now appears that the connectivity of the corticofugal feedback pathway is also fundamentally linked to the orientation preference of the cortical cells involved.
The ORL1 receptor, an orphan receptor whose human and murine complementary DNAs have recently been characterized, structurally resembles opioid receptors and is negatively coupled with adenylate cyclase. ORL1 transcripts are particularly abundant in the central nervous system. Here we report the isolation, on the basis of its ability to inhibit the cyclase in a stable recombinant CHO(ORL1+) cell line, of a neuropeptide that resembles dynorphin A9 and whose amino acid sequence is Phe-Gly-Gly-Phe-Thr-Gly-Ala-Arg-Lys-Ser-Ala-Arg-Lys-Leu-Ala-Asn-Gln. The rat-brain cDNA encodes the peptide flanked by Lys-Arg proteolytic cleavage motifs. The synthetic heptadecapeptide potently inhibits adenylate cyclase in CHO(ORL1+) cells in culture and induces hyperalgesia when administered intracerebroventricularly to mice. Taken together, these data indicate that the newly discovered heptadecapeptide is an endogenous agonist of the ORL1 receptor and that it may be endowed with pro-nociceptive properties.
The principal inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) exerts its effects through two ligand-gated channels, GABA(A) and GABA(C) receptors, and a third receptor, GABA(B) , which acts through G proteins to regulate potassium and calcium channels. Cells heterologously expressing the cloned DNA encoding the GABA(B)R1 protein exhibit high-affinity antagonist-binding sites, but they produce little of the functional activity expected from studies of endogenous GABA(B) receptors in the brain. Here we describe a new member of the GABA(B) polypeptide family, GABA(B)R2, that shows sequence homology to GABA(B)R1. Neither GABA(B)R1 nor GABA(B)R2, when expressed individually, activates GIRK-type potassium channels; however, the combination of GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B)R2 confers robust stimulation of channel activity. Both genes are co-expressed in individual neurons, and both proteins co-localize in transfected cells. Moreover, immunoprecipitation experiments indicate that the two polypeptides associate with each other, probably as heterodimers. Several G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) exist as high-molecular-weight species, consistent with the formation of dimers by these receptors, but the relevance of these species for the functioning of GPCRs has not been established. We have now shown that co-expression of two GPCR structures, GABA(B)R1 and GABA(B)R2, belonging to the same subfamily is essential for signal transduction by GABA(B) receptors.
We have previously shown that vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and noradrenaline (NA) interact synergistically to increase cyclic AMP levels in mouse cerebral cortical slices. The pharmacological mechanism of this synergism is the potentiation by NA, through alpha 1 adrenergic receptors, of the stimulatory effect of VIP on cAMP formation. A similar interaction has been confirmed in guinea pig cerebral cortex and in discrete nuclei of the rat hypothalamus. Furthermore VIP and NA interact synergistically to depress the spontaneous activity of identified neurons in rat neocortex. At the cellular level, this synergistic interaction suggests that VIP- and NA-containing neuronal systems may converge, at least in part, on the same target cells to increase cAMP levels in the cerebral cortex. At the molecular level, the interaction may occur at various steps in signal transduction, between receptors, intramembrane transduction processes or intracellular effector mechanisms. Here we report that the alpha 1-adrenergic potentiation of the increases in cAMP elicited by VIP involves the formation of arachidonic acid metabolites and is mimicked by prostglandins F2 alpha and E2.
We recorded neuronal activity in monkey medial superior temporal (MST) cortex during movement on a motorized sled. Most neurons showed a preferred heading direction, but some responded only when that heading was part of a particular path. Others responded only when the animal was at a certain place in the room, regardless of its path to that place. Video simulations of the self-movement scene evoked path, but not place, responses. Stationary positioning in the room revealed location preferences that matched place preferences recorded during movement. We conclude that MST encodes heading, path, and place information to support visuospatial orientation.
Rats were adrenalectomized 10 days before we estimated in vivo the conversion index of (3)H-tryptophan into radioactive serotonin in brainstem and telediencephalon. We found that the conversion index in the brainstem of adrenalectomized rats is smaller than in the same area of sham-operated rats. Conversely, the conversion index in the telediencephalon was similar in the two groups of rats. The serotonin concentrations were unchanged by adrenalectomy, which suggests that in brainstem the decrease of tryptophan hydroxylase is reflected by the conversion index estimation and not by measurement of serotonin steady-state concentrations.
Gain-of-function mutations in Kir6.2 (KCNJ11), the pore-forming subunit of the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel, cause neonatal diabetes. Many patients also suffer from hypotonia (weak and flaccid muscles) and balance problems. The diabetes arises from suppressed insulin secretion by overactive KATP channels in pancreatic beta-cells, but the source of the motor phenotype is unknown. By using mice carrying a human Kir6.2 mutation (Val59-->Met59) targeted to either muscle or nerve, we show that analogous motor impairments originate in the central nervous system rather than in muscle or peripheral nerves. We also identify locomotor hyperactivity as a feature of KATP channel overactivity. These findings suggest that drugs targeted against neuronal, rather than muscle, KATP channels are needed to treat the motor deficits and that such drugs require high blood-brain barrier permeability.
Our brains allow us to reason about alternatives and to make choices that are likely to pay off. Often there is no one correct answer, but instead one that is favoured simply because it is more likely to lead to reward. A variety of probabilistic classification tasks probe the covert strategies that humans use to decide among alternatives based on evidence that bears only probabilistically on outcome. Here we show that rhesus monkeys can also achieve such reasoning. We have trained two monkeys to choose between a pair of coloured targets after viewing four shapes, shown sequentially, that governed the probability that one of the targets would furnish reward. Monkeys learned to combine probabilistic information from the shape combinations. Moreover, neurons in the parietal cortex reveal the addition and subtraction of probabilistic quantities that underlie decision-making on this task.
Evidence that carbon monoxide can serve as an intercellular messenger in brain, a role much like that demonstrated for nitric oxide in various tissue, prompted us to investigate whether carbon monoxide participates in long-term potentiation (LTP), the cellular mechanism that may underlie certain forms of learning and memory. Although LTP is triggered in the postsynaptic neuron, at least some fraction of LTP is expressed presynaptically as an increase in the quantity of neurotransmitter released. Thus, a retrograde signal must form the communication link between the postsynaptic site of induction and the presynaptic site of expression. To test whether carbon monoxide might act as a retrograde signal in LTP, we have investigated the effect on LTP of inhibitors of the enzyme haem oxygenase-2, which catalyses the production of carbon monoxide in the brain. We find that these inhibitors prevent the induction of LTP and have no effect on one form of long-term depression. Furthermore, they will reverse LTP that is already established.
Flexible goal-driven orientation requires that the position of a target be stored, especially in case the target moves out of sight. The capability to retain, recall and integrate such positional information into guiding behaviour has been summarized under the term spatial working memory. This kind of memory contains specific details of the presence that are not necessarily part of a long-term memory. Neurophysiological studies in primates indicate that sustained activity of neurons encodes the sensory information even though the object is no longer present. Furthermore they suggest that dopamine transmits the respective input to the prefrontal cortex, and simultaneous suppression by GABA spatially restricts this neuronal activity. Here we show that Drosophila melanogaster possesses a similar spatial memory during locomotion. Using a new detour setup, we show that flies can remember the position of an object for several seconds after it has been removed from their environment. In this setup, flies are temporarily lured away from the direction towards their hidden target, yet they are thereafter able to aim for their former target. Furthermore, we find that the GABAergic (stainable with antibodies against GABA) ring neurons of the ellipsoid body in the central brain are necessary and their plasticity is sufficient for a functional spatial orientation memory in flies. We also find that the protein kinase S6KII (ignorant) is required in a distinct subset of ring neurons to display this memory. Conditional expression of S6KII in these neurons only in adults can restore the loss of the orientation memory of the ignorant mutant. The S6KII signalling pathway therefore seems to be acutely required in the ring neurons for spatial orientation memory in flies.
A central issue in cognitive neuroscience concerns the functional architecture of the prefrontal cortex and the degree to which it is organized by sensory domain. To examine this issue, multiple areas of the macaque monkey prefrontal cortex were mapped for selective responses to visual stimuli that are prototypical of the brain's object vision pathway-pictorial representations of faces. Prefrontal neurons not only selectively process information related to the identity of faces but, importantly, such neurons are localized to a remarkably restricted area. These findings suggest that the prefrontal cortex is functionally compartmentalized with respect to the nature of its inputs.
Morphilne was injected via fine-gauge cannulas permanently implanted in various subcortical sites in the rat brain. In this way the blood-brain barrier was avoided and precise quantities of the drug were delivered to the intended sites. Ten micrograms of morphine in the posterior hypothalamus resulted in siginificant analgesia, while the same dose injected into the medial septum, the caudate, or the periaqueductal gray matter yielded hyperalgesia. The morphine-produced hyperalgesia at the last-mentioned site was accompanied by stereotyped violent circular leaps, an effect of morphine not previously reported. Thus, intracerebral injections of morphine differ significantly from systemic injections and produce either analgesia or hyperalgesia, depending on site and dose.
Glycine is an important inhibitory transmitter in the brainstem and spinal cord. In the trigeminal subnucleus caudalis (medullary dorsal horn) and in the spinal dorsal horn (the relaying centres for processing pain and sensory information), glycine inhibits the glutamate-evoked depolarization and depresses firing of neurons. The binding of glycine to its receptor produces a large increase in Cl- conductance, which causes membrane hyperpolarization. The selectivity and gating properties of glycine receptor channels have been well characterized; the glycine receptor molecules have also been purified. The amino-acid sequence, deduced from complementary DNA clones encoding one of the peptides (the 48K subunit), shows significant homology with gamma-aminobutyric acid A (GABAA) and nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits, suggesting that glycine receptors may belong to a superfamily of chemically gated channel proteins. However, very little is known about the modulation of glycine receptor channels. We have investigated the regulation of strychnine-sensitive glycine receptor channels by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase in neurons isolated from spinal trigeminal nucleus of rat and report here that the protein kinase A dramatically increased the glycine-induced Cl- currents by increasing the probability of the channel openings. GS protein, which is sensitive to cholera toxin, was involved in the modulation.
The retina contains complex circuits of neurons that extract salient information from visual inputs. Signals from photoreceptors are processed by retinal interneurons, integrated by retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and sent to the brain by RGC axons. Distinct types of RGC respond to different visual features, such as increases or decreases in light intensity (ON and OFF cells, respectively), colour or moving objects. Thus, RGCs comprise a set of parallel pathways from the eye to the brain. The identification of molecular markers for RGC subsets will facilitate attempts to correlate their structure with their function, assess their synaptic inputs and targets, and study their diversification. Here we show, by means of a transgenic marking method, that junctional adhesion molecule B (JAM-B) marks a previously unrecognized class of OFF RGCs in mice. These cells have asymmetric dendritic arbors aligned in a dorsal-to-ventral direction across the retina. Their receptive fields are also asymmetric and respond selectively to stimuli moving in a soma-to-dendrite direction; because the lens reverses the image of the world on the retina, these cells detect upward motion in the visual field. Thus, JAM-B identifies a unique population of RGCs in which structure corresponds remarkably to function.
We have found marked anatomical asymmetries between tile upper surfaces of the human right and left temporal lobes. The planum temporale (the area behind Hesch's gyrus) is larger on the left in 65 percent of brains; on the right it is larger in only 11 percent. The left planum is on the average one-third longer than the planum. This area makes up part of the temporal speech cortex, whose importance is well established on the basis of both anatomical findings in aphasic patients ans cortical stimulation at operation.
The neuronal structure and connectivity underlying receptive field organisation of cells in the cat visual cortex have been investigated. Intracellular recordings were made using a micropipette filled with a histochemical marker, which was injected into the cells after their receptive fields had been characterised. This allowed visualisation of the dendritic and axonal arborisations of functionally identified neurones.
Microglial cells represent the immune system of the mammalian brain and therefore are critically involved in various injuries and diseases. Little is known about their role in the healthy brain and their immediate reaction to brain damage. By using in vivo two-photon imaging in neocortex, we found that microglial cells are highly active in their presumed resting state, continually surveying their microenvironment with extremely motile processes and protrusions. Furthermore, blood-brain barrier disruption provoked immediate and focal activation of microglia, switching their behavior from patroling to shielding of the injured site. Microglia thus are busy and vigilant housekeepers in the adult brain.
Oestrogen, acting in both the brain and pituitary, has a critical role in regulating the reproductive cycle in most mammals. In the brain, oestrogen regulates the release of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) partly through a mechanism that is blocked by inhibitors of DNA-dependent RNA synthesis or protein synthesis. The distributions of oestrogen-concentrating neurones and of LHRH neurones overlap. The present study was undertaken to determine whether genomic effects of oestrogen mediated by nuclear oestradiol concentration include a direct effect on LHRH-containing neurones. During extensive studies in which the immunocytochemical method for localizing LHRH neurones was optimized and made compatible with the autoradiographic method for detecting oestrogen-concentrating neurones, doubly-labelled cells were very rarely seen. This suggests that genomic regulatory effects of oestrogen which depend on nuclear retention are not exerted directly on most LHRH neurones, but rather must be mediated by another class of neurones.
The movement of carbachol, norepinephrine, and dopamine from cannula sites in caudate nucleus and septal area of freely moving rats was traced by means of biogenic amine fluorescence. Fluorescent patterns seen after application of carbachol and norepinephrine to brain tissue did not appear to differ from controls. Three types of movement from the cannula site after administration of dopamine were observed. There was a spherical distribution approximately 2 millimeters in diameter. Fluorescence also followed axonal pathways in the orthodromic direction, suggesting that dopamine may have been transported by " axonal streaming " or by some other unknown mechanism in periaxonal spaces. Because fluorescence was present in both the ependymal lining and the choroid plexus, it was inferred that the cerebral ventricles were also involved in the movement of chemical. Any attempt to ascribe anatomical localization to behavioral effects resulting from chemical stimulation of the brain should take into account the widespread movement of chemicals after their local application to brain tissue.
The ion current induced by the glutamate receptor agonist N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) in voltage-clamped hippocampal neurons was inhibited by ethanol (EtOH). Inhibition increased in a concentration-dependent manner over the range 5 to 50 mM, a range that also produces intoxication. The amplitude of the NMDA-activated current was reduced 61 percent by 50 mM EtOH; in contrast, this concentration of EtOH reduced the amplitude of current activated by the glutamate receptor agonists kainate and quisqualate by only 18 and 15 percent, respectively. The potency for inhibition of the NMDA-activated current by several alcohols is linearly related to their intoxicating potency, suggesting that alcohol-induced inhibition of responses to NMDA receptor activation may contribute to the neural and cognitive impairments associated with intoxication.
To localize objects in space, the brain needs to combine information about the position of the stimulus on the retinae with information about the location of the eyes in their orbits. Interaction between these two types of information occurs in several cortical areas, but the role of the primary visual cortex (area V1) in this process has remained unclear. Here we show that, for half the cells recorded in area V1 of behaving monkeys, the classically described visual responses are strongly modulated by gaze direction. Specifically, we find that selectivity for horizontal retinal disparity-the difference in the position of a stimulus on each retina which relates to relative object distance-and for stimulus orientation may be present at a given gaze direction, but be absent or poorly expressed at another direction. Shifts in preferred disparity also occurred in several neurons. These neural changes were most often present at the beginning of the visual response, suggesting a feedforward gain control by eye position signals. Cortical neural processes for encoding information about the three-dimensional position of a stimulus in space therefore start as early as area V1.
We report here the identification of a unique vertebrate nuclear receptor, Tlx, which is expressed exclusively in the neuroepithelium of the embryonic brain. Sequence comparison reveals striking similarity to the product of the Drosophila terminal/gap gene tailless (tll), which is expressed in the embryonic brain and is required for brain development in flies. In vitro DNA-binding assays demonstrated that Tlx and Tll proteins share a target gene specificity that is unique among the nuclear receptor superfamily. Ectopic expression of Tlx in fly embryos caused a repression of segmentation comparable to that elicited by Tll. The similarities in structure, expression pattern, target gene specificity and phenotypes in transgenic flies suggest conservation of genetic programs upstream and downstream of this Tlx/Tll class of nuclear receptors during embryogenesis.
Previous interpretations of early horse brains were based on an incorrectly identified fossil endocast, now believed to be from a condylarth. Newly prepared endocasts of Hyracotherium, the oldest horse and one of the earliest perissodactyls, reveal a relatively larger brain, with a more expanded neocortex, than existed in the condylarth ancestors of perissodactyls. Fifty million years ago, horse brains had suprasylvian, ectolateral, and lateral sulci, but the frontal lobe was undeveloped.
To elucidate the role of the synaptic protein alpha-synuclein in neurodegenerative disorders, transgenic mice expressing wild-type human alpha-synuclein were generated. Neuronal expression of human alpha-synuclein resulted in progressive accumulation of alpha-synuclein-and ubiquitin-immunoreactive inclusions in neurons in the neocortex, hippocampus, and substantia nigra. Ultrastructural analysis revealed both electron-dense intranuclear deposits and cytoplasmic inclusions. These alterations were associated with loss of dopaminergic terminals in the basal ganglia and with motor impairments. These results suggest that accumulation of wild-type alpha-synuclein may play a causal role in Parkinson's disease and related conditions.
Astrocytes are the most abundant cell type in the mammalian brain. Interest in astrocyte function has increased dramatically in recent years because of their newly discovered roles in synapse formation, maturation, efficacy, and plasticity. However, our understanding of astrocyte development has lagged behind that of other brain cell types. We do not know the molecular mechanism by which astrocytes are specified, how they grow to assume their complex morphologies, and how they interact with and sculpt developing neuronal circuits. Recent work has provided a basic understanding of how intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms govern the production of astrocytes from precursor cells and the generation of astrocyte diversity. Moreover, new studies of astrocyte morphology have revealed that mature astrocytes are extraordinarily complex, interact with many thousands of synapses, and tile with other astrocytes to occupy unique spatial domains in the brain. A major challenge for the field is to understand how astrocytes talk to each other, and to neurons, during development to establish appropriate astrocytic and neuronal network architectures.
Chronic exposure to drugs of abuse induces countless modifications in brain physiology. However, the neurobiological adaptations specifically associated with the transition to addiction are unknown. Cocaine self-administration rapidly suppresses long-term depression (LTD), an important form of synaptic plasticity in the nucleus accumbens. Using a rat model of addiction, we found that animals that progressively develop the behavioral hallmarks of addiction have permanently impaired LTD, whereas LTD is progressively recovered in nonaddicted rats maintaining a controlled drug intake. By making drug seeking consistently resistant to modulation by environmental contingencies and consequently more and more inflexible, a persistently impaired LTD could mediate the transition to addiction.
Visual presentation of words activates extrastriate regions of the occipital lobes of the brain. When analyzed by positron emission tomography (PET), certain areas in the left, medial extrastriate visual cortex were activated by visually presented pseudowords that obey English spelling rules, as well as by actual words. These areas were not activated by nonsense strings of letters or letter-like forms. Thus visual word form computations are based on learned distinctions between words and nonwords. In addition, during passive presentation of words, but not pseudowords, activation occurred in a left frontal area that is related to semantic processing. These findings support distinctions made in cognitive psychology and computational modeling between high-level visual and semantic computations on single words and describe the anatomy that may underlie these distinctions.
The human brain contains more than 100 trillion (10(14)) synaptic connections, which form all of its neural circuits. Neuroscientists have long been interested in how this complex synaptic web is weaved during development and remodelled during learning and disease. Recent studies have uncovered that glial cells are important regulators of synaptic connectivity. These cells are far more active than was previously thought and are powerful controllers of synapse formation, function, plasticity and elimination, both in health and disease. Understanding how signalling between glia and neurons regulates synaptic development will offer new insight into how the nervous system works and provide new targets for the treatment of neurological diseases.
Cerebral blood flow (CBF) is coupled to neuronal activity and is imaged in vivo to map brain activation. CBF is also modified by afferent projection fibres that release vasoactive neurotransmitters in the perivascular region, principally on the astrocyte endfeet that outline cerebral blood vessels. However, the role of astrocytes in the regulation of cerebrovascular tone remains uncertain. Here we determine the impact of intracellular Ca(2+) concentrations ([Ca(2+)](i)) in astrocytes on the diameter of small arterioles by using two-photon Ca(2+) uncaging to increase [Ca(2+)](i). Vascular constrictions occurred when Ca(2+) waves evoked by uncaging propagated into the astrocyte endfeet and caused large increases in [Ca(2+)](i). The vasoactive neurotransmitter noradrenaline increased [Ca(2+)](i) in the astrocyte endfeet, the peak of which preceded the onset of arteriole constriction. Depressing increases in astrocyte [Ca(2+)](i) with BAPTA inhibited the vascular constrictions in noradrenaline. We find that constrictions induced in the cerebrovasculature by increased [Ca(2+)](i) in astrocyte endfeet are generated through the phospholipase A(2)-arachidonic acid pathway and 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid production. Vasoconstriction by astrocytes is a previously unknown mechanism for the regulation of CBF.
Accumulation of the amyloid-beta protein (Abeta) in the cerebral cortex is an early and invariant event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. The final step in the generation of Abeta from the beta-amyloid precursor protein is an apparently intramembranous proteolysis by the elusive gamma-secretase(s). The most common cause of familial Alzheimer's disease is mutation of the genes encoding presenilins 1 and 2, which alters gamma-secretase activity to increase the production of the highly amyloidogenic Abeta42 isoform. Moreover, deletion of presenilin-1 in mice greatly reduces gamma-secretase activity, indicating that presenilin-1 mediates most of this proteolytic event. Here we report that mutation of either of two conserved transmembrane (TM) aspartate residues in presenilin-1, Asp 257 (in TM6) and Asp 385 (in TM7), substantially reduces Abeta production and increases the amounts of the carboxy-terminal fragments of beta-amyloid precursor protein that are the substrates of gamma-secretase. We observed these effects in three different cell lines as well as in cell-free microsomes. Either of the Asp --> Ala mutations also prevented the normal endoproteolysis of presenilin-1 in the TM6 --> TM7 cytoplasmic loop. In a functional presenilin-1 variant (carrying a deletion in exon 9) that is associated with familial Alzheimer's disease and which does not require this cleavage, the Asp 385 --> Ala mutation still inhibited gamma-secretase activity. Our results indicate that the two transmembrane aspartate residues are critical for both presenilin-1 endoproteolysis and gamma-secretase activity, and suggest that presenilin 1 is either a unique diaspartyl cofactor for gamma-secretase or is itself gamma-secretase, an autoactivated intramembranous aspartyl protease.
A single injection of methylazoxymethanol in pregnant rats at 15 days of gestation results in severe cortical atrophy in the offspring. In the adult offspring, the neurochemical markers for the cortical gamma-aminobutyric acid-containing neurons are severely reduced, whereas the noradrenergic markers are minimally altered. Immunohistofluorescence microscopy demonstrates a marked increase in the density of noradrenergic axons which have an abnormal pattern of distribution in the atrophic cortex. The results suggest that the central noradrenergic neurons determine the number of axons to be formed early in brain development, but local factors in the terminal field regulate the ultimate distribution of the noradrenergic axons.
How do we understand the actions of others? According to the direct matching hypothesis, action understanding results from a mechanism that maps an observed action onto motor representations of that action. Although supported by neurophysiological and brain-imaging studies, direct evidence for this hypothesis is sparse. In visually guided actions, task-specific proactive eye movements are crucial for planning and control. Because the eyes are free to move when observing such actions, the direct matching hypothesis predicts that subjects should produce eye movements similar to those produced when they perform the tasks. If an observer analyses action through purely visual means, however, eye movements will be linked reactively to the observed action. Here we show that when subjects observe a block stacking task, the coordination between their gaze and the actor's hand is predictive, rather than reactive, and is highly similar to the gaze-hand coordination when they perform the task themselves. These results indicate that during action observation subjects implement eye motor programs directed by motor representations of manual actions and thus provide strong evidence for the direct matching hypothesis.
Retroviruses are involved in several human neurological diseases with varying pathological features. Whether these diseases are due to a direct effect of the virus on nervous system cells is unknown. To gain insight into the pathogenesis of one retroviral neurological disease, we are studying the murine neurotropic retrovirus, Cas-Br-E, which causes lower motor neuron disease associated with spongiform degenerative changes in brain and spinal cord. Central nervous system (CNS) injury seems to be due to direct viral action, but the precise target cells of the virus are uncertain. After blood-borne virus enters the CNS it is found in capillary endothelial cells. No microscopic evidence for virus within glia or neurons has been found in some studies, whereas virus or incomplete particles have been observed in CNS cells in other studies. Here we identify the neuron as a major target for Cas-Br-E in the CNS, suggesting that this disease may be a direct result of viral infection of neurons. We also show that envelope protein (Env, encoded by the env gene), a major determinant of neurovirulence, cannot be detected in neurons but is present in non-neuronal cells, although spliced env messenger RNA is synthesized in CNS tissue. This suggests that a post-transcriptional step in Cas-Br-E Env protein synthesis is impaired and that the neurological disease may be a consequence of abortive replication of virus in neurons. This may explain the failure to find neuronal infection in other neurological diseases by conventional methods of virus detection.
In primates, prefrontal, inferior temporal, and posterior parietal cortex are important for cognitive function. It is shown that in adult macaques, new neurons are added to these three neocortical association areas, but not to a primary sensory area (striate cortex). The new neurons appeared to originate in the subventricular zone and to migrate through the white matter to the neocortex, where they extended axons. These new neurons, which are continually added in adulthood, may play a role in the functions of association neocortex.
The flow of neural signals within the cerebral cortex must be subject to multiple controls as behaviour unfolds in time. In a visual discrimination task that includes a delay period, the transmission of sensory signals to circuitry that mediates memory, decision-making and motor-planning must be governed closely by 'filtering' or 'gating' mechanisms so that extraneous events occurring before, during or after presentation of the critical visual stimulus have little or no effect on the subject's behavioural responses. Here we study one such mechanism physiologically by applying electrical microstimulation to columns of directionally selective neurons in the middle temporal visual area at varying times during single trials of a direction-discrimination task. The behavioural effects of microstimulation varied strikingly according to the timing of delivery within the trial, indicating that signals produced by microstimulation may be subject to active 'gating'. Our results show several important features of this gating process: first, signal flow is modulated upwards on onset of the visual stimulus and downwards, typically with a slower time course, after stimulus offset; second, gating efficacy can be modified by behavioural training; and third, gating is implemented primarily downstream of the middle temporal visual area.
Microinjection of the C-fragment (also called beta-endorphin), which is amino acid sequence 61-91 of the endogenous pituitary hormone, beta-lipotropin (beta-LPH), in the periaqueductal gray of the rat resulted in profound sedation and catalepsy, while microinjection of smaller fragments-that is, methionine-enkephalin [sequence beta-LPH-(61-65)] and its related pentapeptide, leucine enkephalin, and alpha-endorphin [sequence beta-LPH-(61-76)] resulted in attenuated forms of this behavior. This indicates that the C-fragment is an important neuromodulator of the central nervous system. The similarity of this behavior to that seen after systemic administration to experimental animals of exogenous neuroleptics suggests that a disturbance in the bioavailability of this neuropeptide to receptor sites in brain-perhaps due to lack of enzymatic cleavage from the circulating parent hormone, beta-lipotropin--may be an etiological factor in those psychopathological states for which the exogenous neuroleptics exert an ameliorative influence.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the progressive accumulation in selected neurons of protein inclusions containing alpha-synuclein and ubiquitin. Rare inherited forms of PD are caused by autosomal dominant mutations in alpha-synuclein or by autosomal recessive mutations in parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. We hypothesized that these two gene products interact functionally, namely, that parkin ubiquitinates alpha-synuclein normally and that this process is altered in autosomal recessive PD. We have now identified a protein complex in normal human brain that includes parkin as the E3 ubiquitin ligase, UbcH7 as its associated E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme, and a new 22-kilodalton glycosylated form of alpha-synuclein (alphaSp22) as its substrate. In contrast to normal parkin, mutant parkin associated with autosomal recessive PD failed to bind alphaSp22. In an in vitro ubiquitination assay, alphaSp22 was modified by normal but not mutant parkin into polyubiquitinated, high molecular weight species. Accordingly, alphaSp22 accumulated in a non-ubiquitinated form in parkin-deficient PD brains. We conclude that alphaSp22 is a substrate for parkin's ubiquitin ligase activity in normal human brain and that loss of parkin function causes pathological alphaSp22 accumulation. These findings demonstrate a critical biochemical reaction between the two PD-linked gene products and suggest that this reaction underlies the accumulation of ubiquitinated alpha-synuclein in conventional PD.
The recent positional cloning of the mouse ob gene and its human homology has provided the basis to investigate the potential role of the ob gene product in body weight regulation. A biologically active form of recombinant mouse OB protein was overexpressed and purified to near homogeneity from a bacterial expression system. Peripheral and central administration of microgram doses of OB protein reduced food intake and body weight of ob/ob and diet-induced obese mice but not in db/db obese mice. The behavioral effects after brain administration suggest that OB protein can act directly on neuronal networks that control feeding and energy balance.
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) is predominantly released by local interneurons in the cerebral cortex to particular subcellular domains of the target cells. This suggests that compartmentalized, synapse-specific action of GABA is required in cortical networks for phasic inhibition. However, GABA released at the synaptic cleft diffuses to receptors outside the postsynaptic density and thus tonically activates extrasynaptic GABA(A) and GABA(B) receptors, which include subtypes of both receptor families especially sensitive to low concentrations of GABA. The synaptic and extrasynaptic action of GABA corroborates the idea that neurons of the brain use synaptic (or wiring) transmission and non-synaptic (or volume) transmission for communication. However, re-uptake mechanisms restrict the spatial extent of extrasynaptic GABA-mediated effects, and it has been proposed that the concerted action of several presynaptic interneurons, the sustained firing of individual cells or an increase in release-site density is required to reach ambient GABA levels sufficient to activate extrasynaptic receptors. Here we show that individual neurogliaform cells release enough GABA for volume transmission within the axonal cloud and, thus, that neurogliaform cells do not require synapses to produce inhibitory responses in the overwhelming majority of nearby neurons. Neurogliaform cells suppress connections between other neurons acting on presynaptic terminals that do not receive synapses at all in the cerebral cortex. They also reach extrasynaptic, delta-subunit-containing GABA(A) (GABA(Adelta)) receptors responsible for tonic inhibition. We show that GABA(Adelta) receptors are localized to neurogliaform cells preferentially among cortical interneurons. Neurosteroids, which are modulators of GABA(Adelta) receptors, alter unitary GABA-mediated effects between neurogliaform cells. In contrast to the specifically placed synapses formed by other interneurons, the output of neurosteroid-sensitive neurogliaform cells represents the ultimate form of the lack of spatial specificity in GABA-mediated systems, leading to long-lasting network hyperpolarization combined with widespread suppression of communication in the local circuit.
Pannexin-1 (Px1) is expressed at postsynaptic sites in pyramidal neurons, suggesting that these hemichannels contribute to dendritic signals associated with synaptic function. We found that, in pyramidal neurons, N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) activation induced a secondary prolonged current and dye flux that were blocked with a specific inhibitory peptide against Px1 hemichannels; knockdown of Px1 by RNA interference blocked the current in cultured neurons. Enhancing endogenous NMDAR activation in brain slices by removing external magnesium ions (Mg2+) triggered epileptiform activity, which had decreased spike amplitude and prolonged interburst interval during application of the Px1 hemichannel blocking peptide. We conclude that Px1 hemichannel opening is triggered by NMDAR stimulation and can contribute to epileptiform seizure activity.
Neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS domain transcription factor expressed in multiple regions of the vertebrate brain. Targeted insertion of a beta-galactosidase reporter gene (lacZ) resulted in the production of an NPAS2-lacZ fusion protein and an altered form of NPAS2 lacking the bHLH domain. The neuroanatomical expression pattern of NPAS2-lacZ was temporally and spatially coincident with formation of the mature frontal association/limbic forebrain pathway. NPAS2-deficient mice were subjected to a series of behavioral tests and were found to exhibit deficits in the long-term memory arm of the cued and contextual fear task. Thus, NPAS2 may serve a dedicated regulatory role in the acquisition of specific types of memory.
Diabetic patients with increased plasma glucose concentrations may develop cerebral symptoms of hypoglycemia when their plasma glucose is rapidly lowered to normal concentrations. The symptoms may indicate insufficient transport of glucose from blood to brain. In rats with chronic hyperglycemia the maximum glucose transport capacity of the blood-brain barrier decreased from 400 to 290 micromoles per 100 grams per minute. When plasma glucose was lowered to normal values, the glucose transport rate into brain was 20 percent below normal. This suggests that repressive changes of the glucose transport mechanism occur in brain endothelial cells in response to increased plasma glucose.
In Drosophila and mice, olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) expressing the same receptors have convergent axonal projections to specific glomerular targets in the antennal lobe/olfactory bulb, creating an odour map in this first olfactory structure of the central nervous system. Projection neurons of the Drosophila antennal lobe send dendrites into glomeruli and axons to higher brain centres, thereby transferring this odour map further into the brain. Here we use the MARCM method to perform a systematic clonal analysis of projection neurons, allowing us to correlate lineage and birth time of projection neurons with their glomerular choice. We demonstrate that projection neurons are prespecified by lineage and birth order to form synapses with specific incoming ORN axons, and therefore to carry specific olfactory information. This prespecification could be used to hardwire the fly's olfactory system, enabling stereotyped behavioural responses to odorants. Developmental studies lead us to hypothesize that recognition molecules ensure reciprocally specific connections of ORNs and projection neurons. These studies also imply a previously unanticipated role for precise dendritic targeting by postsynaptic neurons in determining connection specificity.
Cerebral glucose utilization is markedly increased in most areas of the cerebral cortex and reduced in many subcortical structures during spreading cortical depression. During recovery, cortical glucose utilization is still elevated, but the increased metabolic activity is distributed in columns running perpendicularly through the cortex.
Development of a rapid and sensitive radioassay has permitted study of the conversion of tryptophan to 5-hydroxytryptophan in mammalian tissues. Of normal tissues examined, beef and rat pineal gland contained the highest activity. This is the first direct demonstration of tryptophan hydroxylase in this hydroxyindole-rich tissue. Rat and rabbit brainstem and human carcinoid tumor also had quantities of enzyme that could be measured easily. The reaction requires a reduced pteridine and oxygen and is inhibired by Para-Chorophenylalanine.
Two markers of neuronal plasticity were used to compare the response of the human central nervous system to neuronal loss resulting from Alzheimer's disease with the response of rats to a similar neuronal loss induced by lesions. In rats that had received lesions of the entorhinal cortex, axon sprouting of commissural and associational fibers into the denervated molecular layer of the dentate gyrus was paralleled by a spread in the distribution of tritiated kainic acid-binding sites. A similar expansion of kainic acid receptor distribution was observed in hippocampal samples obtained postmortem from patients with Alzheimer's disease. An enhancement of acetylcholinesterase activity in the dentate gyrus molecular layer, indicative of septal afferent sprouting, was also observed in those patients with a minimal loss of cholinergic neurons. These results are evidence that the central nervous system is capable of a plastic response in Alzheimer's disease. Adaptive growth responses occur along with the degenerative events.
The immature cerebral cortex self-organizes into local neuronal clusters long before it is activated by patterned sensory inputs. In the cortical anlage of newborn mammals, neurons coassemble through electrical or chemical synapses either spontaneously or by activation of transmitter-gated receptors. The neuronal network and the cellular mechanisms underlying this cortical self-organization process during early development are not completely understood. Here we show in an intact in vitro preparation of the immature mouse cerebral cortex that neurons are functionally coupled in local clusters by means of propagating network oscillations in the beta frequency range. In the newborn mouse, this activity requires an intact subplate and is strongly synchronized within a cortical column by gap junctions. With the developmental disappearance of the subplate at the end of the first postnatal week, activation of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors in the immature cortical network is essential to generate this columnar activity pattern. Our findings show that during a brief developmental period the cortical network switches from a subplate-driven, gap-junction-coupled syncytium to a synaptic network acting through NMDA receptors to generate synchronized oscillatory activity, which may function as an early functional template for the development of the cortical columnar architecture.
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT) is thought to regulate neurodevelopmental processes through maternal-fetal interactions that have long-term mental health implications. It is thought that beyond fetal 5-HT neurons there are significant maternal contributions to fetal 5-HT during pregnancy but this has not been tested empirically. To examine putative central and peripheral sources of embryonic brain 5-HT, we used Pet1(-/-) (also called Fev) mice in which most dorsal raphe neurons lack 5-HT. We detected previously unknown differences in accumulation of 5-HT between the forebrain and hindbrain during early and late fetal stages, through an exogenous source of 5-HT which is not of maternal origin. Using additional genetic strategies, a new technology for studying placental biology ex vivo and direct manipulation of placental neosynthesis, we investigated the nature of this exogenous source. We uncovered a placental 5-HT synthetic pathway from a maternal tryptophan precursor in both mice and humans. This study reveals a new, direct role for placental metabolic pathways in modulating fetal brain development and indicates that maternal-placental-fetal interactions could underlie the pronounced impact of 5-HT on long-lasting mental health outcomes.
Flatfish provide a natural model for the study of adaptive changes in the vestibulo-ocular reflex system. During metamorphosis their vestibular and oculomotor coordinate systems undergo a 90 degree relative displacement. As a result, during swimming movements different types of compensatory eye movements are produced before and after metamorphosis by the same vestibular stimulation. Intracellular staining of central nervous connections in the flatfish with horseradish peroxidase revealed that in postmetamorphic fish secondary horizontal semicircular canal neurons contact vertical eye muscle motoneuron pools on both sides of the brain via pathways that are absent in all other vertebrates studied.
The predominant inhibitory neurotransmitter of the brain, GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), activates chloride-selective ion pores integral to the receptor complex. Subunits comprising the presumed hetero-pentameric GABA channel have been cloned, but little information is available on the domains important for activation. Rat wild-type or mutated alpha 1-, beta 2- and gamma 2-subunits (designated alpha, beta and gamma) were coexpressed in Xenopus oocytes and examined electrophysiologically. We report here the identification of two separate and homologous domains of the beta-subunit, each of which contributes a tyrosine and threonine essential for activation by GABA. Conservative substitution of each of these four amino acids dramatically decreased GABA channel sensitivity to activation by GABA and the GABA agonist muscimol. These substitutions, however, did not impair activation by the barbiturate pentobarbital, indicating these two different classes of agonists activate GABA channels through distinct mechanisms. We also present evidence suggesting that the two identified domains of the beta-subunit contribute a major component of the GABA receptor.
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a cytokine that mediates the acute phase reaction. Many of the actions of IL-1 involve direct effects on the central nervous system. However, IL-1 has not previously been identified as an intrinsic component within the brain, except in glial cells. An antiserum directed against human IL-1 beta was used to stain the human brain immunohistochemically for IL-1 beta-like immunoreactive neural elements. IL-1 beta-immunoreactive fibers were found innervating the key endocrine and autonomic cell groups that control the central components of the acute phase reaction. These results indicate that IL-1 may be an intrinsic neuromodulator in central nervous system pathways that mediate various metabolic functions of the acute phase reaction, including the body temperature changes that produce the febrile response.
Medial temporal lobe structures have been implicated in human episodic memory. Patients with medial temporal lesions show memory deficits, and functional neuroimaging studies have revealed activation in this region during episodic encoding and retrieval when data are averaged over a sample of subjects. The relevance of such observations for memory performance has remained unclear, however. Here we have used positron emission tomography (PET) to examine cerebral blood flow related to verbal episodic retrieval. We observed strong positive correlations between retrieval and blood flow in left medial temporal structures in individual normal human subjects. In addition, multivariate analysis showed that regions in the left medial temporal lobe were dominant components of a pattern of brain regions that distinguished a high-retrieval condition from conditions of lower retrieval. These results suggest that medial temporal activity is related to retrieval success rather than retrieval attempt, possibly by reflecting reactivation of stored patterns.
The caption for figure 5 (p. 1104) in the article "The return of Phineas Gage: Clues about the brain from the skull of a famous patient" by H. Damasio et al. (20 May, p. 1102) should have stated that the area of the brain colored green in the figure is Wernicke's area and that the area colored blue is the somatosensory cortex. In the same caption, the first word of the last descriptive phrase should have been "Medial," not "Medical."
A projection of nerve fibers from rostral brainstem areas, which produce pressor responses and tachycardia, terminates in the inferior olive. Electrical stimulation of the olive in the cat produces no cardiovascular response but inhibits the depressor cotnponent of the carotid sinusreflex.
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) is a blood malignancy afflicting mainly children and adolescents. T-ALL patients present at diagnosis with increased white cell counts and hepatosplenomegaly, and are at an increased risk of central nervous system (CNS) relapse. For that reason, T-ALL patients usually receive cranial irradiation in addition to intensified intrathecal chemotherapy. The marked increase in survival is thought to be worth the considerable side-effects associated with this therapy. Such complications include secondary tumours, neurocognitive deficits, endocrine disorders and growth impairment. Little is known about the mechanism of leukaemic cell infiltration of the CNS, despite its clinical importance. Here we show, using T-ALL animal modelling and gene-expression profiling, that the chemokine receptor CCR7 (ref. 5) is the essential adhesion signal required for the targeting of leukaemic T-cells into the CNS. Ccr7 gene expression is controlled by the activity of the T-ALL oncogene Notch1 and is expressed in human tumours carrying Notch1-activating mutations. Silencing of either CCR7 or its chemokine ligand CCL19 (ref. 6) in an animal model of T-ALL specifically inhibits CNS infiltration. Furthermore, murine CNS-targeting by human T-ALL cells depends on their ability to express CCR7. These studies identify a single chemokine-receptor interaction as a CNS 'entry' signal, and open the way for future pharmacological targeting. Targeted inhibition of CNS involvement in T-ALL could potentially decrease the intensity of CNS-targeted therapy, thus reducing its associated short- and long-term complications.
Sequences of motor activity are encoded in many vertebrate brains by complex spatio-temporal patterns of neural activity; however, the neural circuit mechanisms underlying the generation of these pre-motor patterns are poorly understood. In songbirds, one prominent site of pre-motor activity is the forebrain robust nucleus of the archistriatum (RA), which generates stereotyped sequences of spike bursts during song and recapitulates these sequences during sleep. We show that the stereotyped sequences in RA are driven from nucleus HVC (high vocal centre), the principal pre-motor input to RA. Recordings of identified HVC neurons in sleeping and singing birds show that individual HVC neurons projecting onto RA neurons produce bursts sparsely, at a single, precise time during the RA sequence. These HVC neurons burst sequentially with respect to one another. We suggest that at each time in the RA sequence, the ensemble of active RA neurons is driven by a subpopulation of RA-projecting HVC neurons that is active only at that time. As a population, these HVC neurons may form an explicit representation of time in the sequence. Such a sparse representation, a temporal analogue of the 'grandmother cell' concept for object recognition, eliminates the problem of temporal interference during sequence generation and learning attributed to more distributed representations.
Uptake into glial cells helps to terminate glutamate's neurotransmitter action and to keep its extracellular concentration, [Glu]o, below neurotoxic levels. The accumulative power of the uptake carrier stems from its transport of inorganic ions such as sodium (into the cell) and potassium (out of the cell). There is controversy over whether the carrier also transports a proton (or pH-changing anion). Here we show that the carrier generates an alkalinization outside and an acidification inside glial cells, and transports anions out of the cells, suggesting that there is a carrier cycle in which two Na+ accompany each glutamate anion into the cell, while one K+ and one OH- (or HCO3-) are transported out. This stoichiometry predicts a minimum [Glu]o of 0.6 microM normally (tonically activating presynaptic autoreceptors and post-synaptic NMDA receptors), and 370 microM during brain anoxia (high enough to kill neurons). Transport of OH-/HCO3- on the uptake carrier generates significant pH changes, and may provide a mechanism for neuron-glial interaction.
Internal brain states form key determinants for sensory perception, sensorimotor coordination and learning. A prominent reflection of different brain states in the mammalian central nervous system is the presence of distinct patterns of cortical synchrony, as revealed by extracellular recordings of the electroencephalogram, local field potential and action potentials. Such temporal correlations of cortical activity are thought to be fundamental mechanisms of neuronal computation. However, it is unknown how cortical synchrony is reflected in the intracellular membrane potential (V(m)) dynamics of behaving animals. Here we show, using dual whole-cell recordings from layer 2/3 primary somatosensory barrel cortex in behaving mice, that the V(m) of nearby neurons is highly correlated during quiet wakefulness. However, when the mouse is whisking, an internally generated state change reduces the V(m) correlation, resulting in a desynchronized local field potential and electroencephalogram. Action potential activity was sparse during both quiet wakefulness and active whisking. Single action potentials were driven by a large, brief and specific excitatory input that was not present in the V(m) of neighbouring cells. Action potential initiation occurs with a higher signal-to-noise ratio during active whisking than during quiet periods. Therefore, we show that an internal brain state dynamically regulates cortical membrane potential synchrony during behaviour and defines different modes of cortical processing.
Target-derived macromolecules in the peripheral nervous system apparently play an important part in the regulation of neuronal survival and maturation during critical stages of development. Similar trophic factors could also be required in the central nervous system (CNS) for the maintenance of intracerebral connections, and neuronal cell death may result from a decrease or failure of a target-derived trophic support. Recent experiments have demonstrated the presence of factors in brain extracts or astrocytic glial cells which can support the survival of embryonic sympathetic, parasympathetic or sensory ganglionic neurones in vitro. The importance of these putative factors for neuronal survival in vivo has, however, so far not been demonstrated. In the study reported here we have used the intracerebral grafting technique to monitor the availability of survival factors in an adult CNS target area and show here that neonatal rat superior cervical cells, which have an absolute requirement for such factors for their survival, will survive in the hippocampal formation of adult rats only in the presence of a denervating lesion.
Abnormally synchronized synaptic transmission in the brain causes epilepsy. Most inherited forms of epilepsy result from mutations in ion channels. However, one form of epilepsy, autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory features (ADPEAF), is characterized by mutations in a secreted neuronal protein, LGI1. We show that ADAM22, a transmembrane protein that when mutated itself causes seizure, serves as a receptor for LGI1. LGI1 enhances AMPA receptor-mediated synaptic transmission in hippocampal slices. The mutated form of LGI1 fails to bind to ADAM22. ADAM22 is anchored to the postsynaptic density by cytoskeletal scaffolds containing stargazin. These studies in rat brain indicate possible avenues for understanding human epilepsy.
A pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease is an accumulation of insoluble plaque containing the amyloid-beta peptide of 40-42 amino acid residues. Prefibrillar, soluble oligomers of amyloid-beta have been recognized to be early and key intermediates in Alzheimer's-disease-related synaptic dysfunction. At nanomolar concentrations, soluble amyloid-beta oligomers block hippocampal long-term potentiation, cause dendritic spine retraction from pyramidal cells and impair rodent spatial memory. Soluble amyloid-beta oligomers have been prepared from chemical syntheses, transfected cell culture supernatants, transgenic mouse brain and human Alzheimer's disease brain. Together, these data imply a high-affinity cell-surface receptor for soluble amyloid-beta oligomers on neurons-one that is central to the pathophysiological process in Alzheimer's disease. Here we identify the cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) as an amyloid-beta-oligomer receptor by expression cloning. Amyloid-beta oligomers bind with nanomolar affinity to PrP(C), but the interaction does not require the infectious PrP(Sc) conformation. Synaptic responsiveness in hippocampal slices from young adult PrP null mice is normal, but the amyloid-beta oligomer blockade of long-term potentiation is absent. Anti-PrP antibodies prevent amyloid-beta-oligomer binding to PrP(C) and rescue synaptic plasticity in hippocampal slices from oligomeric amyloid-beta. Thus, PrP(C) is a mediator of amyloid-beta-oligomer-induced synaptic dysfunction, and PrP(C)-specific pharmaceuticals may have therapeutic potential for Alzheimer's disease.
Recombinant mouse prion protein (recMoPrP) produced in Escherichia coli was polymerized into amyloid fibrils that represent a subset of beta sheet-rich structures. Fibrils consisting of recMoPrP(89-230) were inoculated intracerebrally into transgenic (Tg) mice expressing MoPrP(89-231). The mice developed neurologic dysfunction between 380 and 660 days after inoculation. Brain extracts showed protease-resistant PrP by Western blotting; these extracts transmitted disease to wild-type FVB mice and Tg mice overexpressing PrP, with incubation times of 150 and 90 days, respectively. Neuropathological findings suggest that a novel prion strain was created. Our results provide compelling evidence that prions are infectious proteins.
Critical periods are times of pronounced brain plasticity. During a critical period in the postnatal development of the visual cortex, the occlusion of one eye triggers a rapid reorganization of neuronal responses, a process known as ocular dominance plasticity. We have shown that the transplantation of inhibitory neurons induces ocular dominance plasticity after the critical period. Transplanted inhibitory neurons receive excitatory synapses, make inhibitory synapses onto host cortical neurons, and promote plasticity when they reach a cellular age equivalent to that of endogenous inhibitory neurons during the normal critical period. These findings suggest that ocular dominance plasticity is regulated by the execution of a maturational program intrinsic to inhibitory neurons. By inducing plasticity, inhibitory neuron transplantation may facilitate brain repair.
Long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) of synaptic strength may underlie learning and memory in the brain. The induction of LTP occurs in postsynaptic cells in the hippocampal CA1 region but is presynaptic in CA3. LTD is also well characterized in CA1 but not in CA3. Low-frequency stimulation of mouse hippocampal slices caused homosynaptic LTD at the mossy fiber-CA3 synapse, which may be induced presynaptically by activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors. Thus, the efficacy of mossy fiber-CA3 synapses can be regulated bidirectionally, which may contribute to neuronal information processing.
The basal ganglia, of which the striatum is the major component, process inputs from virtually all cerebral cortical areas to affect motor, emotional, and cognitive behaviors. Insights into how these seemingly disparate functions may be integrated have emerged from studies that have demonstrated that the mammalian striatum is composed of two compartments arranged as a mosaic, the patches and the matrix, which differ in their neurochemical and neuroanatomical properties. In this study, projections from prefrontal, cingulate, and motor cortical areas to the striatal compartments were examined with the Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin (PHA-L) anterograde axonal tracer in rats. Each cortical area projects to both the patches and the matrix of the striatum; however, deep layer V and layer VI corticostriatal neurons project principally to the patches, whereas superficial layer V and layer III and II corticostriatal neurons project principally to the matrix. The relative contribution of patch and matrix corticostriatal projections varies among the cortical areas examined such that allocortical areas provide a greater number of inputs to the patches than to the matrix, whereas the reverse obtains for neocortical areas. These results demonstrate that the compartmental organization of corticostriatal inputs is related to their laminar origin and secondarily to the cytoarchitectonic area of origin.
Tumour-necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) is believed to have an important role in the pathogenesis of severe infectious disease and fatal cerebral malaria is associated with high circulating levels of this cytokine. In a large case-control study in Gambian children we find that homozygotes for the TNF2 allele, a variant of the TNF-alpha gene promoter region, have a relative risk of 7 for death or severe neurological sequelae due to cerebral malaria. Although the TNF2 allele is in linkage disequilibrium with several neighbouring HLA alleles, we show that this disease association is independent of HLA class I and class II variation. These data suggest that regulatory polymorphisms of cytokine genes can affect the outcome of severe infection. The maintenance of the TNF2 allele at a gene frequency of 0.16 in The Gambia implies that the increased risk of cerebral malaria in homozygotes is counterbalanced by some biological advantage.
The severe limitation of the capacity of working memory, the ability to store temporarily and manipulate information, necessitates mechanisms that restrict access to it. Here we report tests to discover whether the activity of neurons in the prefrontal (PF) cortex, the putative neural correlate of working memory, might reflect these mechanisms and preferentially represent behaviourally relevant information. Monkeys performed a 'delayed-matching-to-sample' task with an array of three objects. Only one of the objects in the array was relevant for task performance and the monkeys needed to find that object (the target) and remember its location. For many PF neurons, activity to physically identical arrays varied with the target location; the location of the non-target objects had little or no influence on activity. Information about the target location was present in activity as early as 140ms after array onset. Also, information about which object was the target was reflected in the sustained activity of many PF neurons. These results suggest that the prefrontal cortex is involved in selecting and maintaining behaviourally relevant information.
The presence and function of CB2 receptors in central nervous system (CNS) neurons are controversial. We report the expression of CB2 receptor messenger RNA and protein localization on brainstem neurons. These functional CB2 receptors in the brainstem were activated by a CB2 receptor agonist, 2-arachidonoylglycerol, and by elevated endogenous levels of endocannabinoids, which also act at CB1 receptors. CB2 receptors represent an alternative site of action of endocannabinoids that opens the possibility of nonpsychotropic therapeutic interventions using enhanced endocannabinoid levels in localized brain areas.
Functional brain organization of macaque monkeys and humans was directly compared by functional magnetic resonance imaging. Subjects of both species performed a modified Wisconsin Card Sorting Test that required behavioral flexibility in the form of cognitive set shifting. Equivalent visual stimuli and task sequence were used for the two species. We found transient activation related to cognitive set shifting in focal regions of prefrontal cortex in both monkeys and humans. These functional homologs were located in cytoarchitectonically equivalent regions in the posterior part of ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. This comparative imaging provides insights into the evolution of cognition in primates.
The organization of the visual cortex has been considered to be highly stable in adult mammals. However, 5 degrees to 10 degrees lesions of the retina in the contralateral eye markedly altered the systematic representations of the retina in primary and secondary visual cortex when matched inputs from the ipsilateral eye were also removed. Cortical neurons that normally have receptive fields in the lesioned region of the retina acquired new receptive fields in portions of the retina surrounding the lesions. The capacity for such changes may be important for normal adjustments of sensory systems to environmental contingencies and for recoveries from brain damage.
Members of the nerve growth factor (NGF) family promote the survival of neurons during development. NGF specifically activates the receptor trkA, initiating a signal transduction cascade which ultimately blocks cell death. Here we show that NGF can have the opposite effect, inducing the death of mature oligodendrocytes cultured from postnatal rat cerebral cortex. This effect was highly specific, because NGF had no effect on oligodendrocyte precursors and astrocytes. Other neurotrophins such as brain-derived neurotrophin factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) did not induce cell death. NGF binding to mature oligodendrocytes expressing the p75 neurotrophin receptor, but not trkA, resulted in a sustained increase of intracellular ceramide and c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK) activity, which are thought to participate in a signal transduction pathway leading to cell death. Taken together, these results indicate that NGF has the ability to promote cell death in specific cell types through a ligand-dependent signalling mechanism involving the p75 neurotrophin receptor.
Mice with the mutant gene tottering (tg, chromosome 8, autosomal recessive) show, in adolescence, abnormal bursts of bilaterally synchronous spike waves as revealed in electrocorticograms recorded over long periods. The spike waves are accompanied by behavioral "absence" attacks and intermittent focal motor seizures showing somatotopic progression. Cerebral metabolic activity during seizures was assayed by autoradiography of brain sections from mice injected intravenously with 14C-labeled 2-deoxyglucose. Metabolic activity was increased bilaterally in selected brainstem structures. Spontaneous electrocorticographic and clinical seizures of this general pattern were recognized hitherto only in humans.
Hypertonic urea or lactamide solutions osmotically open the blood-brain barrier in the monkey without producing gross neurological deficits if the blood supply to the brain is not compromised. The brain is perfused via the left lingual artery when the external and common carotid arteries are clamped temporarily. Hypertonic perfusion, which opens the barrier by opening tight junctions between cerebrovascular endothelial cells, can thus be used to study barrier function and brain pharmacology.
By combining the models and tasks of Game Theory with modern psychological and neuroscientific methods, the neuroeconomic approach to the study of social decision-making has the potential to extend our knowledge of brain mechanisms involved in social decisions and to advance theoretical models of how we make decisions in a rich, interactive environment. Research has already begun to illustrate how social exchange can act directly on the brain's reward system, how affective factors play an important role in bargaining and competitive games, and how the ability to assess another's intentions is related to strategic play. These findings provide a fruitful starting point for improved models of social decision-making, informed by the formal mathematical approach of economics and constrained by known neural mechanisms.
The primary structures of two muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) species, designated as mAChR I and mAChR II, have been elucidated by cloning and sequence analysis of DNAs complementary to the porcine cerebral and cardiac messenger RNAs, respectively. mAChR I and mAChR II expressed in Xenopus oocytes differ from each other both in acetylcholine-induced response and in antagonist binding properties. These results, together with the differential tissue location of the two mAChR mRNAs, have indicated that pharmacologically distinguishable subtypes of the mAChR represent distinct gene products. The primary structures of two additional mammalian mAChR species, designated as mAChR III and mAChR IV, have subsequently been deduced from the nucleotide sequences of the cloned cDNAs or genomic DNAs. We report here that mAChR I and mAChR III expressed in NG108-15 neuroblastoma-glioma hybrid cells, but not mAChR II and mAChR IV, efficiently mediate phosphoinositide hydrolysis, activation of a Ca2+-dependent K+ current and inhibition of the M-current, a voltage-dependent K+ current sensitive to muscarinic agonists.
The extinction of conditioned fear memories requires plasticity in the infralimbic medial prefrontal cortex (IL mPFC), but little is known about the molecular mechanisms involved. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a key mediator of synaptic plasticity in multiple brain areas. In rats subjected to auditory fear conditioning, BDNF infused into the IL mPFC reduced conditioned fear for up to 48 hours, even in the absence of extinction training, which suggests that BDNF substituted for extinction. Similar to extinction, BDNF-induced reduction in fear required N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors and did not erase the original fear memory. Rats failing to learn extinction showed reduced BDNF in hippocampal inputs to the IL mPFC, and augmenting BDNF in this pathway prevented extinction failure. Hence, boosting BDNF activity in hippocampal-infralimbic circuits may ameliorate disorders of learned fear.
Stimulation of the caudate nucleus modifies inputs to the visual system of the cat. The modification of such sensory information is similar to the modification seen on stimulation of the thalamus and brain stem reticular formation. Preliminary stimulation of the caudate nucleus at different intervals prior to the afferent input may have facilitatory or inhibitory effects on both evoked potentials and unitary responses of the visual cortex.
Neurons sensitive to the orientation of light stimuli exist throughout the mammalian visual system, suggesting that this spatial feature is a fundamental cue used by the brain to decipher visual information. The most peripheral neurons known to show orientation sensitivity are the retinal ganglion cells. Considerable morphological and pharmacological data suggest that the orientation sensitivity of ganglion cells is formed, at least partly, by the amacrine cells, which are laterally oriented interneurons presynaptic to the ganglion cells in the inner plexiform layer. So far there have been few studies of the responses of amacrine cells to oriented visual stimuli and their role in forming orientation-sensitive responses in the retina remains unclear. Here I report the novel finding of a population of amacrine cells in the rabbit retina which are orientation-sensitive. These amacrine cells can be divided into two subtypes, whose orientation sensitivity is manufactured by two distinct mechanisms. The orientation sensitivity of the first subtype of amacrine cell is formed from the interactions of excitatory, centre-receptive field synaptic inputs and inhibitory inputs of opposite polarity, whereas that for cells of the second subtype seems to be the product of a marked asymmetry in their dendritic arbors.
The majority of neurones in the visual cortex of both adult cats and kittens can be excited by visual stimulation of either eye. Nevertheless, if one eye is deprived of patterned vision early in life, most cortical cells can only be activated by visual stimuli presented to the nondeprived eye and behaviourally the deprived eye is apparently useless. Although the consequences of monocular deprivation can be severe, they can in many circumstances be rapidly reversed with the early implementation of reverse occlusion which forces the use of the initially deprived eye. However, by itself reverse occlusion does not restore a normal distribution of cortical ocular dominance and only promotes visual recovery in one eye. In an effort to find a procedure that might restore good binocular vision, we have examined the effects on acuity and cortical ocular dominance of a short, but physiologically optimal period of reverse occlusion, followed by a period of binocular vision beginning at 7.5 weeks of age. Surprisingly, despite the early introduction of binocular vision, both eyes attained acuities that were only approximately 1/3 of normal acuity levels. Despite the severe bilateral amblyopia, cortical ocular dominance appeared similar to that of normal cats. This is the first demonstration of severe bilateral amblyopia following consecutive periods of monocular occlusion.
The mammalian brain is composed of several distinct parts which show different growth in evolution. Clark, Mitra and Wang found that the two main cortices of the brain - the cerebral (neo-) cortex and the cerebellum - show very different growth, and that whereas the ratio of neocortex volume to total brain volume increases with evolution, the cerebellum occupies a constant proportion in different species. Here I compare the surface areas of the two cortices in different species and find that these show a simple proportionality. Contrary to the conclusion drawn by Clark et al., this linear dependence of size implies that the two major cortices increase their computational capacity in parallel, suggesting a functional dependence of the one upon the other.
Scrapie and related animal and human disorders are neurodegenerative diseases characterized by the formation of a modified, partly proteinase-resistant protein (PrP) of the host, which tends to aggregate as amyloid fibrils and accumulate in the brain of infected individuals. There is a general consensus that the pathological form of PrP (PrPSc) is essential for the clinical appearance of the disease, but whether it is part of the scrapie agent or a by-product of viral infection is still controversial. Here we report that treatment of scrapie-infected hamsters with amphotericin B delays the accumulation in the brain of the proteinase-resistant portion of PrPSc by about 30 days without affecting scrapie replication. The consequence is that hamsters treated with amphotericin B developed clinical signs of disease later than infected controls. We argue that the proteinase-resistant portion of PrPSc is necessary for the development of the disease but that it is unlikely to be essential for scrapie replication.
Neurotrophins such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) are thought to be transferred from post- to presynaptic neurons and to be involved in the formation and plasticity of neural circuits. However, direct evidence for a transneuronal transfer of BDNF and its relation to neuronal activity remains elusive. We simultaneously injected complementary DNAs of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged BDNF and red fluorescence protein into the nucleus of single neurons and visualized expression, localization, and transport of BDNF in living neurons. Fluorescent puncta representing BDNF moved in axons in the anterograde direction, though some moved retrogradely, and transferred to postsynaptic neurons in an activity-dependent manner.
A midbrain hemisection in a midpontine pretrigeminal preparation of the cat causes an asymmetry in the electroencephalogram with a marked increase in the acetylcholine content of the cortex from the synchronized hemisphere. It is suggested that the increase in acetylcholine is related to the decrease of nervous activity caused by the hemisection.
Acoustic stimuli are processed throughout the auditory projection pathway, including the neocortex, by neurons that are aggregated into 'tonotopic' maps according to their specific frequency tunings. Research on animals has shown that tonotopic representations are not statically fixed in the adult organism but can reorganize after damage to the cochlea or after training the intact subject to discriminate between auditory stimuli. Here we used functional magnetic source imaging (single dipole model) to measure cortical representations in highly skilled musicians. Dipole moments for piano tones, but not for pure tones of similar fundamental frequency (matched in loudness), were found to be enlarged by about 25% in musicians compared with control subjects who had never played an instrument. Enlargement was correlated with the age at which musicians began to practise and did not differ between musicians with absolute or relative pitch. These results, when interpreted with evidence for modified somatosensory representations of the fingering digits in skilled violinists, suggest that use-dependent functional reorganization extends across the sensory cortices to reflect the pattern of sensory input processed by the subject during development of musical skill.
Astrocytes play active roles in brain physiology. They respond to neurotransmitters and modulate neuronal excitability and synaptic function. However, the influence of astrocytes on synaptic transmission and plasticity at the single synapse level is unknown. Ca(2+) elevation in astrocytes transiently increased the probability of transmitter release at hippocampal area CA3-CA1 synapses, without affecting the amplitude of synaptic events. This form of short-term plasticity was due to the release of glutamate from astrocytes, a process that depended on Ca(2+) and soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) protein and that activated metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs). The transient potentiation of transmitter release became persistent when the astrocytic signal was temporally coincident with postsynaptic depolarization. This persistent plasticity was mGluR-mediated but N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor-independent. These results indicate that astrocytes are actively involved in the transfer and storage of synaptic information.
A goal in visual neuroscience is to reveal how the visual system reconstructs the three-dimensional (3D) representation of the world from two-dimensional retinal images. Although the importance of texture gradient cues in the process of 3D vision has been pointed out, most studies concentrate on the neural process based on binocular disparity. We report the neural correlates of depth perception from texture gradient in the cortex. In the caudal part of the lateral bank of intraparietal sulcus, many neurons were selective to 3D surface orientation defined by texture gradient, and their response was invariant over different types of texture pattern. Most of these neurons were also sensitive to a disparity gradient, suggesting that they integrate texture and disparity gradient signals to construct a generalized representation of 3D surface orientation.
The degeneration of forebrain dopamine systems in Parkinson's disease has been an effective target for pharmaceutical research over the past four decades. However, although dopamine replacement may alleviate the symptoms of the disease, it does not halt the underlying neuronal degeneration. The past decade has seen major advances in identifying discrete genetic and molecular causes of parkinsonism and mapping the events involved in nigral cell death. This new understanding of the pathogenesis of the disease now offers novel prospects for therapy based on targeted neuroprotection of vulnerable neurons and effective strategies for their replacement.
Although there are elegants maps of the human brain that reveal differences in cellular architecture between different cortical regions, there is not much information about how corresponding cortical regions differ between the left and right hemispheres. As Gazzaniga explains in his Perspective, new results reveal the surprising finding of asymmetry in area 22 (which is important for language processing) of the left and right hemisphere (Galuske et al.). Clusters of neurons in area 22 of the left hemisphere are spaced farther apart and have longer axons cabling them together than neuronal clusters in area 22 of the right hemisphere.
Tuberous sclerosis complex and fragile X syndrome are genetic diseases characterized by intellectual disability and autism. Because both syndromes are caused by mutations in genes that regulate protein synthesis in neurons, it has been hypothesized that excessive protein synthesis is one core pathophysiological mechanism of intellectual disability and autism. Using electrophysiological and biochemical assays of neuronal protein synthesis in the hippocampus of Tsc2(+/-) and Fmr1(-/y) mice, here we show that synaptic dysfunction caused by these mutations actually falls at opposite ends of a physiological spectrum. Synaptic, biochemical and cognitive defects in these mutants are corrected by treatments that modulate metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 in opposite directions, and deficits in the mutants disappear when the mice are bred to carry both mutations. Thus, normal synaptic plasticity and cognition occur within an optimal range of metabotropic glutamate-receptor-mediated protein synthesis, and deviations in either direction can lead to shared behavioural impairments.
Lesions of the lateral portion of the upper midbrain, involving medial, lateral, spinal, and trigeminal lemnisci primarily, result in a consistent syndrome of symptoms in the cat. (i) There is a marked sensory deficit, characterized mainly by sensory inattention and poor localization in the tactile, proprioceptive, auditory, gustatory, and nociceptive modalities, where direct pathways are interrupted. Similar defectsappear in vision and olfaction where no known direct or primary paths are interrupted. (ii) These cats are characterized by a lack of affect, showing little or no defensive and aggressive reaction to noxious and aversive situations and no response to pleasurable stimulation or solicitation of affection or petting. The animals are mute, lack facial expression, and show minimal autonomic responses. (iii) They show a hyperexploratory activity characterized by incessant, stereotyped wandering, sniffing, and visual searching, as though hallucinating. This behavior appears to be centrally directed and is very difficult to interrupt with environmental stimuli. (iv) They also demonstrate exaggerated oral activities: they snap in response to tactile stimulation of the lips, seizing and swallowing small objects even if inedible; they overeat; they hold objects too large to swallow (a mouse, a catnip ball) firmly clamped in the mouth for long periods of time; they mount and seize other animals (rat, cat, dog, monkey) by the back or the neck; they lick and chew the hair and skin of the back or tail incessantly when confined in a cage. In interpreting these results we emphasize the view that the syndrome is due chiefly to the extensive, specific, sensory deprivation produced by interruption of the lemnisci at the rostral midbrain. The relation of these findings to the effects of sensory isolation in man and animals, to the effects of midbrain lesions and neodecortication, to parietal lobe syndrome in primates, and to the behavior of autistic children is discussed. It is our belief, from these studies, that the symptoms produced by interruption of the lemnisci, characterized by a high degree of somatotopic and modality localization, are due to a loss of patterned sensory input to the forebrain, particularly to the neocortex and to the rostral midbrain. Without a patterned afferent input to the forebrain via the lemnisci, the remaining portions of the central nervous system, which include a virtually intact reticular formation, seem incapable of elaborating a large part of the animal's repertoire of adaptive behavior (45).
Reduced population densities lead to increased rates of fissioning in planarians whereas higher population densities suppress fissioning. This effect is not primarily due to mucus deposition or substances secreted into the water. Experiments are presented which show a system of population feedback control. In the presence of other planarians, the brain exerts an influence (probably neurohormonal) to suppress fissioning. This influence becomes attenuated with axial distance from the brain.
An RNA virus population does not consist of a single genotype; rather, it is an ensemble of related sequences, termed quasispecies. Quasispecies arise from rapid genomic evolution powered by the high mutation rate of RNA viral replication. Although a high mutation rate is dangerous for a virus because it results in nonviable individuals, it has been hypothesized that high mutation rates create a 'cloud' of potentially beneficial mutations at the population level, which afford the viral quasispecies a greater probability to evolve and adapt to new environments and challenges during infection. Mathematical models predict that viral quasispecies are not simply a collection of diverse mutants but a group of interactive variants, which together contribute to the characteristics of the population. According to this view, viral populations, rather than individual variants, are the target of evolutionary selection. Here we test this hypothesis by examining the consequences of limiting genomic diversity on viral populations. We find that poliovirus carrying a high-fidelity polymerase replicates at wild-type levels but generates less genomic diversity and is unable to adapt to adverse growth conditions. In infected animals, the reduced viral diversity leads to loss of neurotropism and an attenuated pathogenic phenotype. Notably, using chemical mutagenesis to expand quasispecies diversity of the high-fidelity virus before infection restores neurotropism and pathogenesis. Analysis of viruses isolated from brain provides direct evidence for complementation between members in the quasispecies, indicating that selection indeed occurs at the population level rather than on individual variants. Our study provides direct evidence for a fundamental prediction of the quasispecies theory and establishes a link between mutation rate, population dynamics and pathogenesis.
Modules of neurons sharing a common property are a basic organizational feature of mammalian sensory cortex. Primary visual cortex (V1) is characterized by orientation modules--groups of cells that share a preferred stimulus orientation--which are organized into a highly ordered orientation map. Here we show that in ferrets in which retinal projections are routed into the auditory pathway, visually responsive neurons in 'rewired' primary auditory cortex are also organized into orientation modules. The orientation tuning of neurons within these modules is comparable to the tuning of cells in V1 but the orientation map is less orderly. Horizontal connections in rewired cortex are more patchy and periodic than connections in normal auditory cortex, but less so than connections in V1. These data show that afferent activity has a profound influence on diverse components of cortical circuitry, including thalamocortical and local intracortical connections, which are involved in the generation of orientation tuning, and long-range horizontal connections, which are important in creating an orientation map.
Anatomical and physiological studies have shown that there is an area specialized for the processing of colour (area V4) in the prestriate cortex of macaque monkey brain. Earlier this century, suggestive clinical evidence for a colour centre in the brain of man was dismissed because of the association of other visual defects with the defects in colour vision. However, since the demonstration of functional specialization in the macaque cortex, the question of a colour centre in man has been reinvestigated, based on patients with similar lesions in the visual cortex. In order to study the colour centre in normal human subjects, we used the technique of positron emission tomography (PET), which measures increases in blood flow resulting from increased activity in the cerebral cortex. A comparison of the results of PET scans of subjects viewing multi-coloured and black-and-white displays has identified a region of normal human cerebral cortex specialized for colour vision.
Proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) generates amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide, which is thought to be causal for the pathology and subsequent cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease. Cleavage by beta-secretase at the amino terminus of the Abeta peptide sequence, between residues 671 and 672 of APP, leads to the generation and extracellular release of beta-cleaved soluble APP, and a corresponding cell-associated carboxy-terminal fragment. Cleavage of the C-terminal fragment by gamma-secretase(s) leads to the formation of Abeta. The pathogenic mutation K670M671-->N670L671 at the beta-secretase cleavage site in APP, which was discovered in a Swedish family with familial Alzheimer's disease, leads to increased beta-secretase cleavage of the mutant substrate. Here we describe a membrane-bound enzyme activity that cleaves full-length APP at the beta-secretase cleavage site, and find it to be the predominant beta-cleavage activity in human brain. We have purified this enzyme activity to homogeneity from human brain using a new substrate analogue inhibitor of the enzyme activity, and show that the purified enzyme has all the properties predicted for beta-secretase. Cloning and expression of the enzyme reveals that human brain beta-secretase is a new membrane-bound aspartic proteinase.
Phencyclidine (PCP), a dissociative anesthetic and widely abused psychotomimetic drug, and MK-801, a potent PCP receptor ligand, have neuroprotective properties stemming from their ability to antagonize the excitotoxic actions of endogenous excitatory amino acids such as glutamate and aspartate. There is growing interest in the potential application of these compounds in the treatment of neurological disorders. However, there is an apparent neurotoxic effect of PCP and related agents (MK-801, tiletamine, and ketamine), which has heretofore been overlooked: these drugs induce acute pathomorphological changes in specific populations of brain neurons when administered subcutaneously to adult rats in relatively low doses. These findings raise new questions regarding the safety of these agents in the clinical management of neurodegenerative diseases and reinforce concerns about the potential risks associated with illicit use of PCP.
Long-term potentiation (LTP) of excitatory synaptic transmission could be a mechanism underlying memory. Induction of LTP requires Ca2+ influx into postsynaptic neurons through ion channels gated by NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors in hippocampus (area CA1 and dentate gyrus) and neocortex. Here we report that a component of LTP not requiring the activation of NMDA receptors can be induced in area CA1. The component is dependent on tetanus frequency, requires increases in postsynaptic intracellular Ca2+ concentrations, and is suppressed by an antagonist of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels.
Complement-mediated inflammation exacerbates the tissue injury of ischaemic necrosis in heart attacks and strokes, the most common causes of death in developed countries. Large infarct size increases immediate morbidity and mortality and, in survivors of the acute event, larger non-functional scars adversely affect long-term prognosis. There is thus an important unmet medical need for new cardioprotective and neuroprotective treatments. We have previously shown that human C-reactive protein (CRP), the classical acute-phase protein that binds to ligands exposed in damaged tissue and then activates complement, increases myocardial and cerebral infarct size in rats subjected to coronary or cerebral artery ligation, respectively. Rat CRP does not activate rat complement, whereas human CRP activates both rat and human complement. Administration of human CRP to rats is thus an excellent model for the actions of endogenous human CRP. Here we report the design, synthesis and efficacy of 1,6-bis(phosphocholine)-hexane as a specific small-molecule inhibitor of CRP. Five molecules of this palindromic compound are bound by two pentameric CRP molecules, crosslinking and occluding the ligand-binding B-face of CRP and blocking its functions. Administration of 1,6-bis(phosphocholine)-hexane to rats undergoing acute myocardial infarction abrogated the increase in infarct size and cardiac dysfunction produced by injection of human CRP. Therapeutic inhibition of CRP is thus a promising new approach to cardioprotection in acute myocardial infarction, and may also provide neuroprotection in stroke. Potential wider applications include other inflammatory, infective and tissue-damaging conditions characterized by increased CRP production, in which binding of CRP to exposed ligands in damaged cells may lead to complement-mediated exacerbation of tissue injury.
Recent studies have suggested that bone marrow cells possess a broad differentiation potential, being able to form new liver cells, cardiomyocytes and neurons. Several groups have attributed this apparent plasticity to 'transdifferentiation'. Others, however, have suggested that cell fusion could explain these results. Using a simple method based on Cre/lox recombination to detect cell fusion events, we demonstrate that bone-marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) fuse spontaneously with neural progenitors in vitro. Furthermore, bone marrow transplantation demonstrates that BMDCs fuse in vivo with hepatocytes in liver, Purkinje neurons in the brain and cardiac muscle in the heart, resulting in the formation of multinucleated cells. No evidence of transdifferentiation without fusion was observed in these tissues. These observations provide the first in vivo evidence for cell fusion of BMDCs with neurons and cardiomyocytes, raising the possibility that cell fusion may contribute to the development or maintenance of these key cell types.
The direction and rate at which an object moves are normally not correlated with the manifold physical cues (for example, brightness and texture) that enable it to be seen. As befits its goals, human perception of visual motion largely evades this diversity of cues for image form; direction and rate of motion are perceived (with few exceptions) in a fashion that does not depend on the physical characteristics of the object. The middle temporal visual area of the primate cerebral cortex contains many neurons that respond selectively to motion in a particular direction and is an integral part of the neural substrate for perception of motion. When stimulated with moving patterns characterized by one of three very diverse cues for form, many middle temporal neurons exhibited similar directional tuning. This lack of sensitivity for figural cue characteristics may allow the uniform perception of motion of objects having a broad spectrum of physical cues.
Seven monoclonal antibodies have been produced against a membrane preparation from adult rat retina. Three antibodies reacted with particular regions of rat photoreceptor cell surfaces: RET-P1 labelled the cell bodies, outer and inner segments (rods but not cones), RET-P2 labelled only outer segments and RET-P3 labelled only the cell bodies. Three antibodies reacted with glial cells; RET-G2 and RET-G3 were specific for Muller cells, RET-G1 also labelled glia elsewhere in brain. The seventh antibody (RET-N1) reacted with many types of neuronal cells.
A 9-month-old dog with a history of progressive motor dysfunction was shown to have a deficiency in brain beta-galactosidase activity. The canine disease, like that of children with GM1 gangliosidosis, is characterized by accumulation of GM1 ganglioside in the brain, liver, and spleen, and membranous cytoplasmic bodies in neurons. The dog's pedigree suggests an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.
Decision theory proposes that humans and animals decide what to do in a given situation by assessing the relative value of each possible response. This assessment can be computed, in part, from the probability that each action will result in a gain and the magnitude of the gain expected. Here we show that the gain (or reward) a monkey can expect to realize from an eye-movement response modulates the activity of neurons in the lateral intraparietal area, an area of primate cortex that is thought to transform visual signals into eye-movement commands. We also show that the activity of these neurons is sensitive to the probability that a particular response will result in a gain. When animals can choose freely between two alternative responses, the choices subjects make and neuronal activation in this area are both correlated with the relative amount of gain that the animal can expect from each response. Our data indicate that a decision-theoretic model may provide a powerful new framework for studying the neural processes that intervene between sensation and action.
The oscillation in firing rate of units of the lateral geniculate body in response to stimulation with sine-wave light was studied in unanesthetized cats with the brainstem sectioned immediately in front of the fifth nerve (pretrigeminal preparation). During wakefulness, as indicated by behavior and by electroencephalograms, the time course of the oscillation in firing rate followed very closely the change in intensity of sine-wave light. During synchronized sleep there was no such relationship.
Following ligation of the right middle cerebral artery, rats were hyperactive for 2 to 3 weeks whether activity was measured by running wheel revolutions or open field observations. Assays of brain catecholamines revealed 30 percent reductions of norepinephrine in the injured and uninjured cortex and locus coeruleus and a 20 percent reduction of dopamine in the substantia nigra. In contrast, rats with left middle cerebral artery ligations did not become hyperactive and did not show any significant change in catecholamines in any of the brain areas studied. Right and left hemispheric infarctions were comparable in their locations and extent of tissue damage. This lateralization of behavioral and biochemical response to cerebral infarction may be the consequence of anatomical or physiological asymmetries in the brain.
Neuronal degeneration in the hippocampus, a region of the brain important for acquisition of memory in humans, occurs in various pathological conditions, including Alzheimer's disease, brain ischaemia and epilepsy. When neuronal activity is stimulated in the adult rat and mouse hippocampus, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), a serine protease that converts inactive plasminogen to the active protease plasmin, is transcriptionally induced. The activity of tPA in neural tissue is correlated with neurite outgrowth, regeneration and migration, suggesting that it might be involved in neuronal plasticity. Here we show that tPA is produced primarily by microglia in the hippocampus. Using excitotoxins to induce neuronal cell loss, we demonstrate that tPA-deficient mice are resistant to neuronal degeneration. These mice are also less susceptible to pharmacologically induced seizures than wild-type mice. These findings identify a role for tPA in neuronal degeneration and seizure.
The function and nature of inhibition of neurons in the visual cortex have been the focus of both experimental and theoretical investigations. There are two ways in which inhibition can suppress synaptic excitation. In hyperpolarizing inhibition, negative and positive currents sum linearly to produce a net change in membrane potential. In contrast, shunting inhibition acts nonlinearly by causing an increase in membrane conductance; this divides the amplitude of the excitatory response. Visually evoked changes in membrane conductance have been reported to be nonsignificant or weak, supporting the hyperpolarization mode of inhibition. Here we present a new approach to studying inhibition that is based on in vivo whole-cell voltage clamping. This technique allows the continuous measurement of conductance dynamics during visual activation. We show, in neurons of cat primary visual cortex, that the response to optimally orientated flashed bars can increase the somatic input conductance to more than three times that of the resting state. The short latency of the visually evoked peak of conductance, and its apparent reversal potential suggest a dominant contribution from gamma-aminobutyric acid ((GABA)A) receptor-mediated synapses. We propose that nonlinear shunting inhibition may act during the initial stage of visual cortical processing, setting the balance between opponent 'On' and 'Off' responses in different locations of the visual receptive field.
The amyloid beta protein is deposited in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease but its pathogenic role is unknown. In culture, the amyloid beta protein was neurotrophic to undifferentiated hippocampal neurons at low concentrations and neurotoxic to mature neurons at higher concentrations. In differentiated neurons, amyloid beta protein caused dendritic and axonal retraction followed by neuronal death. A portion of the amyloid beta protein (amino acids 25 to 35) mediated both the trophic and toxic effects and was homologous to the tachykinin neuropeptide family. The effects of the amyloid beta protein were mimicked by tachykinin antagonists and completely reversed by specific tachykinin agonists. Thus, the amyloid beta protein could function as a neurotrophic factor for differentiating neurons, but at high concentrations in mature neurons, as in Alzheimer's disease, could cause neuronal degeneration.
Tobacco use in developed countries is estimated to be the single largest cause of premature death. Nicotine is the primary component of tobacco that drives use, and like other addictive drugs, nicotine reinforces self-administration and place preference in animal studies. Midbrain dopamine neurons normally help to shape behaviour by reinforcing biologically rewarding events, but addictive drugs such as cocaine can inappropriately exert a reinforcing influence by acting upon the mesolimbic dopamine system. Here we show that the same concentration of nicotine achieved by smokers activates and desensitizes multiple nicotinic receptors thereby regulating the activity of mesolimbic dopamine neurons. Initial application of nicotine can increase the activity of the dopamine neurons, which could mediate the rewarding aspects of tobacco use. Prolonged exposure to even these low concentrations of nicotine, however, can cause desensitization of the nicotinic receptors, which helps to explain acute tolerance to nicotine's effects. The effects suggest a cellular basis for reports that the first cigarette of the day is the most pleasurable, whereas the effect of subsequent cigarettes may depend on the interplay between activation and desensitization of multiple nicotinic receptors.
The central biological clock of the mammalian brain is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. This hypothalamic region contains neurons that generate a circadian rhythm on a single-cell basis. Clock cells transmit their circadian timing signals to other brain areas by diurnal modulation of their spontaneous firing rate. The intracellular mechanism underlying rhythm generation is thought to consist of one or more self-regulating molecular loops, but it is unknown how these loops interact with the plasma membrane to modulate the ionic conductances that regulate firing behaviour. Here we demonstrate a diurnal modulation of Ca2+ current in suprachiasmatic neurons. This current strongly contributes to the generation of spontaneous oscillations in membrane potential, which occur selectively during daytime and are tightly coupled to spike generation. Thus, day-night modulation of Ca2+ current is a central step in transducing the intracellular cycling of molecular clocks to the rhythm in spontaneous firing rate.
Imprinted genes display parent-of-origin-dependent monoallelic expression that apparently regulates complex mammalian traits, including growth and behavior. The Peg3 gene is expressed in embryos and the adult brain from the paternal allele only. A mutation in the Peg3 gene resulted in growth retardation, as well as a striking impairment of maternal behavior that frequently resulted in death of the offspring. This result may be partly due to defective neuronal connectivity, as well as reduced oxytocin neurons in the hypothalamus, because mutant mothers were deficient in milk ejection. This study provides further insights on the evolution of epigenetic regulation of imprinted gene dosage in modulating mammalian growth and behavior.
A critical issue in developmental cognitive neuroscience is the extent to which the functional neuroanatomy underlying task performance differs in adults and children. Direct comparisons of brain activation in the left frontal and extrastriate cortex were made in adults and children (aged 7 to 10 years) performing single-word processing tasks with visual presentation; differences were found in circumscribed frontal and extrastriate regions. Conceivably, these differences could be attributable exclusively to performance discrepancies; alternatively, maturational differences in functional neuroanatomy could exist despite similar performance. Some of the brain regions examined showed differences attributable to age independent of performance, suggesting that maturation of the pattern of regional activations for these tasks is incomplete at age 10.
Adenosine is present in the mammalian brain in large amounts and has potent effects on neuronal activity, but its role in neural signaling is poorly understood. The glutamate receptor agonist N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) caused a presynaptic depression of excitatory synaptic transmission in the CA1 region of guinea pig hippocampal slices. This depression was blocked by an adenosine A1 receptor antagonist, which suggests that activation of the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptor raises the concentration of extracellular adenosine, which acts on presynaptic inhibitory A1 receptors. Strong tetanic stimulation caused a heterosynaptic inhibition that was blocked by both NMDA and A1 receptor antagonists. Enkephalin, which selectively inhibits interneurons, antagonized the heterosynaptic inhibition. These findings suggest that synaptically released glutamate activates NMDA receptors, which in turn releases adenosine, at least in part from interneurons, that acts at a distance to inhibit presynaptically the release of glutamate from excitatory synapses. Thus, interneurons may mediate a widespread purinergic presynaptic inhibition.
The influence of cognitive context on orienting behaviour can be explored using the mixed memory-prosaccade, memory-antisaccade task. A symbolic cue, such as the colour of a visual stimulus, instructs the subject to make a brief, rapid eye movement (a saccade) either towards the stimulus (prosaccade) or in the opposite direction (antisaccade). Thus, the appropriate sensorimotor transformation must be switched on to execute the instructed task. Despite advances in our understanding of the neuronal processing of antisaccades, it remains unclear how the brain selects and computes the sensorimotor transformation leading to an antisaccade. Here we show that area LIP of the posterior parietal cortex is involved in these processes. LIP's population activity turns from the visual direction to the motor direction during memory-antisaccade trials. About one-third of the visual neurons in LIP produce a brisk, transient discharge in certain memory-antisaccade trials. We call this discharge 'paradoxical' because its timing is visual-like but its direction is motor. The paradoxical discharge shows, first, that switching occurs already at the level of visual cells, as previously proposed by Schlag-Rey and colleagues; and second, that this switching is accomplished very rapidly, within 50 ms from the arrival of the visual signals in LIP.
Acetylcholine (ACh) is considered to act as a neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain by binding to membrane receptors and bringing about a change in neurone excitability. In the case of muscarinic receptors, cell excitability is usually increased; this effect results from a closure of membrane potassium channels in cortical cells. However, some central neurones are inhibited by ACh, and we hypothesized that these two opposite effects of ACh resulted from interactions with different subtypes of muscarinic receptor. We made intracellular recordings from neurones in the rat nucleus parabrachialis, a group of neurones in the upper pons some of which themselves synthesize ACh. ACh and muscarine caused a membrane hyperpolarization which resulted from an increase in the membrane conductance to potassium ions. The muscarinic receptor subtype was characterized by determining the dissociation equilibrium constant (KD) for pirenzepine during the intracellular recording; the value of approximately 600 nM indicates a receptor in the M2 class. This muscarinic receptor is quite different from that which brings about a decrease in potassium conductance in other neurones, which has a pirenzepine KD of approximately 10 nM (M1 receptors). It is possible that antagonists selective for this kind of M2 receptor would be useful in the management of conditions, such as Alzheimer's disease, which are associated with a reduced effectiveness of cholinergic neurones.
Ethanol, at pharmacologically relevant concentrations of 20 to 100 mM, stimulates gamma-aminobutyric (GABA) receptor-mediated uptake of 36Cl-labeled chlorine into isolated brain vesicles. One drug that acts at GABA-benzodiazepine receptors, the imidazobenzodiazepine Ro15-4513, has been found to be a potent antagonist of ethanol-stimulated 36Cl- uptake into brain vesicles, but it fails to antagonize either pentobarbital- or muscimol-stimulated 36Cl- uptake. Pretreatment of rats with Ro15-4513 blocks the anticonflict activity of low doses of ethanol (but not pentobarbital) as well as the behavioral intoxication observed with higher doses of ethanol. The effects of Ro15-4513 in antagonizing ethanol-stimulated 36Cl- uptake and behavior are completely blocked by benzodiazepine receptor antagonists. However, other benzodiazepine receptor inverse agonists fail to antagonize the actions of ethanol in vitro or in vivo, suggesting a novel interaction of Ro15-4513 with the GABA receptor-coupled chloride ion channel complex. The identification of a selective benzodiazepine antagonist of ethanol-stimulated 36Cl- uptake in vitro that blocks the anxiolytic and intoxicating actions of ethanol suggests that many of the neuropharmacologic actions of ethanol may be mediated via central GABA receptors.
We describe here a new view of primary visual cortex (V1) based on measurements of neural responses in V1 to patterns called 'illusory contours' (Fig. 1a, b). Detection of an object's boundary contours is a fundamental visual task. Boundary contours are defined by discontinuities not only in luminance and colour, but also in texture, disparity and motion. Two theoretical approaches can account for illusory contour perception. The cognitive approach emphasizes top-down processes. An alternative emphasizes bottom-up processing. This latter view is supported by (1) stimulus constraints for illusory contour perception and (2) the discovery by von der Heydt and Peterhans of neurons in extrastriate visual area V2 (but not in V1) of macaque monkeys that respond to illusory contours. Using stimuli different from those used previously, we found illusory contour responses in about half the neurons studied in V1 of macaque monkeys. Therefore, there are neurons as early as V1 with the computational power to detect illusory contours and to help distinguish figure from ground.
Quantitative autoradiography of brain glucose metabolism has been combined with digital image processing to represent the brain as a three-dimensional (3-D) reconstruction of brain energy use. Autoradiographs contain enormous amounts of potentially useful data, but conventional analyses, based on tedious manual methods, can sample and analyze only a small portion of this information. Computer 3-D reconstruction provides a mechanism for observing and analyzing all the data; therefore, a system of computer programs was developed for this purpose. The programs use digital imaging methods for image registration, superimpose whole brain data sets, and allow resampling of the 3-D data in arbitrary planes for pixel-by-pixel comparisons among multiple 3-D sets. These programs operate on the mathematical properties of the images alone, obviating the need for manual image alignment. Various statistical analyses can be applied to the data directly to study the patterns of metabolic changes in different experiments. The system is applied to data from experiments on the influence of injectable anesthetics on cerebral glucose metabolism.
Extracellular levels of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate in the nervous system are maintained by transporters that actively remove glutamate from the extracellular space. Homozygous mice deficient in GLT-1, a widely distributed astrocytic glutamate transporter, show lethal spontaneous seizures and increased susceptibility to acute cortical injury. These effects can be attributed to elevated levels of residual glutamate in the brains of these mice.
The purpose of our nervous system is to allow us to successfully interact with our environment. This normative idea is formalized by decision theory that defines which choices would be most beneficial. We live in an uncertain world, and each decision may have many possible outcomes; choosing the best decision is thus complicated. Bayesian decision theory formalizes these problems in the presence of uncertainty and often provides compact models that predict observed behavior. With its elegant formalization of the problems faced by the nervous system, it promises to become a major inspiration for studies in neuroscience.
The relay of information through thalamus to cortex is dynamically gated, as illustrated by the retinogeniculocortical pathway. Important to this is the inhibitory interneuron in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). For the typical neuron, synaptic information arrives through postsynaptic dendrites and is transmitted by axon terminals. However, the typical thalamic interneuron, in addition to conventional axonal outputs, has distal dendrites that serve both pre- and postsynaptic roles. These dendritic terminals participate in curious and enigmatic triadic arrangements, in which each contacts a relay cell dendrite and is contacted by a glutamatergic retinal terminal that innervates the same relay cell dendrite. Here we show that agonists of the metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) activate dendritic terminals of interneurons in the absence of action potentials, thereby inhibiting the postsynaptic relay neuron. Somatic recordings from LGN interneurons reveal that there is no response to mGluR agonists, suggesting that their dendritic terminals are electrically isolated from their somata and axons, consistent with anatomical modelling of these cells. Our results offer insight into the functioning of triadic circuitry and indicate that thalamic interneurons can perform independent computations expressed through axonal as opposed to dendritic outputs.
A decision is a commitment to a proposition or plan of action based on evidence and the expected costs and benefits associated with the outcome. Progress in a variety of fields has led to a quantitative understanding of the mechanisms that evaluate evidence and reach a decision. Several formalisms propose that a representation of noisy evidence is evaluated against a criterion to produce a decision. Without additional evidence, however, these formalisms fail to explain why a decision-maker would change their mind. Here we extend a model, developed to account for both the timing and the accuracy of the initial decision, to explain subsequent changes of mind. Subjects made decisions about a noisy visual stimulus, which they indicated by moving a handle. Although they received no additional information after initiating their movement, their hand trajectories betrayed a change of mind in some trials. We propose that noisy evidence is accumulated over time until it reaches a criterion level, or bound, which determines the initial decision, and that the brain exploits information that is in the processing pipeline when the initial decision is made to subsequently either reverse or reaffirm the initial decision. The model explains both the frequency of changes of mind as well as their dependence on both task difficulty and whether the initial decision was accurate or erroneous. The theoretical and experimental findings advance the understanding of decision-making to the highly flexible and cognitive acts of vacillation and self-correction.
Chaperone-mediated autophagy controls the degradation of selective cytosolic proteins and may protect neurons against degeneration. In a neuronal cell line, we found that chaperone-mediated autophagy regulated the activity of myocyte enhancer factor 2D (MEF2D), a transcription factor required for neuronal survival. MEF2D was observed to continuously shuttle to the cytoplasm, interact with the chaperone Hsc70, and undergo degradation. Inhibition of chaperone-mediated autophagy caused accumulation of inactive MEF2D in the cytoplasm. MEF2D levels were increased in the brains of alpha-synuclein transgenic mice and patients with Parkinson's disease. Wild-type alpha-synuclein and a Parkinson's disease-associated mutant disrupted the MEF2D-Hsc70 binding and led to neuronal death. Thus, chaperone-mediated autophagy modulates the neuronal survival machinery, and dysregulation of this pathway is associated with Parkinson's disease.
Animals from flies to humans are able to distinguish subtle gradations in temperature and show strong temperature preferences. Animals move to environments of optimal temperature and some manipulate the temperature of their surroundings, as humans do using clothing and shelter. Despite the ubiquitous influence of environmental temperature on animal behaviour, the neural circuits and strategies through which animals select a preferred temperature remain largely unknown. Here we identify a small set of warmth-activated anterior cell (AC) neurons located in the Drosophila brain, the function of which is critical for preferred temperature selection. AC neuron activation occurs just above the fly's preferred temperature and depends on dTrpA1, an ion channel that functions as a molecular sensor of warmth. Flies that selectively express dTrpA1 in the AC neurons select normal temperatures, whereas flies in which dTrpA1 function is reduced or eliminated choose warmer temperatures. This internal warmth-sensing pathway promotes avoidance of slightly elevated temperatures and acts together with a distinct pathway for cold avoidance to set the fly's preferred temperature. Thus, flies select a preferred temperature by using a thermal sensing pathway tuned to trigger avoidance of temperatures that deviate even slightly from the preferred temperature. This provides a potentially general strategy for robustly selecting a narrow temperature range optimal for survival.
The development of the human cerebral cortex is an orchestrated process involving the generation of neural progenitors in the periventricular germinal zones, cell proliferation characterized by symmetric and asymmetric mitoses, followed by migration of post-mitotic neurons to their final destinations in six highly ordered, functionally specialized layers. An understanding of the molecular mechanisms guiding these intricate processes is in its infancy, substantially driven by the discovery of rare mutations that cause malformations of cortical development. Mapping of disease loci in putative Mendelian forms of malformations of cortical development has been hindered by marked locus heterogeneity, small kindred sizes and diagnostic classifications that may not reflect molecular pathogenesis. Here we demonstrate the use of whole-exome sequencing to overcome these obstacles by identifying recessive mutations in WD repeat domain 62 (WDR62) as the cause of a wide spectrum of severe cerebral cortical malformations including microcephaly, pachygyria with cortical thickening as well as hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. Some patients with mutations in WDR62 had evidence of additional abnormalities including lissencephaly, schizencephaly, polymicrogyria and, in one instance, cerebellar hypoplasia, all traits traditionally regarded as distinct entities. In mice and humans, WDR62 transcripts and protein are enriched in neural progenitors within the ventricular and subventricular zones. Expression of WDR62 in the neocortex is transient, spanning the period of embryonic neurogenesis. Unlike other known microcephaly genes, WDR62 does not apparently associate with centrosomes and is predominantly nuclear in localization. These findings unify previously disparate aspects of cerebral cortical development and highlight the use of whole-exome sequencing to identify disease loci in settings in which traditional methods have proved challenging.
A single injection of 5 or 10 microliters of ferrous or ferric chloride into rat or cat sensorimotor cortex resulted in chronic recurrent focal paroxysmal electroencephalographic discharges as well as behavioral convulsions and electrical seizures. Recurrent focal epileptiform discharge caused by cortical injection of iron salts suggests that the development of human posttraumatic epilepsy may depend, in part, on the neurochemical alterations induced by the principal metallic ions found in whole blood.
Intracranial self-stimulation was elicited by electrodes located in the trigeminal motor nucleus of the rat. Rebound jaw movements were also elicited at postiive self-stimulation placements, but control experiments revealed that the lever pressing was not a motor artifact. It is suggested the modulation of trigeminal motoneurons may serve as an important reinforcement mechanism in the brainstem.
The arrest of dorsal root axonal regeneration at the transitional zone between the peripheral and central nervous system has been repeatedly described since the early twentieth century. Here we show that, with trophic support to damaged sensory axons, this regenerative barrier is surmountable. In adult rats with injured dorsal roots, treatment with nerve growth factor (NGF), neurotrophin-3 (NT3) and glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), but not brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), resulted in selective regrowth of damaged axons across the dorsal root entry zone and into the spinal cord. Dorsal horn neurons were found to be synaptically driven by peripheral nerve stimulation in rats treated with NGF, NT3 and GDNF, demonstrating functional reconnection. In behavioural studies, rats treated with NGF and GDNF recovered sensitivity to noxious heat and pressure. The observed effects of neurotrophic factors corresponded to their known actions on distinct subpopulations of sensory neurons. Neurotrophic factor treatment may thus serve as a viable treatment in promoting recovery from root avulsion injuries. I
Fibroblasts were genetically modified to secrete nerve growth factor (NGF) by infection with a retroviral vector and then implanted into the brains of rats that had surgical lesions of the fimbria-fornix. The grafted cells survived and produced sufficient NGF to prevent the degeneration of cholinergic neurons that would die without treatment. In addition, the protected cholinergic cells sprouted axons that projected in the direction of the cellular source of NGF. These results indicate that a combination of gene transfer and intracerebral grafting may provide an effective treatment for some disorders of the central nervous system.
Pre-eclampsia is a principal cause of maternal morbidity and mortality, affecting 5-10% of first pregnancies worldwide. Manifestations include increased blood pressure, proteinuria, coagulopathy and peripheral and cerebral oedema. Although the aetiology and pathogenesis remain to be elucidated, the placenta is undoubtedly involved, as termination of pregnancy eradicates the disease. Here we have cloned a complementary DNA from human placental messenger RNA encoding a precursor protein of 121 amino acids which gives rise to a mature peptide identical to the neuropeptide neurokinin B (NKB) of other mammalian species. In female rats, concentrations of NKB several-fold above that of an animal 20 days into pregnancy caused substantial pressor activity. In human pregnancy, the expression of NKB was confined to the outer syncytiotrophoblast of the placenta, significant concentrations of NKB could be detected in plasma as early as week 9, and plasma concentrations of NKB were grossly elevated in pregnancy-induced hypertension and pre-eclampsia. We conclude that elevated levels of NKB in early pregnancy may be an indicator of hypertension and pre-eclampsia, and that treatment with certain neurokinin receptor antagonists may be useful in alleviating the symptoms.
Systemic gamma-aminobutyric acid produces a rapid, sustained, but transiently reversible blockade of evoked axodendritic excitatory postsynaptic potentials in neonatal cortex when the "barrier" operating to restrict its passage has been altered by various experimental procedures. The data obtained under these conditions indicate the existence of well-developed synaptic pathways in the superficial neuropil of immature cortex.
Intracellular recordings from pairs of neurons in slices of rat hippocampus directly demonstrated electronic coupling between CA3 pyramidal cells. When two neurons were impaled simultaneously (as verified by subsequent double staining with horseradish peroxidase), current pulses injected into one cell caused voltage changes in other cells. These interactions were bidirectional. Fast prepotentials, historically thought to represent spike activity in dendrites, resulted from action potentials in other electronically coupled pyramidal cells. These data directly demonstrate electrotonic coupling between neurons in the mammalian brain and indicate that some fast prepotentials are coupling potentials. Coupling between pyramidal cells could mediate synchronization of normal rhythmic activity and of burst discharges during seizures.
Human sleep is a global state whose functions remain unclear. During much of sleep, cortical neurons undergo slow oscillations in membrane potential, which appear in electroencephalograms as slow wave activity (SWA) of <4 Hz. The amount of SWA is homeostatically regulated, increasing after wakefulness and returning to baseline during sleep. It has been suggested that SWA homeostasis may reflect synaptic changes underlying a cellular need for sleep. If this were so, inducing local synaptic changes should induce local SWA changes, and these should benefit neural function. Here we show that sleep homeostasis indeed has a local component, which can be triggered by a learning task involving specific brain regions. Furthermore, we show that the local increase in SWA after learning correlates with improved performance of the task after sleep. Thus, sleep homeostasis can be induced on a local level and can benefit performance.
Accumulation of the prion protein PrPSc, a pathological and protease-resistant isoform of the normal host protein PrPC, is a feature of prion disease such as scrapie. It is still unknown whether scrapie pathology comes about by neurotoxicity of PrPSc, acute depletion of PrPC, or some other mechanism. Here we investigate this question by grafting neural tissue overexpressing PrPC into the brain of PrP-deficient mice which are scrapie-resistant and do not propagate infectivity. After intracerebral inoculation with scrapie prions, the grafts accumulated high levels of PrPSc and infectivity and developed the severe histopathological changes characteristic of scrapie. Moreover, substantial amounts of graft-derived PrPSc migrated into the host brain. Even 16 months after inoculation no pathological changes were seen in PrP-deficient tissue, not even in the immediate vicinity of the grafts. Therefore, in addition to being resistant to scrapie infection, brain tissue devoid of PrPC is not damaged by exogenous PrPSc.
Three-dimensional (3D) movement of neuroprosthetic devices can be controlled by the activity of cortical neurons when appropriate algorithms are used to decode intended movement in real time. Previous studies assumed that neurons maintain fixed tuning properties, and the studies used subjects who were unaware of the movements predicted by their recorded units. In this study, subjects had real-time visual feedback of their brain-controlled trajectories. Cell tuning properties changed when used for brain-controlled movements. By using control algorithms that track these changes, subjects made long sequences of 3D movements using far fewer cortical units than expected. Daily practice improved movement accuracy and the directional tuning of these units.
The mammalian sensory neocortex exhibits experience-dependent plasticity such that neurons modify their response properties according to changes in sensory experience. The synaptic plasticity mechanism of long-term potentiation requiring calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase type II (CaMKII) could underlie experience-dependent plasticity. Plasticity in adult mice can be induced by changes in the patterns of tactile input to the barrel cortex. This response is strongly depressed in adult mice that lack the gene encoding alpha-CaMKII, although adolescent animals are unaffected. Thus, alpha-CaMKII is necessary either for the induction or for the expression of plasticity in adult mice.
Gain-of-function mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause familial as well as sporadic Parkinson's disease characterized by age-dependent degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. The molecular mechanism of LRRK2 action is not known. Here we show that LRRK2 interacts with the microRNA (miRNA) pathway to regulate protein synthesis. Drosophila e2f1 and dp messenger RNAs are translationally repressed by let-7 and miR-184*, respectively. Pathogenic LRRK2 antagonizes these miRNAs, leading to the overproduction of E2F1/DP, previously implicated in cell cycle and survival control and shown here to be critical for LRRK2 pathogenesis. Genetic deletion of let-7, antagomir-mediated blockage of let-7 and miR-184* action, transgenic expression of dp target protector, or replacement of endogenous dp with a dp transgene non-responsive to let-7 each had toxic effects similar to those of pathogenic LRRK2. Conversely, increasing the level of let-7 or miR-184* attenuated pathogenic LRRK2 effects. LRRK2 associated with Drosophila Argonaute-1 (dAgo1) or human Argonaute-2 (hAgo2) of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). In aged fly brain, dAgo1 protein level was negatively regulated by LRRK2. Further, pathogenic LRRK2 promoted the association of phospho-4E-BP1 with hAgo2. Our results implicate deregulated synthesis of E2F1/DP caused by the miRNA pathway impairment as a key event in LRRK2 pathogenesis and suggest novel miRNA-based therapeutic strategies.
In the adult brain, neuroblasts born in the subventricular zone migrate from the walls of the lateral ventricles to the olfactory bulb. How do these cells orient over such a long distance and through complex territories? Here we show that neuroblast migration parallels cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow. Beating of ependymal cilia is required for normal CSF flow, concentration gradient formation of CSF guidance molecules, and directional migration of neuroblasts. Results suggest that polarized epithelial cells contribute important vectorial information for guidance of young, migrating neurons.
After eating, the human brain senses a biochemical change and then signals satiation, but precisely when this occurs is unknown. Even for well-established physiological systems like glucose-insulin regulation, the timing of interaction between hormonal processes and neural events is inferred mostly from blood sampling. Recently, neuroimaging studies have provided in vivo information about the neuroanatomical correlates of the regulation of energy intake. Temporal orchestration of such systems, however, is crucial to the integration of neuronal and hormonal signals that control eating behaviour. The challenge of this functional magnetic resonance imaging study is to map not only where but also when the brain will respond after food ingestion. Here we use a temporal clustering analysis technique to demonstrate that eating-related neural activity peaks at two different times with distinct localization. Importantly, the differentiated responses are interacting with an internal signal, the plasma insulin. These results support the concept of temporal parcellation of brain activity, which reflects the different natures of stimuli and responses. Moreover, this study provides a neuroimaging basis for detecting dynamic processes without prior knowledge of their timing, such as the acute effects of medication and nutrition in the brain.
Adaptive goal-directed behavior involves monitoring of ongoing actions and performance outcomes, and subsequent adjustments of behavior and learning. We evaluate new findings in cognitive neuroscience concerning cortical interactions that subserve the recruitment and implementation of such cognitive control. A review of primate and human studies, along with a meta-analysis of the human functional neuroimaging literature, suggest that the detection of unfavorable outcomes, response errors, response conflict, and decision uncertainty elicits largely overlapping clusters of activation foci in an extensive part of the posterior medial frontal cortex (pMFC). A direct link is delineated between activity in this area and subsequent adjustments in performance. Emerging evidence points to functional interactions between the pMFC and the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC), so that monitoring-related pMFC activity serves as a signal that engages regulatory processes in the LPFC to implement performance adjustments.
Clonidine, an antihypertensive drug, binds to alpha 2-adrenergic and imidazoline receptors. The endogenous ligand for imidazoline receptors may be a clonidine-displacing substance, a small molecule isolated from bovine brain. This clonidine-displacing substance was purified and determined by mass spectroscopy to be agmatine (decarboxylated arginine), heretofore not detected in brain. Agmatine binds to alpha 2-adrenergic and imidazoline receptors and stimulates release of catecholamines from adrenal chromaffin cells. Its biosynthetic enzyme, arginine decarboxylase, is present in brain. Agmatine, locally synthesized, is an endogenous agonist at imidazoline receptors, a noncatecholamine ligand at alpha 2-adrenergic receptors and may act as a neurotransmitter.
In the cerebral cortex, local circuits consist of tens of thousands of neurons, each of which makes thousands of synaptic connections. Perhaps the biggest impediment to understanding these networks is that we have no wiring diagrams of their interconnections. Even if we had a partial or complete wiring diagram, however, understanding the network would also require information about each neuron's function. Here we show that the relationship between structure and function can be studied in the cortex with a combination of in vivo physiology and network anatomy. We used two-photon calcium imaging to characterize a functional property--the preferred stimulus orientation--of a group of neurons in the mouse primary visual cortex. Large-scale electron microscopy of serial thin sections was then used to trace a portion of these neurons' local network. Consistent with a prediction from recent physiological experiments, inhibitory interneurons received convergent anatomical input from nearby excitatory neurons with a broad range of preferred orientations, although weak biases could not be rejected.
Most striatal and cortical interneurons arise from the basal telencephalon, later segregating to their respective targets. Here, we show that migrating cortical interneurons avoid entering the striatum because of a chemorepulsive signal composed at least in part of semaphorin 3A and semaphorin 3F. Migrating interneurons expressing neuropilins, receptors for semaphorins, are directed to the cortex; those lacking them go to the striatum. Loss of neuropilin function increases the number of interneurons that migrate into the striatum. These observations reveal a mechanism by which neuropilins mediate sorting of distinct neuronal populations into different brain structures, and provide evidence that, in addition to guiding axons, these receptors also control neuronal migration in the central nervous system.
The mechanism by which psychostimulants act as calming agents in humans with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or hyperkinetic disorder is currently unknown. Mice lacking the gene encoding the plasma membrane dopamine transporter (DAT) have elevated dopaminergic tone and are hyperactive. This activity was exacerbated by exposure to a novel environment. Additionally, these mice were impaired in spatial cognitive function, and they showed a decrease in locomotion in response to psychostimulants. This paradoxical calming effect of psychostimulants depended on serotonergic neurotransmission. The parallels between the DAT knockout mice and individuals with ADHD suggest that common mechanisms may underlie some of their behaviors and responses to psychostimulants.
Attention modulates our subjective perception of time. The less we attend to an event's duration, the shorter it seems to last. Attention to time or color stimulus attributes was modulated parametrically in an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Linear increases in task performance were accompanied by corresponding increases in brain activity. Increasing attention to time selectively increased activity in a corticostriatal network, including pre-supplementary motor area and right frontal operculum. Increasing attention to color selectively increased activity in area V4. By identifying areas whose activity was specifically modulated by attention to time, we have defined the core neuroanatomical substrates of timing behavior.
A hallmark of mammalian brain evolution is the disproportionate increase in neocortical size as compared with subcortical structures. Because primary visual cortex (V1) is the most thoroughly understood cortical region, the visual system provides an excellent model in which to investigate the evolutionary expansion of neocortex. I have compared the numbers of neurons in the visual thalamus (lateral geniculate nucleus; LGN) and area V1 across primate species. Here I find that the number of V1 neurons increases as the 3/2 power of the number of LGN neurons. As a consequence of this scaling law, the human, for example, uses four times as many V1 neurons per LGN neuron (356) to process visual information as does a tarsier (87). I argue that the 3/2 power relationship is a natural consequence of the organization of V1, together with the requirement that spatial resolution in V1 should parallel the maximum resolution provided by the LGN. The additional observation that thalamus/neocortex follows the same evolutionary scaling law as LGN/V1 may suggest that neocortex generally conforms to the same organizational principle as V1.
Senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type can be diagnosed with certainty only by examining neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques under the microscope. Recently, it has been suggested that the condition is linked to specific neurotransmitter systems, with a decline of cortical acetylcholine, choline acetyltransferase, cholinergic neurones projecting to the cortex, cortical noradrenaline content, locus coeruleus neurones and cortical somatostatic content. Using immunocytochemical methods, we here report that somatostatin-immunoreactive processes are present in neuritic plaques in human Alzheimer's specimens. These data, as well as other reports of non-cholinergic changes, strongly imply that Alzheimer's disease cannot be linked exclusively to cortical cholinergic elements, as proposed previously. Rather, our data on plaque and somatostatin co-localization and distribution patterns suggest that Alzheimer's neuropathology may involve primarily the loss of selective cortical neurones that are targets of the implicated transmitter systems and that plaque formation may result from the degeneration of presynaptic and postsynaptic neurites of large projection neurones in layers III and V. Given the neurochemically heterogeneous input to these cells, it is not surprising that several neurotransmitter systems, one of which is somatostatin, are implicated in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease.
How a cell chooses to proliferate or to differentiate is an important issue in stem cell and cancer biology. Drosophila neuroblasts undergo self-renewal with every cell division, producing another neuroblast and a differentiating daughter cell, but the mechanisms controlling the self-renewal/differentiation decision are poorly understood. Here we tested whether cell polarity genes, known to regulate embryonic neuroblast asymmetric cell division, also regulate neuroblast self-renewal. Clonal analysis in larval brains showed that pins mutant neuroblasts rapidly fail to self-renew, whereas lethal giant larvae (lgl) mutant neuroblasts generate multiple neuroblasts. Notably, lgl pins double mutant neuroblasts all divide symmetrically to self-renew, filling the brain with neuroblasts at the expense of neurons. The lgl pins neuroblasts show ectopic cortical localization of atypical protein kinase C (aPKC), and a decrease in aPKC expression reduces neuroblast numbers, suggesting that aPKC promotes neuroblast self-renewal. In support of this hypothesis, neuroblast-specific overexpression of membrane-targeted aPKC, but not a kinase-dead version, induces ectopic neuroblast self-renewal. We conclude that cortical aPKC kinase activity is a potent inducer of neuroblast self-renewal.
The activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) leads to long-term depression (mGluR-LTD) at many synapses of the brain. The induction of mGluR-LTD is well characterized, whereas the mechanisms underlying its expression remain largely elusive. mGluR-LTD in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) efficiently reverses cocaine-induced strengthening of excitatory inputs onto dopamine neurons. We show that mGluR-LTD is expressed by an exchange of GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors for GluR2-containing receptors with a lower single-channel conductance. The synaptic insertion of GluR2 depends on de novo protein synthesis via rapid messenger RNA translation of GluR2. Regulated synthesis of GluR2 in the VTA is therefore required to reverse cocaine-induced synaptic plasticity.
Aggregating cultures of mechanically dissociated fetal brain cells provide an excellent system for neurobiological studies of cellular growth and differentiation, but, in common with almost all culture systems, they have the disadvantage that crude serum is required in the medium. Although several cell lines have either been adapted to serum-free conditions or grown normally in serum-free media supplemented with hormones, trace elements and defined serum components, this approach has never been applied to differentiating primary cells of the central nervous system. We now describe the successful cultivation of aggregating fetal rat brain cells in a chemically defined, serum-free medium.
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) enzymes are critical regulators of prostaglandin and leukotriene synthesis and can directly modify the composition of cellular membranes. PLA2 enzymes release fatty acids and lysophospholipids, including the precursor of platelet-activating factor, PAF, from phospholipids. Free fatty acids, eicosanoids, lysophospholipids and PAF are potent regulators of inflammation, reproduction and neurotoxicity. The physiological roles of the various forms of PLA2 are not well defined. The cytosolic form, cPLA2, preferentially releases arachidonic acid from phospholipids and is regulated by changes in intracellular calcium concentration. We have now created 'knockout' (cPLA2-/-) mice that lack this enzyme, in order to evaluate its physiological importance. We find that cPLA2-/- mice develop normally, but that the females produce only small litters in which the pups are usually dead. Stimulated peritoneal macrophages from cPLA2-/- animals did not produce prostaglandin E2 or leukotriene B4 or C4. After transient middle cerebral artery occlusion, cPLA2-/- mice had smaller infarcts and developed less brain oedema and fewer neurological deficits. Thus cPLA2 is important for macrophage production of inflammatory mediators, fertility, and in the pathophysiology of neuronal death after transient focal cerebral ischaemia.
Synaptotagmins (Syts) are brain-specific Ca2+/phospholipid-binding proteins. In hippocampal synapses, Syt I is essential for fast Ca(2+)-dependent synaptic vesicle exocytosis but not for Ca(2+)-independent exocytosis. In vertebrates and invertebrates, Syt may therefore participate in Ca(2+)-dependent synaptic membrane fusion, either by serving as the Ca2+ sensor in the last step of fast Ca(2+)-triggered neurotransmitter release, or by collaborating with an additional Ca2+ sensor. While Syt I binds Ca2+ (refs 10, 11), its phospholipid binding is triggered at lower calcium concentrations (EC50 = 3-6 microM) than those required for exocytosis. Furthermore, Syts bind clathrin-AP2 with high affinity, indicating that they may play a general role in endocytosis rather than being confined to a specialized function in regulated exocytosis. Here we resolve this apparent contradiction by describing four Syts, three of which (Syt VI, VII and VIII) are widely expressed in non-neural tissues. All Syts tested share a common domain structure, with a cytoplasmic region composed of two C2 domains that interacts with clathrin-AP2 (Kd = 0.1-1.0 nM) and with neural and non-neural syntaxins. The first C2 domains of Syt I, II, III, V and VII, but not of IV, VI or VIII, bind phospholipids with a similar Ca(2+)-concentration dependence (EC50 = 3-6 microM). The same C2 domains also bind syntaxin as a function of Ca2+ but the Ca(2+)-concentration dependence of Syt I, II and V (> 200 microM) differs from that of Syt III and VII (< 10 microM).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Speaking and singing present the auditory system of the caller with two fundamental problems: discriminating between self-generated and external auditory signals and preventing desensitization. In humans and many other vertebrates, auditory neurons in the brain are inhibited during vocalization but little is known about the nature of the inhibition. Here we show, using intracellular recordings of auditory neurons in the singing cricket, that presynaptic inhibition of auditory afferents and postsynaptic inhibition of an identified auditory interneuron occur in phase with the song pattern. Presynaptic and postsynaptic inhibition persist in a fictively singing, isolated cricket central nervous system and are therefore the result of a corollary discharge from the singing motor network. Mimicking inhibition in the interneuron by injecting hyperpolarizing current suppresses its spiking response to a 100-dB sound pressure level (SPL) acoustic stimulus and maintains its response to subsequent, quieter stimuli. Inhibition by the corollary discharge reduces the neural response to self-generated sound and protects the cricket's auditory pathway from self-induced desensitization.
Injections of D-lysergic acid diethylamide decrease the turnover rate of 5-hydroxytryptamine of rat brain, as measured from the conversion of (14)C-tryptophan into (14)C-5-hydroxytryptamine. The 2-bromolysergic acid diethylamide given in doses fivefold greater than those of lysergic acid diethylamide fails to change the rate of (14)C-tryptophan conversion into (14)C-5-hydroxytryptamine. The effect of D-lysergic acid diethylamide is discussed with regard to its action on brain serotonergic neurons and its psychotomimetic effects.
We propose that the function of dream sleep (more properly rapid-eye movement or REM sleep) is to remove certain undesirable modes of interaction in networks of cells in the cerebral cortex. We postulate that this is done in REM sleep by a reverse learning mechanism (see also p. 158), so that the trace in the brain of the unconscious dream is weakened, rather than strengthened, by the dream.
The movement disorder tardive dyskinesia is a serious side effect of the long-term treatment of schizophrenia with neuroleptic drugs. Similar symptoms to those of tardive dyskinesia have been observed in Cebus apella monkeys following long-term treatment with neuroleptic drugs, and these monkeys may therefore be a useful animal model of tardive dyskinesia. Motor defects have persisted in these dyskinetic monkeys for periods of 1-6 yr after the cessation of neuroleptic treatment. We report here that in three regions of the brains of dyskinetic monkeys (substantia nigra, medial globus pallidus and subthalamic nucleus) glutamate decarboxylase activities and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) levels are reduced relative to control monkeys that had been treated with neuroleptics but which showed none of the symptoms of tardive dyskinesia. These results suggest that alterations in the GABA neurone system are involved in neuroleptic drug-induced tardive dyskinesia.
The brain is generally considered immunoprivileged, although increasing examples of immunological responses to brain antigens, neuronal expression of major histocompatibility class I genes, and neurological autoimmunity have been recognized. An adeno-associated virus (AAV) vaccine generated autoantibodies that targeted a specific brain protein, the NR1 subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. After peroral administration of the AAV vaccine, transgene expression persisted for at least 5 months and was associated with a robust humoral response in the absence of a significant cell-mediated response. This single-dose vaccine was associated with strong anti-epileptic and neuroprotective activity in rats for both a kainate-induced seizure model and also a middle cerebral artery occlusion stroke model at 1 to 5 months following vaccination. Thus, a vaccination strategy targeting brain proteins is feasible and may have therapeutic potential for neurological disorders.
Changes in turnover of cerebral norepinephrine, as measured after intracisternal administration of the H(3) amine, have been studied in rats during selective paradoxical sleep deprivation and its following rebound. Experiments were performed under neurophysiological control. A marked increase of turnover of norepinephrine is associated with the augmentation of paradoxical sleep characteristic of the rebound period.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of progressive intellectual failure in aged humans. AD brains contain numerous amyloid plaques surrounded by dystrophic neurites, and show profound synaptic loss, neurofibrillary tangle formation and gliosis. The amyloid plaques are composed of amyloid beta-peptide (A beta), a 40-42-amino-acid fragment of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP). A primary pathogenic role for APP/A beta is suggested by missense mutations in APP that are tightly linked to autosomal dominant forms of AD. A major obstacle to elucidating and treating AD has been the lack of an animal model. Animals transgenic for APP have previously failed to show extensive AD-type neuropathology, but we now report the production of transgenic mice that express high levels of human mutant APP (with valine at residue 717 substituted by phenylalanine) and which progressively develop many of the pathological hallmarks of AD, including numerous extracellular thioflavin S-positive A beta deposits, neuritic plaques, synaptic loss, astrocytosis and microgliosis. These mice support a primary role for APP/A beta in the genesis of AD and could provide a preclinical model for testing therapeutic drugs.
Peroxidase-containing cell bodies were found in the ipsilateral trigeminal ganglia after horseradish peroxidase was applied to the proximal segment of the middle cerebral artery in seven cats. Cell bodies containing the enzyme marker were located among clusters of cells that project via the first division. The existence of sensory pathways surrounding large cerebral arteries provides an important neuroanatomical explanation for the hemicranial distribution of headaches associated with certain strokes and migraine.
Cerebrospinal fluid levels of dopamine beta-hydroxylase, found to be relatively constant over time in individual patients, were significantly lower in schizophrenic patients who became nonpsychotic during neuroleptic treatment than in those who remained psychotic. Dopamine beta-hydroxylase activity may delineate a subgroup of patients who have a dopamine-sensitive brain disorder.
To analyze the rules that govern communication between eye and brain, visual responses were recorded from an intact salamander retina. Parallel observation of many retinal ganglion cells with a microelectrode array showed that nearby neurons often fired synchronously, with spike delays of less than 10 milliseconds. The frequency of such synchronous spikes exceeded the correlation expected from a shared visual stimulus up to 20-fold. Synchronous firing persisted under a variety of visual stimuli and accounted for the majority of action potentials recorded. Analysis of receptive fields showed that concerted spikes encoded information not carried by individual cells; they may represent symbols in a multineuronal code for vision.
Noradrenergic locus coeruleus (LC) neurons were recorded in monkeys performing a visual discrimination task, and a computational model was developed addressing the role of the LC brain system in cognitive performance. Changes in spontaneous and stimulus-induced patterns of LC activity correlated closely with fluctuations in behavioral performance. The model explains these fluctuations in terms of changes in electrotonic coupling among LC neurons and predicts improved performance during epochs of high coupling and synchronized LC firing. Cross correlations of simultaneously recorded LC neurons confirmed this prediction, indicating that electrotonic coupling in LC may play an important role in attentional modulation and the regulation of goal-directed versus exploratory behaviors.
Intelligent behaviour requires self-control based on the consequences of actions. The countermanding task is designed to study self-control; it requires subjects to withhold planned movements in response to an imperative stop signal, which they can do with varying success. In humans, the medial frontal cortex has been implicated in the supervisory control of action. In monkeys, the supplementary eye field in the dorsomedial frontal cortex is involved in producing eye movements, but its precise function has not been clarified. To investigate the role of the supplementary eye field in the control of eye movements, we recorded neural activity in macaque monkeys trained to perform an eye movement countermanding task. Distinct groups of neurons were active after errors, after successful withholding of a partially prepared movement, or in association with reinforcement. These three forms of activation could not be explained by sensory or motor factors. Our results lead us to put forward the hypothesis that the supplementary eye field contributes to monitoring the context and consequences of eye movements.
The mechanism of transformation of the overtly similar cells of the neural plate into the numerous and diverse cell types of the mature vertebrate central nervous system (CNS) can better be understood by studying the clonal development of isolated CNS precursor cells. Here I describe a culture system in which blast cells (cells capable of division) isolated from embryonic day 13.5-14.5 rat forebrain can divide and differentiate into a variety of clonal types. Most clones contain only neurons or glia; 22% contain both neurons and non-neuronal cells. For the division of blast cells, live conditioning cells need to be present indicating that environmental signals influence proliferation. Heterogeneous clones develop in homogeneous culture conditions, so factors intrinsic to the blast cells are probably important in determining the number and type of clonal progeny.
To understand conscious vision, scientists must elucidate how the brain selects specific visual signals for awareness. When different monocular patterns are presented to the two eyes, they rival for conscious expression such that only one monocular image is perceived at a time. Controversy surrounds whether this binocular rivalry reflects neural competition among pattern representations or monocular channels. Here we show that rivalry arises from interocular competition, using functional magnetic resonance imaging of activity in a monocular region of primary visual cortex corresponding to the blind spot. This cortical region greatly prefers stimulation of the ipsilateral eye to that of the blind-spot eye. Subjects reported their dominant percept while viewing rivalrous orthogonal gratings in the visual location corresponding to the blind spot and its surround. As predicted by interocular rivalry, the monocular blind-spot representation was activated when the ipsilateral grating became perceptually dominant and suppressed when the blind-spot grating became dominant. These responses were as large as those observed during actual alternations between the gratings, indicating that rivalry may be fully resolved in monocular visual cortex. Our findings provide the first physiological evidence, to our knowledge, that interocular competition mediates binocular rivalry, and indicate that V1 may be important in the selection and expression of conscious visual information.
Growth cones are specialized structures that form the distal tips of growing axons. During both normal development of the nervous system and regeneration of injured nerves, growth cones are essential for elongation and guidance of growing axons. Developmental and regenerative axon growth is frequently accompanied by elevated synthesis of a protein designated GAP-43. GAP-43 has now been found to be a major component of growth-cone membranes in developing rat brains. Relative to total protein, GAP-43 is approximately 12 times as abundant in growth-cone membranes as in synaptic membranes from adult brains. Immunohistochemical localization of GAP-43 in frozen sections of developing brain indicates that the protein is specifically associated with neuropil areas containing growth cones and immature synaptic terminals. The results support the proposal that GAP-43 plays a role in axon growth.
More than 30 years after Hubel and Wiesel first described orientation selectivity in the mammalian visual cortex, the mechanism that gives rise to this property is still controversial. Hubel and Wiesel proposed a simple model for the origin of orientation tuning, in which the circularly symmetrical receptive fields of neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus that excite a cortical simple cell are arranged in rows. Since this model was proposed, several experiments and neuronal simulations have suggested that the connectivity between the lateral geniculate nucleus and the cortex is not well organized in an orientation-specific fashion, and that orientation tuning arises instead from extensive interactions within the cortex. To test these models we have recorded visually evoked synaptic potentials in simple cells while cooling the cortex, which largely inactivates the cortical network, but leaves geniculate synaptic input functional. We report that the orientation tuning of these potentials is almost unaffected by cooling the cortex, in agreement with Hubel and Wiesel's original proposal.
Prolonged exposure of one eye to a diagonal line grating produces masking or decreased sensitivity for similar test gratings presented to the contralateral eye. These aftereffects are orientationally selective and suggest that narrow orientationally tuned channels found by electrophysiological methods in the visual cortex of the cat and the monkey may have neural correlates in the human brain.
Neurotrophins play important roles in neuronal survival during vertebrate development. Neurotrophin-4 (NT4), alone or in combination with brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), has been suggested to be necessary for the survival of peripheral sensory neurons and central nervous system (CNS) neurons, including motor neurons. To define the role of NT4 in vivo, we generated mice lacking NT4 by gene targeting. NT4-deficient mice were viable but exhibited a loss of sensory neurons in the nodose-petrosal and geniculate ganglia. In contrast, motor neurons of the facial nucleus and sympathetic neurons of the superior cervical ganglion were unaffected, and there was no obvious loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. In mice lacking both NT4 and BDNF, facial neurons remained unaffected, whereas the loss of sensory neurons was more severe than with either mutation alone. Thus NT4 is required during development for the survival of some peripheral sensory neurons but not sympathetic or motor neurons.
Long-term potentiation of chemical synapses is closely related to memory and learning. Studies of this process have concentrated on chemically mediated excitatory synapses. By contrast, activity-dependent modification of gap junctions, which also widely exist in higher structures such as hippocampus and neocortex, has not been described. Here we report that at mixed synapses between sensory afferents and an identified reticulospinal neuron, the electrotonic coupling potential can be potentiated, as well as the chemically mediated excitatory postsynaptic potential, for a prolonged time period using a stimulation paradigm like that which produces long-term potentiation in hippocampus. The effect on coupling is due to an increase in gap-junctional conductance. Our data indicate that the potentiation of both synaptic components requires an increase in intracellular calcium, involves activation of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors, and is specific to the tetanized pathway.
The neurohypophysial hormone vasopressin exerts antidiuretic, vasopressor and behavioural effects (for example, facilitation of memory processes). Vasopressin may alter animal behaviour via direct effect on brain processes. Recently, however, it has been suggested that vasopressin acts mainly at peripheral receptor systems and influences behavioural mechanisms by altering visceral afferent signals. We now present data showing that (1) central administration of [Arg8]vasopressin (AVP) and more potently [pGlu, Cyt]AVP(4-8), the desglycinamide derivative of a peptide generated from AVP by brain synaptic membranes, produce the behavioural effect (promotion of passive avoidance behaviour) without the pressor effect; (2) central administration of a vasopressor antagonist blocks the behavioural but not the pressor effect of systemically administered AVP; and (3) [pGlu, Cyt]AVP(4-8) induces the behavioural effect in the absence of the pressor effect. The results indicate that AVP and related peptides affect passive avoidance behaviour by a direct central action and that the structural requirement for activation of central vasopressin receptors differs from that of the peripheral cardiovascular receptors, although both can be blocked by the same vasopressor antagonist.
Norepinephrine, briefly superfused during high-frequency stimulation of the mossy fibers in the rat hippocampal slice in vitro, produced a reversible increase in the magnitude, duration, and probability of induction of long-term synaptic potentiation in the CA3 subfield. Similar results were obtained with isoproterenol, whereas propranolol or timolol reversibly blocked long-term potentiation. Norepinephrine had little apparent effect on responses obtained during low-frequency stimulation of the mossy fibers. These data suggest that norepinephrine can mediate long-lasting, frequency-dependent modulation of synaptic transmission in the mammalian brain. Furthermore, the results suggest a plausible mechanism for some of the known associative interactions between synaptic inputs to hippocampal neurons.
Binocular neurons in the visual cortex are thought to perform the first stage of processing for the fine stereoscopic depth discrimination exhibited by animals with frontally located eyes. Because lateral separation of the eyes gives a slightly different view to each eye, there are small variations in position (disparities), mainly along the horizontal dimension, between corresponding features in the two retinal images. The visual system uses these disparities to gauge depth. We studied neurons in the cat's visual cortex to determine whether the visual system uses the anisotropy in the range of horizontal and vertical disparities. We report here that there is a corresponding anisotropy in the cortical representation of binocular information: receptive-field profiles for left and right eyes are matched for cells that are tuned to horizontal orientations of image contours. For neurons tuned to vertical orientations, left and right receptive fields are predominantly dissimilar. Therefore, a major modification is required of the conventional notion of disparity processing. The modified scheme allows a unified encoding of monocular form and binocular disparity information.
During vertebrate development, neuronal survival depends on target-derived neurotrophic factors. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a member of the neurotrophin family, can prevent the death of particular peripheral sensory neurons in vitro, and of central motor neurons as well as dopaminergic and cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain during development. It also prevents the death of motor neurons and midbrain dopaminergic neurons induced by lesions. Here we show that mutant mice lacking BDNF have severe deficiencies in coordination and balance, associated with excessive degeneration in several sensory ganglia including the vestibular ganglion. The few remaining vestibular axons fail to contact the vestibular sensory epithelia, and terminate in the adjacent connective tissue. Survival of sympathetic, midbrain dopaminergic and motor neurons is not affected. These results indicate that BDNF is required for the survival and target innervation of particular neuronal populations.
Neuroscience has recently turned to the study of utilitarian and non-utilitarian moral judgement. Koenigs et al. examine the responses of normal subjects and those with ventromedial-prefrontal-cortex (VMPC) damage to moral scenarios drawn from functional magnetic resonance imaging studies by Greene et al., and claim that patients with VMPC damage have an abnormally "utilitarian" pattern of moral judgement. It is crucial to the claims of Koenigs et al. that the scenarios of Greene et al. pose a conflict between utilitarian consequence and duty: however, many of them do not meet this condition. Because of this methodological problem, it is too early to claim that VMPC patients have a utilitarian bias.
The identification of brain regions that are associated with the conscious perception of visual stimuli is a major goal in neuroscience. Here we present a test of whether the signals on neurons in cortical area V1 correspond directly to our conscious perception of binocular stereoscopic depth. Depth perception requires that image features on one retina are first matched with appropriate features on the other retina. The mechanisms that perform this matching can be examined by using random-dot stereograms, in which the left and right eyes view randomly positioned but binocularly correlated dots. We exploit the fact that anticorrelated random-dot stereograms (in which dots in one eye are matched geometrically to dots of the opposite contrast in the other eye) do not give rise to the perception of depth because the matching process does not find a consistent solution. Anti-correlated random-dot stereograms contain binocular features that could excite neurons that have not solved the correspondence problem. We demonstrate that disparity-selective neurons in V1 signal the disparity of anticorrelated random-dot stereograms, indicating that they do not unambiguously signal stereoscopic depth. Hence single V1 neurons cannot account for the conscious perception of stereopsis, although combining the outputs of many V1 neurons could solve the matching problem. The accompanying paper suggests an additional function for disparity signals from V1: they may be important for the rapid involuntary control of vergence eye movements (eye movements that bring the images on the two foveae into register).
Synchronous neuronal oscillations in the 30-70 Hz range, known as gamma oscillations, occur in the cortex of many species. This synchronization can occur over large distances, and in some cases over multiple cortical areas and in both hemispheres; it has been proposed to underlie the binding of several features into a single perceptual entity. The mechanism by which coherent oscillations are generated remains unclear, because they often show zero or near-zero phase lags over long distances, whereas much greater phase lags would be expected from the slow speed of axonal conduction. We have previously shown that interneuron networks alone can generate gamma oscillations; here we propose a simple model to explain how an interconnected chain of such networks can generate coherent oscillations. The model incorporates known properties of excitatory pyramidal cells and inhibitory interneurons; it predicts that when excitation of interneurons reaches a level sufficient to induce pairs of spikes in rapid succession (spike doublets), the network will generate gamma oscillations that are synchronized on a millisecond time-scale from one end of the chain to the other. We show that in rat hippocampal slices interneurons do indeed fire spike doublets under conditions in which gamma oscillations are synchronized over several millimetres, whereas they fire single spikes under other conditions. Thus, known properties of neurons and local synaptic circuits can account for tightly synchronized oscillations in large neuronal ensembles.
Millions of people regularly obtain insufficient sleep. Given the effect of sleep deprivation on our lives, understanding the cellular and molecular pathways affected by sleep deprivation is clearly of social and clinical importance. One of the major effects of sleep deprivation on the brain is to produce memory deficits in learning models that are dependent on the hippocampus. Here we have identified a molecular mechanism by which brief sleep deprivation alters hippocampal function. Sleep deprivation selectively impaired 3', 5'-cyclic AMP (cAMP)- and protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent forms of synaptic plasticity in the mouse hippocampus, reduced cAMP signalling, and increased activity and protein levels of phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4), an enzyme that degrades cAMP. Treatment of mice with phosphodiesterase inhibitors rescued the sleep-deprivation-induced deficits in cAMP signalling, synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent memory. These findings demonstrate that brief sleep deprivation disrupts hippocampal function by interfering with cAMP signalling through increased PDE4 activity. Thus, drugs that enhance cAMP signalling may provide a new therapeutic approach to counteract the cognitive effects of sleep deprivation.
Schizophrenia is believed to involve altered activation of dopamine receptors, and support for this hypothesis comes from the antipsychotic effect of antagonists of the dopamine D2 receptor (D2R). D2R is expressed most highly in the striatum, but most of the recent positron emission tomography (PET) studies have failed to show any change in D2R densities in the striatum of schizophrenics, raising the possibility that other receptors may also be involved. In particular, the dopamine D1 receptor (D1R), which is highly expressed in the prefrontal cortex, has been implicated in the control of working memory, and working memory dysfunction is a prominent feature of schizophrenia. We have therefore used PET to examine the distribution of D1R and D2R in brains of drug-naive or drug-free schizophrenic patients. Although no differences were observed in the striatum relative to control subjects, binding of radioligand to D1R was reduced in the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenics. This reduction was related to the severity of the negative symptoms (for instance, emotional withdrawal) and to poor performance in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test. We propose that dysfunction of D1R signalling in the prefrontal cortex may contribute to the negative symptoms and cognitive deficits seen in schizophrenia.
Receptors that selectively bind micromolar concentrations of benzodiazepines are present in rat brain membrane. These micromolar receptors exhibit saturable, stereospecific binding, and the potency of benzodiazepine binding to these receptors is correlated with the ability of the benzodiazepines to inhibit maximum electric shock-induced convulsions. Benzodiazepine receptors with nanomolar affinity differ from the micromolar receptors in their binding, kinetic, and pharmacologic characteristics. The micromolar receptors also bind phenytoin, a non-benzodiazepine anticonvulsant. These results provide evidence for a distinct class of clinically relevant benzodiazepine receptors that may regulate neuronal excitability and anticonvulsant activity.
Neurons in the primary visual cortex respond selectively to the orientation of edges and their direction of motion. Orientation preference is mapped in a systematic fashion across the cortical surface, such that neurons in adjacent columns have similar but slightly shifted preferred orientations. Microelectrode studies have suggested that direction preference is also arranged in a systematic fashion, but exactly how this response property is mapped remains unclear. Here we show by optical imaging of intrinsic signals in ferret cortical area 17 that there is a mosaic-like map of direction preference. This map consists of numerous regions within which direction preference changes in a slow, continuous fashion. These regions are separated by winding boundaries (fractures) across which direction preference shifts abruptly, often by 180 degrees. Comparison of direction and orientation preference maps shows that these fractures subdivide iso-orientation domains into regions selective for opposite directions of motion.
The most characteristic change in progressive dementia of Alzheimer's type is a tissue deposit of amyloid beta/A4 protein, which is derived from its precursor protein APP (ref.2). Structural alterations of APP are implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, but it is not known how they cause the disease. Although APP has a receptor-like architecture, is located on the neuronal surface, and has a conserved cytoplasmic domain, no receptor function has been demonstrated for APP. Here we report that APP forms a complex with G(o), a major GTP-binding protein in brain. The cytoplasmic APP sequence His 657-Lys 676 shows a specific G(o)-activating function and is necessary for complex formation. G(o) protein treated with GTP-gamma S lost the ability to associate with APP. This suggests that APP is a receptor coupled to G(o) and that abnormal APP-G(o) signalling is involved in the Alzheimer's disease process.
Neurotrophins are a family of structurally related proteins that regulate the survival, differentiation and maintenance of function of different populations of peripheral and central neurons. They are also essential for modulating activity-dependent neuronal plasticity. Here we show that neurotrophins elicit action potentials in central neurons. Even at low concentrations, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) excited neurons in the hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum. We found that BDNF and neurotrophin-4/5 depolarized neurons just as rapidly as the neurotransmitter glutamate, even at a more than thousand-fold lower concentration. Neurotrophin-3 produced much smaller responses, and nerve growth factor was ineffective. The neurotrophin-induced depolarization resulted from the activation of a sodium ion conductance which was reversibly blocked by K-252a, a protein kinase blocker which prefers tyrosine kinase Trk receptors. Our results demonstrate a very rapid excitatory action of neurotrophins, placing them among the most potent endogenous neuro-excitants in the mammalian central nervous system described so far.
The possibility has been explored that a subset of physiologically identifiable cells in the visual cortex is especially suited for the processing of stereoscopic depth information. First, characteristics of a disparity detector that would be useful for such processing were outlined. Then, a method was devised by which detailed binocular response data were obtained from cortical cells. In addition, a model of the disparity detector was developed that includes a plausible hierarchical arrangement of cortical cells. Data from the cells compare well with the requirements for the archetypal disparity detector and are in excellent agreement with the predictions of the model. These results demonstrate that a specific type of cortical neuron exhibits the desired characteristics of a disparity detector.
The proposed hypothesis is directed toward explaining a number of disparate findings in terms of a stress-related interaction between the NE- and DA-containing systems in the brain. The deleterious behavioral effects of decreased DA activity, for example, may be counterbalanced by a similar decrease occurring in NE activity, such compensation being most likely to occur under conditions of stress. This hypothesis may have application to the understanding of neurological and mental disorders such as Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia.
Infectious prion diseases-scrapie of sheep and chronic wasting disease (CWD) of several species in the deer family-are transmitted naturally within affected host populations. Although several possible sources of contagion have been identified in excretions and secretions from symptomatic animals, the biological importance of these sources in sustaining epidemics remains unclear. Here we show that asymptomatic CWD-infected mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) excrete CWD prions in their faeces long before they develop clinical signs of prion disease. Intracerebral inoculation of irradiated deer faeces into transgenic mice overexpressing cervid prion protein (PrP) revealed infectivity in 14 of 15 faecal samples collected from five deer at 7-11 months before the onset of neurological disease. Although prion concentrations in deer faeces were considerably lower than in brain tissue from the same deer collected at the end of the disease, the estimated total infectious dose excreted in faeces by an infected deer over the disease course may approximate the total contained in a brain. Prolonged faecal prion excretion by infected deer provides a plausible natural mechanism that might explain the high incidence and efficient horizontal transmission of CWD within deer herds, as well as prion transmission among other susceptible cervids.
It now appears to be possible to continuously record changes in intracellular oxidation-reduction levels in terms of the fluorescence of reduced pyridine nucleotide in mitochondria of various tissues and organs in situ. Studies of kidney and brain cortex in the rat show that changes in fluorescence are not measurably affected by the presence of oxyhemoglobin. Nitrogen, sulfide, cyanide, and carbon monoxide cause increases in fluorescence to very nearly the same levels, and the increases are attributed to larger reduction of mitochondrial diphosphopyridine nucleotide. Amytal at a low blood concentration causes increased reduction in the kidney cortex, and at a high blood concentration, in the brain cortex. The qualitative response of the pyridine nucleotide to low oxygen concentrations shows the brain to be more sensitive than the kidney. The first measurable increase in pyridine nucleotide reduction observed on the brain occurs at a concentration of inspired oxygen of 8 percent. Breathing stops when the percentage increase of pyridine nucleotide reduction on the brain reaches about 90; at this point the percentage increase for the kidney is only about 30. This difference corresponds roughly to a tenfold difference in oxygen tension. Half-maximal increase in pyridine nucleotide reduction on the brain occurs at a concentration of inspired oxygen of about 4 percent and corresponds to an intracellular oxygen tension of about 0.2 mm (47).
Electrical activity has been shown to regulate development in a variety of species and in various structures, including the retina, spinal cord and cortex. Within the mammalian cortex specifically, the development of dendrites and commissural axons in pyramidal cells is activity-dependent. However, little is known about the developmental role of activity in the other major cortical population of neurons, the GABA-producing interneurons. These neurons are morphologically and functionally heterogeneous and efforts over the past decade have focused on determining the mechanisms that contribute to this diversity. It was recently discovered that 30% of all cortical interneurons arise from a relatively novel source within the ventral telencephalon, the caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE). Owing to their late birth date, these interneurons populate the cortex only after the majority of other interneurons and pyramidal cells are already in place and have started to functionally integrate. Here we demonstrate in mice that for CGE-derived reelin (Re)-positive and calretinin (Cr)-positive (but not vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-positive) interneurons, activity is essential before postnatal day 3 for correct migration, and that after postnatal day 3, glutamate-mediated activity controls the development of their axons and dendrites. Furthermore, we show that the engulfment and cell motility 1 gene (Elmo1), a target of the transcription factor distal-less homeobox 1 (Dlx1), is selectively expressed in Re(+) and Cr(+) interneurons and is both necessary and sufficient for activity-dependent interneuron migration. Our findings reveal a selective requirement for activity in shaping the cortical integration of specific neuronal subtypes.
After learning, the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) gradually comes to modulate the expression of memories that initially depended on the hippocampus. We show that during this consolidation period, neural firing in the mPFC becomes selective for the acquired memories. After acquisition of memory associations, neuron populations in the mPFC of rats developed sustained activity during the interval between two paired stimuli, but reduced activity during the corresponding interval between two unpaired stimuli. These new patterns developed over a period of several weeks after learning, with and without continued conditioning trials. Thus, in agreement with a central tenet of consolidation theory, acquired associations initiate subsequent, gradual processes that result in lasting changes of the mPFC's code, without continued training.
Alzheimer's disease is characterized by cerebral deposits of amyloid beta-protein (AP) as senile plaque core and vascular amyloid, and a complementary DNA encoding a precursor of this protein (APP) has been cloned from human brain. From a cDNA library of a human glioblastoma cell line, we have isolated a cDNA identical to that previously reported, together with a new cDNA which contains a 225-nucleotide insert. The sequence of the 56 amino acids at the N-terminal of the protein deduced from this insert is highly homologous to the basic trypsin inhibitor family, and the lysate from COS-1 cells transfected with the longer APP cDNA showed an increased inhibition of trypsin activity. Partial sequencing of the genomic DNA encoding APP showed that the 225 nucleotides are located in two exons. At least three messenger RNA species, apparently transcribed from a single APP gene by alternative splicing, were found in human brain. We suggest that protease inhibition by the longer APP(s) could be related to aberrant APP catabolism.
The calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II is a major component of brain synaptic junctions and has been proposed to play a variety of important roles in brain function. A complementary DNA representing a portion of the smaller 50-kilodalton subunit of the rat brain enzyme has been cloned and sequenced. The calmodulin-binding region has been identified and a synthetic analog prepared that binds calmodulin with high affinity in the presence of calcium. Like the 50-kilodalton kinase polypeptide, the concentration of the messenger RNA varies both neuroanatomically and during postnatal development of the brain. The broad tissue and species cross-reactivity of the complementary DNA suggests that the 50-kilodalton subunit found in rat brain is evolutionarily conserved and is the product of a single gene.
In regulating the internal homeostatic environment mammals, by necessity, employ behavioral strategies that differ from the tactics used in coping with contingencies in the external environment. When an animal consumes a meal, the palatability of that meal is automatically adjusted in accordance with the ultimate internal effects of that meal. If the meal causes toxicosis, the animal acquires an aversion for the taste of the meal; conversely, if recuperation follows ingestion of the meal, the taste of that meal is enhanced. Unlike the learning that occurs when externally referred visual and auditory signals are followed by punishment in the form of peripheral pain or reward in the form of food in the mouth, conditioning to the homeostatic effects of food can occur in a single trial and rarely requires more than three to five trials, even though the ultimate effects of the meal are delayed for hours. Paradoxically, the animal need not be aware of the ultimate internal effect in the same sense that it is aware of external contingencies. For example, an aversion can be acquired even if the animal is unconscious when the agent of illness is administered. Thus, the way in which food-effects are stored in memory may be fundamentally different from the way in which memories of specific time-space strategies devised for external contingencies are stored. This separation of function is indicated by limbic lesions which disrupt conditioning to a buzzer that is followed by shock and facilitate conditioning to a taste that is followed by illness. Operationally speaking, one can describe both aversion conditioning and buzzer-shock conditioning in the spacetime associationistic terms of classical conditioning. However, psychologically speaking, one must realize that in aversion conditioning the animal does not act as if it were acquiring an "if-then" strategy. It acts as if a hedonic shift, or a change in the incentive value of the flavor were taking place. Such hedonic shifts are critical in regulation of the internal milieu. When an animal is in need of calories, food tends to be more palatable; as the caloric deficit is restored, food becomes less palatable. If the animal's body temperature is below optimum, a warm stimulus applied to the skin is pleasant. When body temperature is too high, the converse is true. In this way, homeostatic states monitored by internal receptors produce changes in the incentive values of external stimuli sensed by the peripheral receptors, and guide feeding behavior. In mammals at least, the gustatory system, which provides sensory control of feeding, sends fibers to the nucleus solitarius. This brainstem relay station also receives fibers from the viscera and the internal monitors of the area postrema. Ascending fibers bifurcate at the level of the pons and project toward the feeding areas of the hypothalamus and the cortex. The olfactory system which primarily projects to the limbic system does not play a primary role in adjusting food incentives. Rather, it plays a secondary role in the activation of feeding, as do other external sensory systems. This specialized conditioning mechanism, which specifically adjusts gustatory hedonic values through delayed visceral feedback, is widespread among animals, including man and rat. These two species are remarkably similar in their thresholds and preferences for gustatory stimuli. The behavioral similarities are based on the animals' having similar gustatory systems, similar convergence of gustatory and internal afferents to the nucleus solitarius, and similar midbrain regulatory mechanisms. Thus, it is not surprising that the feeding of obese rats with internal hypothalamic damage resembles the feeding of obese human beings insensitive to the internal signs of this caloric state. Obviously, man has a highly specialized form of symbolic communication and the rat does not, yet man's cognitive specialization does not prevent him from developing aversions to food consumed before illness even when he knows that his illness was not caused by food (43).
Unilateral spreading cortical depression was elicited by applying potassium chloride solutions to the dura of conscious, freely moving rats. Incorporation of (3)H-leucine into soluble cortical proteins was decreased in the depressed hemisphere relative to the control side, while soluble brainstem proteins from both sides had the same specific activity. Various subfractions of soluble cortical proteins were affected to equal degrees.
Sound-processing strategies that use the highly non-random structure of natural sounds may confer evolutionary advantage to many species. Auditory processing of natural sounds has been studied almost exclusively in the context of species-specific vocalizations, although these form only a small part of the acoustic biotope. To study the relationships between properties of natural soundscapes and neuronal processing mechanisms in the auditory system, we analysed sound from a range of different environments. Here we show that for many non-animal sounds and background mixtures of animal sounds, energy in different frequency bands is coherently modulated. Co-modulation of different frequency bands in background noise facilitates the detection of tones in noise by humans, a phenomenon known as co-modulation masking release (CMR). We show that co-modulation also improves the ability of auditory-cortex neurons to detect tones in noise, and we propose that this property of auditory neurons may underlie behavioural CMR. This correspondence may represent an adaptation of the auditory system for the use of an attribute of natural sounds to facilitate real-world processing tasks.
Synaptic transmission of most vertebrate synapses is thought to be terminated by rapid transport of the neurotransmitter into presynaptic nerve terminals or neuroglia. L-Glutamate is the major excitatory transmitter in brain and its transport represents the mechanism by which it is removed from the synaptic cleft and kept below toxic levels. Here we use an antibody against a glial L-glutamate transporter from rat brain to isolate a complementary DNA clone encoding this transporter. Expression of this cDNA in transfected HeLa cells indicates that L-glutamate accumulation requires external sodium and internal potassium and transport shows the expected stereospecificity. The cDNA sequence predicts a protein of 573 amino acids with 8-9 putative transmembrane alpha-helices. Database searches indicate that this protein is not homologous to any identified protein of mammalian origin, including the recently described superfamily of neurotransmitter transporters. This protein therefore seems to be a member of a new family of transport molecules.
Epigenetic mechanisms that maintain neurogenesis throughout adult life remain poorly understood. Trithorax group (trxG) and Polycomb group (PcG) gene products are part of an evolutionarily conserved chromatin remodelling system that activate or silence gene expression, respectively. Although PcG member Bmi1 has been shown to be required for postnatal neural stem cell self-renewal, the role of trxG genes remains unknown. Here we show that the trxG member Mll1 (mixed-lineage leukaemia 1) is required for neurogenesis in the mouse postnatal brain. Mll1-deficient subventricular zone neural stem cells survive, proliferate and efficiently differentiate into glial lineages; however, neuronal differentiation is severely impaired. In Mll1-deficient cells, early proneural Mash1 (also known as Ascl1) and gliogenic Olig2 expression are preserved, but Dlx2, a key downstream regulator of subventricular zone neurogenesis, is not expressed. Overexpression of Dlx2 can rescue neurogenesis in Mll1-deficient cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrates that Dlx2 is a direct target of MLL in subventricular zone cells. In differentiating wild-type subventricular zone cells, Mash1, Olig2 and Dlx2 loci have high levels of histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4 (H3K4me3), consistent with their transcription. In contrast, in Mll1-deficient subventricular zone cells, chromatin at Dlx2 is bivalently marked by both H3K4me3 and histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), and the Dlx2 gene fails to properly activate. These data support a model in which Mll1 is required to resolve key silenced bivalent loci in postnatal neural precursors to the actively transcribed state for the induction of neurogenesis, but not for gliogenesis.
Tetanus toxin injected into the cortex produces convulsions, neurological disability, and a strychnine-like discharging focus, appearing after a minimal latency of 2 days and lasting more than a month. Such a focus, apparently caused by a blockade of inhibitory synapses, does not demonstrate any major damage in microscopic studies.
The ability of nerve cells to receive up to several thousands of synaptic inputs from other neurons provides the anatomical basis for information processing in the vertebrate brain. The formation of functional synapses involves selective clustering of neurotransmitter receptors at presumptive postsynaptic regions of the neuronal plasma membrane. Receptor-associated proteins are believed to be crucial for this process. In spinal neurons, synaptic targeting of the inhibitory glycine receptor (GlyR) depends on the expression of the anchoring protein gephyrin. Here we show that the competitive GlyR antagonist strychnine and L-type Ca2+-channel blockers inhibit the accumulation of GlyR and gephyrin at postsynaptic membrane areas in cultured rat spinal neurons. Our data are consistent with a model in which GlyR activation that results in Ca2+ influx is required for the clustering of gephyrin and GlyR at developing postsynaptic sites. Similar activity-driven mechanisms may be of general importance in synaptogenesis.
The obesity syndrome of ob/ob mice results from lack of leptin, a hormone released by fat cells that acts in the brain to suppress feeding and stimulate metabolism. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a neuromodulator implicated in the control of energy balance and is overproduced in the hypothalamus of ob/ob mice. To determine the role of NPY in the response to leptin deficiency, ob/ob mice deficient for NPY were generated. In the absence of NPY, ob/ob mice are less obese because of reduced food intake and increased energy expenditure, and are less severely affected by diabetes, sterility, and somatotropic defects. These results suggest that NPY is a central effector of leptin deficiency.
Damage to the central and peripheral nervous system often produces lasting functional deficits. A major focus of neuroscience research has been to enhance functional restitution of the damaged nervous system and thereby produce recovery of behavioral or physiological processes. Promising procedures include surgical, physical, and chemical manipulations to reduce scar formation and minimize the disruption of support elements, administration of growth-stimulating substances, tissue grafts to bridge gaps in fiber pathways, and embryonic brain tissue grafts to provide new cells with the potential to generate fiber systems. Two elements are required for functional nervous system repair: (i) neurons with the capacity to extend processes must be present, and (ii) the regenerating neurites must find a continuous, unbroken pathway to appropriate targets through a supportive milieu.
Nitric oxide (NO), apparently identical to endothelium-derived relaxing factor in blood vessels, is also formed by cytotoxic macrophages, in adrenal gland and in brain tissue, where it mediates the stimulation by glutamate of cyclic GMP formation in the cerebellum. Stimulation of intestinal or anococcygeal nerves liberates NO, and the resultant muscle relaxation is blocked by arginine derivatives that inhibit NO synthesis. It is, however, unclear whether in brain or intestine, NO released following nerve stimulation is formed in neurons, glia, fibroblasts, muscle or blood cells, all of which occur in proximity to neurons and so could account for effects of nerve stimulation on cGMP and muscle tone. We have now localized NO synthase protein immunohistochemically in the rat using antisera to the purified enzyme. We demonstrate NO synthase in the brain to be exclusively associated with discrete neuronal populations. NO synthase is also concentrated in the neural innervation of the posterior pituitary, in autonomic nerve fibres in the retina, in cell bodies and nerve fibres in the myenteric plexus of the intestine, in adrenal medulla, and in vascular endothelial cells. These prominent neural localizations provide the first conclusive evidence for a strong association of NO with neurons.
3',4'-Deoxynorlaudanosolinecarboxylic acid (DNLCA), a tetrahydroisoquinoline derived from dopamine and phenylpyruvic acid, has been detected by computerized mass fragmentography in urine of phenylketonuric children and in urine and brain of rats with experimentally induced hyperphenylalaninemia. Levels of DNLCA in brain of treated animals were more than tenfold higher than controls, and the excess tetrahydroisoquinoline appeared to accumulate in the cerebellum and cortex. DNLCA is a noncompetitive inhibitor of dopamine beta-hydroxylase (inhibition constant, Ki, = 0.42 mM) and is taken up by the brain.
The administration of choline in doses previously shown to elevate brain acetylcholine concentrations also increases the activity of tyrosine hydroxylase in rat caudate nuclei. This response can be blocked by atropine, a muscarinic antagonist. These findings indicate that choline-induced increases in acetylcholine concentrations may be associated with parallel changes in the amount of the neurotransmitter released into synapses.
Furosemide, a chloride cotransport inhibitor, reversibly blocked synchronized burst discharges in hippocampal slices without reducing the pyramidal cell response to single electrical stimuli. Images of the intrinsic optical signal acquired during these slice experiments indicated that furosemide coincidentally blocked changes in extracellular space. In urethane-anesthetized rats, systemically injected furosemide blocked kainic acid-induced electrical discharges recorded from cortex. These results suggest that (i) neuronal synchronization involved in epileptiform activity can be dissociated from synaptic excitability; (ii) nonsynaptic mechanisms, possibly associated with furosemide-sensitive cell volume regulation, may be critical for synchronization of neuronal activity; and (iii) agents that affect extracellular volume may have clinical utility as antiepileptic drugs.
Although astrocytes constitute nearly half of the cells in our brain, their function is a long-standing neurobiological mystery. Here we show by quantal analyses, FM1-43 imaging, immunostaining, and electron microscopy that few synapses form in the absence of glial cells and that the few synapses that do form are functionally immature. Astrocytes increase the number of mature, functional synapses on central nervous system (CNS) neurons by sevenfold and are required for synaptic maintenance in vitro. We also show that most synapses are generated concurrently with the development of glia in vivo. These data demonstrate a previously unknown function for glia in inducing and stabilizing CNS synapses, show that CNS synapse number can be profoundly regulated by nonneuronal signals, and raise the possibility that glia may actively participate in synaptic plasticity.
The neocortex is patterned in layers of neurons that are generated in an orderly sequence during development. This correlation between cell birthday and laminar fate prompted an examination of how neuronal phenotypes are determined in the developing cortex. At various times after labeling with [3H]thymidine, embryonic progenitor cells were transplanted into older host brains. The laminar fate of transplanted neurons correlates with the position of their progenitors in the cell cycle at the time of transplantation. Daughters of cells transplanted in S-phase migrate to layer 2/3, as do host neurons. Progenitors transplanted later in the cell cycle, however, produce daughters that are committed to their normal, deep-layer fates. Thus, environmental factors are important determinants of laminar fate, but embryonic progenitors undergo cyclical changes in their ability to respond to such cues.
Although many anecdotal reports indicate that marijuana and its active constituent, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC), may reduce pain sensation, studies of humans have produced inconsistent results. In animal studies, the apparent pain-suppressing effects of delta-9-THC and other cannabinoid drugs are confounded by motor deficits. Here we show that a brainstem circuit that contributes to the pain-suppressing effects of morphine is also required for the analgesic effects of cannabinoids. Inactivation of the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM) prevents the analgesia but not the motor deficits produced by systemically administered cannabinoids. Furthermore, cannabinoids produce analgesia by modulating RVM neuronal activity in a manner similar to, but pharmacologically dissociable from, that of morphine. We also show that endogenous cannabinoids tonically regulate pain thresholds in part through the modulation of RVM neuronal activity. These results show that analgesia produced by cannabinoids and opioids involves similar brainstem circuitry and that cannabinoids are indeed centrally acting analgesics with a new mechanism of action.
The endogenous opioid system is involved in stress responses, in the regulation of the experience of pain, and in the action of analgesic opiate drugs. We examined the function of the opioid system and mu-opioid receptors in the brains of healthy human subjects undergoing sustained pain. Sustained pain induced the regional release of endogenous opioids interacting with mu-opioid receptors in a number of cortical and subcortical brain regions. The activation of the mu-opioid receptor system was associated with reductions in the sensory and affective ratings of the pain experience, with distinct neuroanatomical involvements. These data demonstrate the central role of the mu-opioid receptors and their endogenous ligands in the regulation of sensory and affective components of the pain experience.
Six isolated canine brains were successfully transplanted for 6 hours to 2 days to the cervical vasculature of dogs. Viability was shown by electrocortical activity and significant uptakes of oxygen and glucose, with production of carbon dioxide. Cerebral blood flows, temperatures, and pressures of the cerebral homograft were continuously monitored by way of an implantable recording module.
Human electrocortical potentials evoked by self-administered auditory and visual stimuli manifest much smaller amplitude and faster poststimulus timing than do average brain responses evoked by identical machine-delivered stimuli. Auditory evoked potentials show this "self-stimulation effect" to a greater degree than do visual responses. For visual evoked potentials, the effect appears greater at the vertex association area than over the occipital cortex. Individual differences in the magnitude of the "self-stimutlation effect" relate to level of intelligence.
In the report "Motor neuron degeneration in mice that express a human Cu, Zn super-oxide dismutase mutation" by M. E. Gurney et al. (17 June 1994, p. 1772)(1), a systematic, 10-fold error was made in calculating the dilutions of brain extract used for determinations of total brain superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity shown in column 6 of table 1 (p. 1774). Each value reported should have been reduced by that factor, for example, the total SOD activity reported for the G1 line should have been 4.26 +/- 0.2 SOD (U)/total protein (microg), not 42.6 +/- 2.1 U/microg, and so forth.
Freud proposed that unwanted memories can be forgotten by pushing them into the unconscious, a process called repression. The existence of repression has remained controversial for more than a century, in part because of its strong coupling with trauma, and the ethical and practical difficulties of studying such processes in controlled experiments. However, behavioural and neurobiological research on memory and attention shows that people have executive control processes directed at minimizing perceptual distraction, overcoming interference during short and long-term memory tasks and stopping strong habitual responses to stimuli. Here we show that these mechanisms can be recruited to prevent unwanted declarative memories from entering awareness, and that this cognitive act has enduring consequences for the rejected memories. When people encounter cues that remind them of an unwanted memory and they consistently try to prevent awareness of it, the later recall of the rejected memory becomes more difficult. The forgetting increases with the number of times the memory is avoided, resists incentives for accurate recall and is caused by processes that suppress the memory itself. These results show that executive control processes not uniquely tied to trauma may provide a viable model for repression.
Tumor necrosis factor, or cachectin (TNF-alpha), a protein with a wide range of biological activities, is produced mainly by macrophages and may be important in inflammatory processes. The role of TNF-alpha in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria was investigated in a murine model. Most CBA mice infected with Plasmodium berghei anka die between days 6 and 14 with acute neurological manifestations unrelated to the level of parasitemia, whereas mice of some other strains have malaria of the same severity that ends in death after 3 to 4 weeks without neurological manifestations. The activity of serum TNF-alpha was considerably increased in CBA/Ca mice with cerebral malaria but not in Plasmodium berghei-infected mice that did not develop this complication. One injection of rabbit antibody to TNF-alpha on day 4 or 7 fully protected infected mice from cerebral malaria without modifying the parasitemia, whereas immunoglobulins from normal rabbit had no effect. In mice with cerebral malaria, the cerebral vessels showed focal accumulations of packed macrophages often containing infected erythrocytes; this lesion was not seen in mice treated with antibody to TNF-alpha or in untreated mice without cerebral malaria. These findings indicate that TNF-alpha has an important role in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria in this murine model and suggest that local accumulation and activation of macrophages may lead to the predominance of lesions in the central nervous system.
The cerebellum traditionally has been viewed as a neural device dedicated to motor control. Although recent evidence shows that it is involved in nonmotor operations as well, an important question is whether this involvement is independent of motor control and motor guidance. Functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to demonstrate that attention and motor performance independently activate distinct cerebellar regions. These findings support a broader concept of cerebellar function, in which the cerebellum is involved in diverse cognitive and noncognitive neurobehavioral systems, including the attention and motor systems, in order to anticipate imminent information acquisition, analysis, or action.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the causative agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). A large number of AIDS patients show evidence of neurologic involvement, known as AIDS-related subacute encephalopathy, which has been correlated with the presence of HIV in the brain. In this study, two genetically distinct but related viruses were isolated from one patient from two different sources in the central nervous system: brain tissue and cerebrospinal fluid. Both viruses were found to replicate in peripheral blood lymphocytes, but only virus from brain tissue will efficiently infect macrophage/monocytes. The viruses also differ in their ability to infect a brain glioma explant culture. This infection of the brain-derived cells in vitro is generally nonproductive, and appears to be some form of persistent or latent infection. These results indicate that genetic variation of HIV in vivo may result in altered cell tropisms and possibly implicate strains of HIV with glial cell tropism in the pathogenesis of some neurologic disorders of AIDS.
Extreme gene duplication is a major source of evolutionary novelty. A genome-wide survey of gene copy number variation among human and great ape lineages revealed that the most striking human lineage-specific amplification was due to an unknown gene, MGC8902, which is predicted to encode multiple copies of a protein domain of unknown function (DUF1220). Sequences encoding these domains are virtually all primate-specific, show signs of positive selection, and are increasingly amplified generally as a function of a species' evolutionary proximity to humans, where the greatest number of copies (212) is found. DUF1220 domains are highly expressed in brain regions associated with higher cognitive function, and in brain show neuron-specific expression preferentially in cell bodies and dendrites.
Perceptual illusions are usually thought to arise from the way sensory signals are encoded by the brain, and indeed are often used to infer the mechanisms of sensory encoding. But perceptual illusions might also result from the way the brain decodes sensory information, reflecting the strategies that optimize performance in particular tasks. In a fine discrimination task, the most accurate information comes from neurons tuned away from the discrimination boundary, and observers seem to use signals from these 'displaced' neurons to optimize their performance. We wondered whether using signals from these neurons might also bias perception. In a fine direction discrimination task using moving random-dot stimuli, we found that observers' perception of the direction of motion is indeed biased away from the boundary. This misperception can be accurately described by a decoding model that preferentially weights signals from neurons whose responses best discriminate those directions. In a coarse discrimination task, to which a different decoding rule applies, the same stimulus is not misperceived, suggesting that the illusion is a direct consequence of the decoding strategy that observers use to make fine perceptual judgments. The subjective experience of motion is therefore not mediated directly by the responses of sensory neurons, but is only developed after the responses of these neurons are decoded.
Cats were reared in a stroboscopically illuminated environment, which deprived them of expereience with visual movement but allowed them form vision. In these cats, neurons of the visual cortex displayed normal orientation selectivity, but direction selectivity was virtually abolished. The effect remained unaltered by long periods of normal visual exposure.
The microtubule-associated protein MAP2 is a prominent large-sized component of purified brain microtubules that, like the 36- to 38-kilodalton tau proteins, bears antigenic determinants found in association with the neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer's disease. The complete sequence of mouse brain MAP2 was determined from a series of overlapping cloned complementary DNAs. The sequence of the carboxyl-terminal 185 amino acids is very similar (67 percent) to a corresponding region of tau protein, and includes a series of three imperfect repeats, each 18 amino acids long and separated by 13 or 14 amino acids. A subcloned fragment spanning the first two of the 18-amino acid repeats was expressed as a polypeptide by translation in vitro. This polypeptide copurified with microtubules through two successive cycles of polymerization and depolymerization, whereas a control polypeptide derived from the amino-terminal region of MAP2 completely failed to copurify. These data imply that the carboxyl-terminal domain containing the 18-amino acid repeats constitutes the microtubule binding site in MAP2. The occurrence of these repeats in tau protein suggests that these may be a general feature of microtubule binding proteins.
Mammals manifest circadian behaviour timed by an endogenous clock in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). Considerable progress has been made in identifying the molecular basis of the circadian clock, but the mechanisms by which it is translated into cyclic firing activity, high during the day and low at night, are still poorly understood. GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), a common inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, is particularly densely distributed within the SCN, where it is located in the majority of neuronal somata and synaptic terminals. Using an in vitro brain-slice technique, we have now studied the effect of bath-applied GABA on adult SCN neurons at various times of the day. We find that GABA acts as an inhibitory neurotransmitter at night, decreasing the firing frequency; but during the day GABA acts as an excitatory neurotransmitter, increasing the firing frequency. We show that this dual effect, which is mediated by GABA(A) receptors, may be attributed to an oscillation in intracellular chloride concentration. A likely explanation is that the amplitude of the oscillation in firing rate, displayed by individual neurons, is amplified by the dual effect of GABA in the SCN's GABAergic network.
Abnormally high spiking activity can damage neurons. Signaling systems to protect neurons from the consequences of abnormal discharge activity have been postulated. We generated conditional mutant mice that lack expression of the cannabinoid receptor type 1 in principal forebrain neurons but not in adjacent inhibitory interneurons. In mutant mice,the excitotoxin kainic acid (KA) induced excessive seizures in vivo. The threshold to KA-induced neuronal excitation in vitro was severely reduced in hippocampal pyramidal neurons of mutants. KA administration rapidly raised hippocampal levels of anandamide and induced protective mechanisms in wild-type principal hippocampal neurons. These protective mechanisms could not be triggered in mutant mice. The endogenous cannabinoid system thus provides on-demand protection against acute excitotoxicity in central nervous system neurons.
The tetradecapeptide bombesin was originally isolated from frog skin. Bombesin-like peptides have since been detected in mammalian gastrointestinal tract, brain and lung. These peptides have potent pharmacological effects on the central nervous system; they cause contraction of intestinal, uterine and urinary tract smooth muscle; and stimulate the release of other peptides including gastrin, cholecystokinin, motilin, pancreatic polypeptide, neurotensin, insulin, enteroglucagon, prolactin and growth hormone. Specific plasma membrane receptors for bombesin have been demonstrated on pancreatic acinar cells, brain membranes and pituitary cells. Studies defining the physiological importance of bombesin have been impeded by the lack of a bombesin receptor antagonist. Here we describe experiments which demonstrate that a peptide originally described as a substance P receptor antagonist, [D-Arg, D-Pro, D-Trp, Leu ]substance P, is also a bombesin receptor antagonist. This peptide competitively inhibits the ability of bombesin to stimulate enzyme secretion from dispersed pancreatic acini, and also inhibits the action of other peptides that interact with the bombesin receptor.
Cerebral cortex samples from patients with Alzheimer's disease and from rats after experimental cholinergic denervation of the cerebral cortex exhibited reductions in the presynaptic marker choline acetyltransferase activity and in the number of M2 muscarine receptors, with no change in the number of M1 receptors. These results are in keeping with evidence that M2 receptors function in cholinergic nerve terminals to regulate the release of acetylcholine, whereas M1 receptors are located on postsynaptic cells and facilitate cellular excitation. New M1-selective agonists and M2-selective antagonists directed at post- or presynaptic sites deserve consideration as potential agents for the treatment of the disease.
Neurones in the visual cortex of higher mammals differ from those elsewhere in the visual pathway in that the majority respond selectively to particular edge or bar orientations in the stimulus. We have developed a visually evoked potential (VEP) technique which isolates the response of orientation-selective mechanisms from that of cortical or sub-cortical neurones which lack orientation selectivity. We are unable to find such orientation-selective responses in newborn human infants within the sensitivity of our method, but repeated longitudinal testing of individual infants shows that measurable responses emerge around 6 weeks of age. This result is consistent with the idea that human cortical visual function is very immature at birth, but develops rapidly in the first two postnatal months.
A new framework for consciousness is introduced based upon traditional artificial neural network models. This framework reflects explicit connections between two parts of the brain: one global working memory and distributed modular cerebral networks relating to specific brain functions. Accordingly this framework is composed of three layers, physical mnemonic layer and abstract thinking layer, which cooperate together through a recognition layer to accomplish information storage and cognition using algorithms of how these interactions contribute to consciousness: (1) the reception process whereby cerebral subsystems group distributed signals into coherent object patterns; (2) the partial recognition process whereby patterns from particular subsystems are compared or stored as knowledge; and (3) the resonant learning process whereby global workspace stably adjusts its structure to adapt to patterns' changes. Using this framework, various sorts of human actions can be explained, leading to a general approach for analyzing brain functions.
The human frontal cortex helps mediate working memory, a system that is used for temporary storage and manipulation of information and that is involved in many higher cognitive functions. Working memory includes two components: short-term storage (on the order of seconds) and executive processes that operate on the contents of storage. Recently, these two components have been investigated in functional neuroimaging studies. Studies of storage indicate that different frontal regions are activated for different kinds of information: storage for verbal materials activates Broca's area and left-hemisphere supplementary and premotor areas; storage of spatial information activates the right-hemisphere premotor cortex; and storage of object information activates other areas of the prefrontal cortex. Two of the fundamental executive processes are selective attention and task management. Both processes activate the anterior cingulate and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
The extracellular space of the rat brain was visualized by electron roscopy in sections of cerebral cortex fixed by freeze-substitution. The volume tissue occupied by the extracellular space was estimated stereomnetrically, and found to decrease from 20.8 percent in 3-month-old rats to 9.6 percent in escent animals, 26 months of age. This decrease in extracellular space indicates age-associated change in the microenvironment of nerve cells.
Retrograde fluorescent tracers were used to demonstrate a previously unknown but sizable direct gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-containing neuronal pathway from the zona incerta to the neocortex in rats. This incertocortical pathway was found to project bilaterally to the entire neocortex and exhibited a rough corticotopic organization. Many of the zona incerta neurons projecting to the parietal and occipital cortices could also be immunohistochemically stained with antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase and GABA. Few of these neurons were immunoreactive to tyrosine hydroxylase antibodies, which identify dopamine-containing neurons. Injections in the frontal and entorhinal cortices labeled many neurons near or within the dopaminergic A13 subdivision of the zona incerta. In addition, the incertocortical system was found to be significantly larger during early postnatal (2 to 3 weeks) development. The projection pattern of this newly discovered pathway resembles that of the monoaminergic and cholinergic systems, arising from the brainstem and forebrain, suggesting possible similarities of function.
The olfactory systems of various species solve the challenging problem of general molecular recognition in widely differing ways. Despite this variety, the molecular receptors are invariably G protein-coupled seven-transmembrane proteins, and are encoded by the largest gene families known to exist in a given animal genome. Receptor gene families have been identified in vertebrates and two invertebrate species, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The complexity of the odorant receptor repertoire is estimated in mouse and rat at 1000 genes, or 1 percent of the genome, surpassing that of the immunoglobulin and T cell receptor genes combined. Two distinct seven-transmembrane gene families may encode in rodents the chemosensory receptors of the vomeronasal organ, which is specialized in the detection of pheromones. Remarkably, these five receptor families have practically no sequence homology among them. Genetic manipulation experiments in mice imply that vertebrate odorant receptors may fulfill a dual role, also serving as address molecules that guide axons of olfactory sensory neurons to their precise target in the brain.
Neurons in the cat primary visual cortex are selective for particular contour orientations but their responsiveness can vary under certain conditions. After prolonged stimulation (adaptation), the contrast sensitivity of cortical cells is reduced and the 'gain' (the strength of response as a function of contrast) falls. The response to an optimal contour is also reduced when a different stimulus is superimposed on the receptive field in the same eye. Here we report that the sudden appearance of an inappropriate stimulus in one eye can interocularly suppress the activity of cortical neurons if they are already responding to an optimally oriented stimulus in the other eye. In strabismic cats, whose cortical neurons lack binocular facilitation, even contours of similar orientation shown to the two eyes trigger such suppression. This interocular control of cortical responsiveness could serve to veto signals from one eye under conditions that would otherwise cause double vision and perceptual confusion.
beta-Receptors were identified in rat brain by a light microscopic autoradiographic technique. The procedure involved binding 3H-labeled dihydroalprenolol to beta-receptors in intact slide-mounted tissue sections and generating autoradiograms by the apposition of emulsion-coated cover slips, Biochemical analysis of the binding indicated that these conditions provided a high degree of selective labeling of beta-receptors. High densities of receptors were found in superficial layers of the cerebral cortex, throughout the caudate-putamen, in the periventricular nucleus of the thalamus, in the molecular layer of the cerebellum, and in other areas. These results are in agreement with other electrophysiological and histochemical data. This radiohistochemical approach should be an important addition to other methods for mapping functional catecholamine neuronal pathways and sites of hormonal action.
Some 30,000 genes are expressed exclusively in the rat brain, many of which contain a genetic element called an identifier sequence located in at least one of their introns. The identifier sequences are transcribed by RNA polymerase III exclusively in neurons to produce two RNA species, BC1 and BC2, of 160 and 100 to 110 nucleotides. This transcriptional event may define regions of chromatin that contain neuronal-specific genes and may poise these genes for transcription by polymerase II by rendering the gene promoters accessible to soluble trans-acting molecules.
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) receptors were identified in rat forebrain by autoradiography with an iodine-125-labeled analog of ovine CRF substituted with norleucine and tyrosine at amino acid residues 21 and 32, respectively. High-affinity receptors for CRF were found in discrete areas of rat forebrain, including laminae I and IV of the neocortex, the external layer of the medium eminence, the lateral nucleus of the amygdala, and the striatum. These results are consistent with earlier findings on the immunohistochemical distribution of CRF and suggest that endogenous CRF has a physiological role in regulating activity of the central nervous system.
The undecapeptide substance P is a putative neurotransmitter in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS), and may be associated with pain fibres in the spinal cord. Radiolabelled derivatives of other neuropeptides have been used to demonstrate specific interactions with receptor sites on brain membranes, and this approach has now been explored with substance P. We have now prepared [4-3H-Phe8]-substance P and we find that it binds reversibly to a saturable population of sites in rat brain particulate fractions. Scatchard analysis of concentration-dependent saturation of binding indicates a single population of non-interacting sites with a high affinity (Kd=0.38 nM) and a low density (Bmax=27.2 fmol per mg protein). Kinetic analyses indicate an apparent dissociation equilibrium constant of 0.46 nM. A variety of neurotransmitter amines and amino acids, and other peptides do not compete at the substance P sites, but structurally related peptides or shorter C-terminal fragments of substance P are active. The rank order of potency of these substance P-related peptides agrees with that reported for their effects in depolarizing spinal cord neurones. The regional distribution of the specific binding sites for 3H-substance P parallels that of substance P immunoreactivity, being high in the hypothalamus and low in the cerebellum and cerebral cortex. The characteristics of the 3H-substance P binding sites are consistent with those expected for substance P receptors.
The median neurosecretory cells of the pars intercerebralis of Iphita limbata seem to release two demonstrable components, probably representing allatotropin to the corpus allatum and myotropin to the aortic neurohemal site.
Porencephaly is a rare neurological disease, typically manifest in infants, which is characterized by the existence of degenerative cavities in the brain. To investigate the molecular pathogenesis of porencephaly, we studied a mouse mutant that develops porencephaly secondary to focal disruptions of vascular basement membranes. Half of the mutant mice died with cerebral hemorrhage within a day of birth, and approximately 18% of survivors had porencephaly. We show that vascular defects are caused by a semidominant mutation in the procollagen type IV alpha 1 gene (Col4a1) in mice, which inhibits the secretion of mutant and normal type IV collagen. We also show that COL4A1 mutations segregate with porencephaly in human families. Because not all mutant mice develop porencephaly, we propose that Col4a1 mutations conspire with environmental trauma in causing the disease.
Grid cells in the entorhinal cortex of freely moving rats provide a strikingly periodic representation of self-location which is indicative of very specific computational mechanisms. However, the existence of grid cells in humans and their distribution throughout the brain are unknown. Here we show that the preferred firing directions of directionally modulated grid cells in rat entorhinal cortex are aligned with the grids, and that the spatial organization of grid-cell firing is more strongly apparent at faster than slower running speeds. Because the grids are also aligned with each other, we predicted a macroscopic signal visible to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in humans. We then looked for this signal as participants explored a virtual reality environment, mimicking the rats' foraging task: fMRI activation and adaptation showing a speed-modulated six-fold rotational symmetry in running direction. The signal was found in a network of entorhinal/subicular, posterior and medial parietal, lateral temporal and medial prefrontal areas. The effect was strongest in right entorhinal cortex, and the coherence of the directional signal across entorhinal cortex correlated with spatial memory performance. Our study illustrates the potential power of combining single-unit electrophysiology with fMRI in systems neuroscience. Our results provide evidence for grid-cell-like representations in humans, and implicate a specific type of neural representation in a network of regions which supports spatial cognition and also autobiographical memory.
Neurotransmitter:sodium symporters (NSS) have a critical role in regulating neurotransmission and are targets for psychostimulants, anti-depressants and other drugs. Whereas the non-homologous glutamate transporters mediate chloride conductance, in the eukaryotic NSS chloride is transported together with the neurotransmitter. In contrast, transport by the bacterial NSS family members LeuT, Tyt1 and TnaT is chloride independent. The crystal structure of LeuT reveals an occluded binding pocket containing leucine and two sodium ions, and is highly relevant for the neurotransmitter transporters. However, the precise role of chloride in neurotransmitter transport and the location of its binding site remain elusive. Here we show that introduction of a negatively charged amino acid at or near one of the two putative sodium-binding sites of the GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) transporter GAT-1 from rat brain (also called SLC6A1) renders both net flux and exchange of GABA largely chloride independent. In contrast to wild-type GAT-1, a marked stimulation of the rate of net flux, but not of exchange, was observed when the internal pH was lowered. Equivalent mutations introduced in the mouse GABA transporter GAT4 (SLC6A11) and the human dopamine transporter DAT (SLC6A3) also result in chloride-independent transport, whereas the reciprocal mutations in LeuT and Tyt1 render substrate binding and/or uptake by these bacterial NSS chloride dependent. Our data indicate that the negative charge, provided either by chloride or by the transporter itself, is required during binding and translocation of the neurotransmitter, probably to counterbalance the charge of the co-transported sodium ions.
Male rhesus monkeys with orbital prefrontal lesions were imtpaired on behavioral tests at 2(1/2) months of age whereas similar deficits were not detected in females with comparable lesions until 15 to 18 months of age. The results suggest that the maturation of a cortical region in the primate brain proceeds at different tempos in males and females.
Moderate non-progressive cognitive impairment is a consistent feature of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), although no central nervous system (CNS) abnormality has been identified. Recent studies have elucidated the molecular defect in DMD, including the absence of the protein dystrophin in affected individuals. Normal brain tissue contains dystrophin messenger RNA and dystrophin is present in low abundance in the brain and seems to be regulated in this tissue, at least in part, by a promoter that differs from that in muscle. Until now, antibodies and immunocytochemical methods used to demonstrate dystrophin at the plasma membrane of mouse and human muscle have proven inadequate to localize precisely dystrophin in the mammalian CNS. We have now made an antibody (anti 6-10) which is much more sensitive than those previously available to immunolabel dystrophin in the CNS. Using this antibody, we found that in the mouse, dystrophin is particularly abundant in the neurons of the cerebral and cerebellar cortices, and that it is localized at postsynaptic membrane specializations. Dystrophin may have a different role in neurons than in muscle, and an alteration at the synaptic level may be the basis of the cognitive impairment in DMD.
In Alzheimer's disease (AD) there are dramatic reductions in the content of corticotropin releasing factor (CRF), reciprocal increases in CRF receptors, and morphological abnormalities in CRF neurons in affected brain areas. Cognitive impairment in AD patients is associated with a lower cerebrospinal fluid concentration of CRF, which is known to induce increases in learning and memory in rodents. This suggests that CRF deficits contribute to cognitive impairment. The identification in post-mortem brain of CRF-binding protein (CRF-BP), a high-affinity binding protein that inactivates CRF, and the differential distribution of CRF-BP and CRF receptors, provides the potential for improving learning and memory without stress effects of CRF receptor agonists. Here we show that ligands that dissociate CRF from CRF-BP increase brain levels of 'free CRF' in AD to control levels and show cognition-enhancing properties in models of learning and memory in animals without the characteristic stress effects of CRF receptor agonists.
The activity of motor cortex (MI) neurons conveys movement intent sufficiently well to be used as a control signal to operate artificial devices, but until now this has called for extensive training or has been confined to a limited movement repertoire. Here we show how activity from a few (7-30) MI neurons can be decoded into a signal that a monkey is able to use immediately to move a computer cursor to any new position in its workspace (14 degrees x 14 degrees visual angle). Our results, which are based on recordings made by an electrode array that is suitable for human use, indicate that neurally based control of movement may eventually be feasible in paralysed humans.
Molecular dependence of vesicular endocytosis was investigated with capacitance measurements at the calyx of Held terminal in brainstem slices. Intraterminal loading of botulinum toxin E revealed that the rapid capacitance transient implicated as "kiss-and-run" was unrelated to transmitter release. The release-related capacitance change decayed with an endocytotic time constant of 10 to 25 seconds, depending on the magnitude of exocytosis. Presynaptic loading of the nonhydrolyzable guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP) analog GTPgS or dynamin-1 proline-rich domain peptide abolished endocytosis. These compounds had no immediate effect on exocytosis, but caused a use-dependent rundown of exocytosis. Thus, the guanosine triphosphatase dynamin-1 is indispensable for vesicle endocytosis at this fast central nervous system (CNS) synapse.
The [2-14C]deoxyglucose method was used to identify the cerebral areas related to vision in the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta). This was achieved by comparing glucose utilization in a visually stimulated with that in a visually deafferented hemisphere. The cortical areas related to vision included the entire expanse of striate, prestriate, and inferior temporal cortex as far forward as the temporal pole, the posterior part of the inferior parietal lobule, and the prearcuate and inferior prefrontal cortex. Subcortically, in addition to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus and superficial layers of the superior colliculus, and structures related to vision included large parts of the pulvinar, caudate, putamen, claustrum, and amygdala. These results, which are consonant with a model of visual function that postulates an occipito-temporo-prefrontal pathway for object vision and an occipito-parieto-prefrontal pathway for spatial vision, reveal the full extent of those pathways and identify their points of contact with limbic, striatal, and diencephalic structures.
Behavioural learning depends on the brain's capacity to respond to instructive experience and is often enhanced during a juvenile sensitive period. How instructive experience acts on the juvenile brain to trigger behavioural learning remains unknown. In vitro studies show that forms of synaptic strengthening thought to underlie learning are accompanied by an increase in the stability, number and size of dendritic spines, which are the major sites of excitatory synaptic transmission in the vertebrate brain. In vivo imaging studies in sensory cortical regions reveal that these structural features can be affected by disrupting sensory experience and that spine turnover increases during sensitive periods for sensory map formation. These observations support two hypotheses: first, the increased capacity for behavioural learning during a sensitive period is associated with enhanced spine dynamics on sensorimotor neurons important for the learned behaviour; second, instructive experience rapidly stabilizes and strengthens these dynamic spines. Here we report a test of these hypotheses using two-photon in vivo imaging to measure spine dynamics in zebra finches, which learn to sing by imitating a tutor song during a juvenile sensitive period. Spine dynamics were measured in the forebrain nucleus HVC, the proximal site where auditory information merges with an explicit song motor representation, immediately before and after juvenile finches first experienced tutor song. Higher levels of spine turnover before tutoring correlated with a greater capacity for subsequent song imitation. In juveniles with high levels of spine turnover, hearing a tutor song led to the rapid ( approximately 24-h) stabilization, accumulation and enlargement of dendritic spines in HVC. Moreover, in vivo intracellular recordings made immediately before and after the first day of tutoring revealed robust enhancement of synaptic activity in HVC. These findings suggest that behavioural learning results when instructive experience is able to rapidly stabilize and strengthen synapses on sensorimotor neurons important for the control of the learned behaviour.
Acute modulation of P/Q-type (alpha1A) calcium channels by neuronal activity-dependent changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration may contribute to short-term synaptic plasticity, potentially enriching the neurocomputational capabilities of the brain. An unconventional mechanism for such channel modulation has been proposed in which calmodulin (CaM) may exert two opposing effects on individual channels, initially promoting ('facilitation') and then inhibiting ('inactivation') channel opening. Here we report that such dual regulation arises from surprising Ca2+-transduction capabilities of CaM. First, although facilitation and inactivation are two competing processes, both require Ca2+-CaM binding to a single 'IQ-like' domain on the carboxy tail of alpha1A; a previously identified 'CBD' CaM-binding site has no detectable role. Second, expression of a CaM mutant with impairment of all four of its Ca2+-binding sites (CaM1234) eliminates both forms of modulation. This result confirms that CaM is the Ca2+ sensor for channel regulation, and indicates that CaM may associate with the channel even before local Ca2+ concentration rises. Finally, the bifunctional capability of CaM arises from bifurcation of Ca2+ signalling by the lobes of CaM: Ca2+ binding to the amino-terminal lobe selectively initiates channel inactivation, whereas Ca2+ sensing by the carboxy-terminal lobe induces facilitation. Such lobe-specific detection provides a compact means to decode local Ca2+ signals in two ways, and to separately initiate distinct actions on a single molecular complex.
Large-conductance calcium- and voltage-activated potassium channels (BKCa) are dually activated by membrane depolarization and elevation of cytosolic calcium ions (Ca2+). Under normal cellular conditions, BKCa channel activation requires Ca2+ concentrations that typically occur in close proximity to Ca2+ sources. We show that BKCa channels affinity-purified from rat brain are assembled into macromolecular complexes with the voltage-gated calcium channels Cav1.2 (L-type), Cav2.1 (P/Q-type), and Cav2.2 (N-type). Heterologously expressed BKCa-Cav complexes reconstitute a functional "Ca2+ nanodomain" where Ca2+ influx through the Cav channel activates BKCa in the physiological voltage range with submillisecond kinetics. Complex formation with distinct Cav channels enables BKCa-mediated membrane hyperpolarization that controls neuronal firing pattern and release of hormones and transmitters in the central nervous system.
Aggregated alpha-synuclein proteins form brain lesions that are hallmarks of neurodegenerative synucleinopathies, and oxidative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of some of these disorders. Using antibodies to specific nitrated tyrosine residues in alpha-synuclein, we demonstrate extensive and widespread accumulations of nitrated alpha-synuclein in the signature inclusions of Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, the Lewy body variant of Alzheimer's disease, and multiple system atrophy brains. We also show that nitrated alpha-synuclein is present in the major filamentous building blocks of these inclusions, as well as in the insoluble fractions of affected brain regions of synucleinopathies. The selective and specific nitration of alpha-synuclein in these disorders provides evidence to directly link oxidative and nitrative damage to the onset and progression of neurodegenerative synucleinopathies.
Glutamate uptake into nerve and glial cells usually functions to keep the extracellular glutamate concentration low in the central nervous system. But one component of glutamate release from neurons is calcium-independent, suggesting a non-vesicular release that may be due to a reversal of glutamate uptake. The activity of the electrogenic glutamate uptake carrier can be monitored by measuring the membrane current it produces, and uptake is activated by intracellular potassium ions. Here we report that raising the potassium concentration around glial cells evokes an outward current component produced by reversed glutamate uptake. This current is activated by intracellular glutamate and sodium, inhibited by extracellular glutamate and sodium, and increased by membrane depolarization. These results demonstrate a non-vesicular mechanism for the release of glutamate from glial cells and neurons. This mechanism may contribute to the neurotoxic rise in extracellular glutamate concentration during brain anoxia.
The neural basis of sexual orientation in Drosophila was studied by the production of males with regionally feminized brains. Such flies express the female form of the sex determination gene transformer in a limited number of neurons under the control of GAL4 enhancer trap inserts. This method facilitated the creation of lines with a stable pattern of feminization. In tests of sexual preferences, flies that were feminized in a portion of the antennal lobes or in a subset of the corpora pedunculata (mushroom bodies) courted both males and females. These two brain structures, both of which are involved in olfactory processing, may function in the recognition of sex-specific pheromones, in the control of sex-specific behaviors, or both.
We discovered that when adult rats experience an association between visual stimuli and subsequent rewards, the responses of a substantial fraction of neurons in the primary visual cortex evolve from those that relate solely to the physical attributes of the stimuli to those that accurately predict the timing of reward. In addition to revealing a remarkable type of response plasticity in adult V1, these data demonstrate that reward-timing activity-a "higher" brain function-can occur very early in sensory-processing paths. These findings challenge the traditional interpretation of activity in the primary visual cortex.
Both Alzheimer's disease and senile dementia of the Alzheimer type (AD/SDAT) are progressive dementias characterized neuropathologically by the presence in the cerebral cortex of numerous neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques. We use the abbreviation AD/SDAT to denote all such cases, irrespective of age of onset. Studies of neurotransmitter-related parameters in autopsied brain tissues from patients with AD/SDAT have, to date, been confined to five putative transmitter systems. Acetycholine-releasing neurones seem to be most markedly and consistently affected, as judged by the extensive reductions in choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and acetylcholinesterase activities that have been reported. Despite numerous studies, there is no consistent evidence for the involvement of neurones releasing dopamine, noradrenaline, serotonin, or gamma-aminobutyric acid in AD/SDAT, nor for loss of muscarinic cholinergic receptors. Thus, the involvement of cholinergic neurones in AD/SDAT seems to be specific. However, the possible involvement of neurones using other chemicals as transmitters has yet to be explored. The recent recognition of the existence of so-called 'peptidergic neurones' in the mammalian brain (for review see ref. 8) and the availability of radioimmunoassay (RIA) techniques for studying these peptides, have led us to begin a systematic investigation of neuropeptides in autopsied brain tissue from cases of AD/SDAT, and from neurologically normal individuals. We report here results obtained with a RIA for somatostatin, showing that somatostatin-like immunoreactivity in the cerebral cortex is reduced in tissue from AD/SDAT patients.
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), the major inhibitory transmitter in the brain, goes through a transitory phase of excitation during development. The excitatory phase promotes neuronal growth and integration into circuits. We show here that spontaneous nicotinic cholinergic activity is responsible for terminating GABAergic excitation and initiating inhibition. It does so by changing chloride transporter levels, shifting the driving force on GABA-induced currents. The timing of the transition is critical, because the two phases of GABAergic signaling provide contrasting developmental instructions. Synergistic with nicotinic excitation, GABAergic inhibition constrains neuronal morphology and innervation. The results reveal a multitiered activity-dependent strategy controlling neuronal development.
Firing patterns of single neurons in the hypothalamus, preoptic area, midbrain reticular system, and hippocampus of awake, freely moving female rats were temporally correlated with exploratory sniffing and vibrissa twitching, feeding, lordosis, locomotion, and (or) arousal. These relationships were remarkably stable during continuous observations lasting many hours. During extended periods when certain of these movements were not performed, the correlated neurons showed no action potentials for minutes at a time. Electrical stimulation at certain recording sites elicited behavior patterns whose spontaneous occurrence was accompanied by neuronal activation. Self-stimulation was elicited from sites spontaneously activated during exploratory behavior.
Glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), a recently cloned new member of the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily, promotes survival of cultured fetal mesencephalic dopamine neurons and is expressed in the developing striatum. There have, however, been no reports about effects of GDNF in situ. We have used the dopaminergic neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), which produces parkinsonian symptoms in man, to determine whether GDNF might exert protective or regenerative effects in vivo in the adult nigrostriatal dopamine system in C57/B1 mice. GDNF injected over the substantia nigra or in striatum before MPTP potently protects the dopamine system, as shown by numbers of mesencephalic dopamine nerve cell bodies, dopamine nerve terminal densities and dopamine levels. When GDNF is given after MPTP, dopamine levels and fibre densities are significantly restored. In both cases, motor behaviour is increased above normal levels. We conclude that intracerebral GDNF administration exerts both protective and reparative effects on the nigrostriatal dopamine system, which may have implications for the development of new treatment strategies for Parkinson's disease.
Paying attention to a stimulus selectively increases the ability to process it. For example, when subjects attend to a specific region of a visual scene, their sensitivity to changes at that location increases. A large number of studies describe the behavioural consequences and neurophysiological correlates of attending to spatial locations. There has, in contrast, been little study of the allocation of attention over time. Because subjects can anticipate predictable events with great temporal precision, it seems probable that they might dynamically shift their attention when performing a familiar perceptual task whose constraints changed over time. We trained monkeys to respond to a stimulus change where the probability of occurrence changed over time. Recording from area V4 of the visual cortex in these animals, we found that the modulation of neuronal responses changed according to the probability of the change occurring at that instant. Thus, we show that the attentional modulation of sensory neurons reflects a subject's anticipation of the timing of behaviourally relevant events.
Our understanding of the cellular implementation of systems-level neural processes like action, thought and emotion has been limited by the availability of tools to interrogate specific classes of neural cells within intact, living brain tissue. Here we identify and develop an archaeal light-driven chloride pump (NpHR) from Natronomonas pharaonis for temporally precise optical inhibition of neural activity. NpHR allows either knockout of single action potentials, or sustained blockade of spiking. NpHR is compatible with ChR2, the previous optical excitation technology we have described, in that the two opposing probes operate at similar light powers but with well-separated action spectra. NpHR, like ChR2, functions in mammals without exogenous cofactors, and the two probes can be integrated with calcium imaging in mammalian brain tissue for bidirectional optical modulation and readout of neural activity. Likewise, NpHR and ChR2 can be targeted together to Caenorhabditis elegans muscle and cholinergic motor neurons to control locomotion bidirectionally. NpHR and ChR2 form a complete system for multimodal, high-speed, genetically targeted, all-optical interrogation of living neural circuits.
D2 dopamine and S2 serotonin receptors were imaged and measured in healthy human subjects by positron emission tomography after intravenous injection of 11C-labeled 3-N-methylspiperone. Levels of receptor in the caudate nucleus, putamen, and frontal cerebral cortex declined over the age span studied (19 to 73 years). The decline in D2 receptor in males was different from that in females.
The regulation of nerve growth factor (NGF) protein and NGF messenger RNA (mRNA) in the developing rat brain has been studied to assess the hypothesis that NGF supports the differentiation of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain. In the adult, the major targets of these neurons, the hippocampus and neocortex, contain the highest concentrations of NGF mRNA, but comparatively low ratios of NGF protein to its mRNA. In contrast, a high concentration of NGF protein and a low concentration of NGF mRNA were seen in the basal forebrain, consistent with retrograde transport of NGF protein into this region from the neocortex and hippocampus. In these two target regions NGF and NGF mRNA were barely detectable at birth, their concentrations increased to a peak at day 21, and then NGF mRNA, but not NGF protein, declined threefold by day 35. NGF accumulation in the basal forebrain paralleled that in the target regions and preceded an increase in choline acetyltransferase, suggesting that the differentiation of cholinergic projection neurons is indeed regulated by retrogradely transported NGF. In addition, high ratios of NGF protein to NGF mRNA, comparable to that in the basal forebrain, were seen in the olfactory bulb and cerebellum, suggesting that NGF may be transported into these regions by unidentified neurons.
Humans appear to have an inherent prosocial tendency toward one another in that we often take pleasure in seeing others succeed. This fact is almost certainly exploited by game shows, yet why watching others win elicits a pleasurable vicarious rewarding feeling in the absence of personal economic gain is unclear. One explanation is that game shows use contestants who have similarities to the viewing population, thereby kindling kin-motivated responses (for example, prosocial behavior). Using a game show-inspired paradigm, we show that the interactions between the ventral striatum and anterior cingulate cortex subserve the modulation of vicarious reward by similarity, respectively. Our results support studies showing that similarity acts as a proximate neurobiological mechanism where prosocial behavior extends to unrelated strangers.
A direct method has been employed to estimate the rate of production by human brain of 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenethyleneglycol, the major metabolite of brain norepinephrine, a brain neurotransmitter. Venous specimens were obtained from the internal jugular vein from ten awake human subjects at a puncture site above the common facial vein, the first major source of extracranial inflow. Arterial specimens were simultaneously obtained from the radial artery. Plasma samples were assayed and a highly significant difference was found in the concentration of the metabolite in plasma coming out of the brain (venous blood) as compared to plasma entering the brain (arterial blood). This venous-arterial difference was calculated to be 0.7 +/- 0.1 nanogram per milliliter of blood. Assuming an adult brain weight of 1400 grams and normal cerebral blood flow, it is estimated that the rate of production of 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenethyleneglycol by the awake human brain is approximately 597 nanograms per minute or 35.8 micrograms per hour. Urine specimens were also collected from six of these subjects during a period of 1 to 3.5 hours, which bracketed the time the blood samples were obtained. For these six subjects the output of 3-methyoxy-4-hydroxyphenethyleneglycol by whole brain was estimated to be 40.9 micrograms per hour, whereas the rate of its excretion into urine was 64.5 micrograms per hour.
Topical application of convulsants to the rat sensorimotor cortex in concentrations sufficient to cause repetitive focal motor seizures resulted in acute neuropathology (dark cell neuronal degeneration and spongiform neurophil changes) involving both the cortical seizure focus and certain thalamic nuclei within seizure pathways. Changes in the cortex were localized primarily in layer IV and those in the thalamus in nuclei having reciprocal connections with the cortical focus. The spongiform neuropil changes consisted of massively dilated presynaptic axon terminals in the cortex and postsynaptic dendrites in the thalamus. The dendritic and dark cell changes resemble the excitotoxic damage caused by glutamate and aspartate. Since these putative transmitters may be released locally from recurrent collaterals and remotely from corticothalamic axons, excessive release of glutamate or aspartate may account for the changes in both sites. The abnormal axons in sensory cortex appear to be terminals of thalamocortical neurons. Swelling of these axons may be caused by excessive anti- and orthodromic firing in the course of focal motor seizures.
Didelot et al. (Reports, 11 August 2006, p. 851) claimed that Drosophila Tequila (Teq) and human neurotrypsin are orthologs and concluded that deficient long-term memory after Teq inactivation indicates that neurotrypsin plays its essential role for human cognitive functions through a similar mechanism. Our analyses suggest that Teq and neurotrypsin are not orthologous, leading us to question their equivalent roles in higher brain function.
What limits the rate at which sensory information can be transmitted across synaptic connections in the brain? High-frequency signalling is restricted to brief bursts at many central excitatory synapses, whereas graded ribbon-type synapses can sustain release and transmit information at high rates. Here we investigate transmission at the cerebellar mossy fibre terminal, which can fire at over 200 Hz for sustained periods in vivo, yet makes few synaptic contacts onto individual granule cells. We show that connections between mossy fibres and granule cells can sustain high-frequency signalling at physiological temperature. We use fluctuation analysis and pharmacological block of desensitization to identify the quantal determinants of short-term plasticity and combine these with a short-term plasticity model and cumulative excitatory postsynaptic current analysis to quantify the determinants of sustained high-frequency transmission. We show that release is maintained at each release site by rapid reloading of release-ready vesicles from an unusually large releasable pool of vesicles (approximately 300 per site). Our results establish that sustained vesicular release at high rates is not restricted to graded ribbon-type synapses and that mossy fibres are well suited for transmitting broad-bandwidth rate-coded information to the input layer of the cerebellar cortex.
Footshock stress produced an immediate increase in brain concentrations of 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol sulfate (MHPG-SO4), a major metabolite of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine, in the rat brain. Twenty-four hours after footshock stress, when concentrations had returned to baseline, increases in MHPG-SO4 and emotional behavior could be elicited by previously neutral environmental stimuli that had been paired with the stress.
Over a period of 2 weeks, adult cats were twice a day exposed for 1 hour to a visual environment consisting only of vertical stripes and for the rest of the time were kept in darkness. Subsequent investigation of the striate cortex showed a decrease in the number of neurons sensitive to orientations around the vertical relative to those sensitive to horizontal orientations. This indicates that plasticity of functional properties of the cortical neuronal network still exists in adult animals.
Schizophrenia is a devastating, highly heritable brain disorder of unknown etiology. Recently, the first common genetic variant associated on a genome-wide level with schizophrenia and possibly bipolar disorder was discovered in ZNF804A (rs1344706). We show, by using an imaging genetics approach, that healthy carriers of rs1344706 risk genotypes exhibit no changes in regional activity but pronounced gene dosage-dependent alterations in functional coupling (correlated activity) of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) across hemispheres and with hippocampus, mirroring findings in patients, and abnormal coupling of amygdala. Our findings establish disturbed connectivity as a neurogenetic risk mechanism for psychosis supported by genome-wide association, show that rs1344706 or variation in linkage disequilibrium is functional in human brain, and validate the intermediate phenotype strategy in psychiatry.
In several areas of the macaque brain, neurons fire during delayed-response tasks at a rate determined by the value of the reward expected at the end of the trial. The activity of these neurons might be related to the value of the expected reward or to the degree of motivation induced by expectation of the reward. We describe results indicating that the nature of reward-dependent activity varies across areas. Neuronal activity in orbitofrontal cortex represents the value of the expected reward, whereas neuronal activity in premotor cortex reflects the degree of motivation.
Three groups of gamma-aminobutyric acid--containing neurons were found in the mammillary region of the posterior hypothalamus. The groups correspond to the tuberal, caudal, and postmammillary caudal magnocellular nuclei. Many cells in these nuclei were retrogradely labeled with fast blue after the injection of this fluorescent dye into the neocortex. Immunohistochemical experiments showed that these same neurons also contained the gamma-aminobutyric acid-synthesizing enzyme glutamate decarboxylase. These results provide morphological evidence for a gamma-aminobutyric acid pathway arising in magnocellular neurons of the posterior hypothalamus and innervating the neocortex.
The prefrontal cortex is implicated in such human characteristics as volition, planning, abstract reasoning and affect. Frontal-lobe damage can cause disinhibition such that the behaviour of a subject is guided by previously acquired responses that are inappropriate to the current situation. Here we demonstrate that disinhibition, or a loss of inhibitory control, can be selective for particular cognitive functions and that different regions of the prefrontal cortex provide inhibitory control in different aspects of cognitive processing. Thus, whereas damage to the lateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann's area 9) in monkeys causes a loss of inhibitory control in attentional selection, damage to the orbito-frontal cortex in monkeys causes a loss of inhibitory control in 'affective' processing, thereby impairing the ability to alter behaviour in response to fluctuations in the emotional significance of stimuli. These findings not only support the view that the prefrontal cortex has multiple functions, but also provide evidence for the distribution of different cognitive functions within specific regions of prefrontal cortex.
Contrary to long-held assumptions, recent work indicates that neurons may profoundly change transmitter status during development and maturity. For example, sympathetic neurons, classically regarded as exclusively noradrenergic or cholinergic, can also express putative peptide transmitters such as substance P. This neuronal plasticity is directly related to membrane depolarization and sodium ion influx. The same molecular mechanisms and plastic responses occur in mature as well as developing neurons. Further, contrary to traditional teaching, adult primary sensory neurons may express the catecholaminergic phenotype in vivo. Transmitter plasticity is not restricted to the peripheral nervous system: ongoing studies of the brain nucleus locus ceruleus in culture indicate that specific extracellular factors elicit marked transmitter changes. Consequently, neurotransmitter expression and metabolism are dynamic, changing processes, regulated by a variety of defined factors. Transmitter plasticity adds a newly recognized dimension of flexibility to nervous system function.
Blindsight, the visually evoked voluntary responses of patients with striate cortical destruction that are demonstrated despite a phenomenal blindness, has attracted attention from neuroscientists and philosophers interested in problems of perceptual consciousness and its neuronal basis. It is assumed to be mediated by the numerous extra-geniculostriate cortical retinofugal pathways whose properties are studied primarily in monkeys. Like patients with blindsight, monkeys with lesions of the primary visual cortex can learn to detect, localize and distinguish between visual stimuli presented within their visual field defects. Although the patients deny seeing the stimuli they can nevertheless respond to (by forced-choice guessing) in their phenomenally blind fields, it is not known whether the monkeys experience the same absence of phenomenal vision. To determine whether they too have blindsight, or whether they actually see the stimuli in their field defects, monkeys who showed excellent detection in tasks where a visual stimulus was presented on every trial, albeit at different positions, were tested in a signal-detection task in which half the trials were blank trials, with no visual stimulus. They classified the visual stimuli presented in the field defect as blank trials, demonstrating, like patients, blindsight rather than degraded real vision.
The analysis of neuropsychological disorders of lexical processing has provided important clues about the general organization of the lexical system and the internal structure of the processing components. Reports of patients with selective dysfunction of specific semantic categories such as abstract versus concrete words, living things versus inanimate objects, animals, fruits and vegetables, proper names and so forth, support the hypothesis that the neural organization of the semantic processing component is organized in these categories. There are reports of selective dysfunction of the grammatical categories noun and verb, suggesting that a dimension of lexical organization is the grammatical class of words. But the results reported in these studies have not provided unambiguous evidence concerning two fundamental questions about the nature and the locus of this organization within the lexical system. Is the noun-verb distinction represented in the semantic or in the phonological and orthographic lexicons? Is grammatical-class knowledge represented independently of lexical forms or is it represented separately and redundantly within each modality-specific lexicon? Here we report the performance of two brain-damaged subjects with modality-specific deficits restricted principally (H.W.) or virtually only (S.J.D) to verbs in oral and written production, respectively. The contrasting performance suggests that grammatical-class distinctions are redundantly represented in the phonological and orthographic output lexical components.
A new technique in which elicited behavior of the freely moving rat is used to measure the poststimulation excitability cycle of the central neurons mediating that behavior has been adapted from accepted methods of neurophysiology. A continuous train of pairs of brief pulses was delivered to pain systems in the midbrain. Rate of lever pressing to achieve 3-second rests from this stimulation was measured as a function of the interval separating the pulses within pairs. Evidence for latent addition, absolute refractory period, temporal summation, and adaptation was demonstrated. Obtained relationships suggested that three sets of fibers may carry the aversive signal and that synaptic integration of pain in the brain may be related to Stevens' power law functions.
The aetiology of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal paralytic disease, is largely unknown. Here we show that there is a defect in the editing of the messenger RNA encoding the GluR2 subunit of glutamate AMPA receptors in the spinal motor neurons of individuals affected by ALS. This failure to swap an arginine for a glutamine residue at a crucial site in the subunit, which occurs normally in the affected brain areas of patients with other neurodegenerative diseases, will interfere with the correct functioning of the glutamate receptors and may be a contributory cause of neuronal death in ALS patients.
The cerebral cortex of the human brain is a sheet of about 10 billion neurons divided into discrete subdivisions or areas that process particular aspects of sensation, movement, and cognition. Recent evidence has begun to transform our understanding of how cortical areas form, make specific connections with other brain regions, develop unique processing networks, and adapt to changes in inputs.
When the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in one hemisphere of a rhesus monkey is resected 6 weeks before birth and the fetus survives to postnatal ages, neurons of the corresponding cortex in the intact hemisphere issue a greatly expanded projection to the contralateral caudate nucleus in addition to a normal projection to the ipsilateral caudate. The enhancement of the crossed prefronto-caudate pathway after prenatal neurosurgery provides direct evidence for lesion-induced neuronal rearrangement in the primate telencephalon.
The segregation of voltage-dependent sodium channels to specialized regions of the neuron is crucial for propagation of an action potential. Studies of their lateral mobility indicate that sodium channels are freely mobile on the neuronal cell body but are immobile at the axon hillock, presynaptic terminal and at focal points along the axon. To elucidate the mechanisms that regulate sodium channel topography and mobility, we searched for specific proteins from the brain that associate with sodium channels. Here we show that sodium channels labelled with 3H-saxitoxin (STX) are precipitated in the presence of exogenous brain ankyrin by anti-ankyrin antibodies and that 125I-labelled ankyrin binds with high affinity to sodium channels reconstituted into lipid vesicles. The cytoplasmic domain of the erythrocyte anion transporter competes for the latter interaction. Neither the neuronal GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor channel complex nor the dihydropyridine (DHP) receptor bind brain ankyrin. The results indicate that brain ankyrin links the voltage-dependent sodium channel to the underlying cytoskeleton and may help to maintain axolemmal membrane heterogeneity and control sodium channel mobility.
The most abundant inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), exerts its main effects via a GABAA receptor that gates a chloride channel in the subsynaptic membrane. These receptors can contain a modulatory unit, the benzodiazepine receptor, through which ligands of different chemical classes can increase or decrease GABAA receptor function. We have now visualized a GABAA receptor in mammalian brain using monoclonal antibodies. The protein complex recognized by the antibodies contained high- and low-affinity binding sites for GABA as well as binding sites for benzodiazepines, indicative of a GABAA receptor functionally associated with benzodiazepine receptors. As the pattern of brain immunoreactivity corresponds to the autoradiographical distribution of benzodiazepine binding sites, most benzodiazepine receptors seem to be part of GABAA receptors. Two constituent proteins were identified immunologically. Because the monoclonal antibodies cross-react with human brain, they provide a means for elucidating those CNS disorders which may be linked to a dysfunction of a GABAA receptor.
Stimulus-evoked oscillatory synchronization of neural assemblies has been described in the olfactory and visual systems of several vertebrates and invertebrates. In locusts, information about odour identity is contained in the timing of action potentials in an oscillatory population response, suggesting that oscillations may reflect a common reference for messages encoded in time. Although the stimulus-evoked oscillatory phenomenon is reliable, its roles in sensation, perception, memory formation and pattern recognition remain to be demonstrated--a task requiring a behavioural paradigm. Using honeybees, we now demonstrate that odour encoding involves, as it does in locusts, the oscillatory synchronization of assemblies of projection neurons and that this synchronization is also selectively abolished by picrotoxin, an antagonist of the GABA(A) (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor. By using a behavioural learning paradigm, we show that picrotoxin-induced desynchronization impairs the discrimination of molecularly similar odorants, but not that of dissimilar odorants. It appears, therefore, that oscillatory synchronization of neuronal assemblies is functionally relevant, and essential for fine sensory discrimination. This suggests that oscillatory synchronization and the kind of temporal encoding it affords provide an additional dimension by which the brain could segment spatially overlapping stimulus representations.
Molecular approaches to understanding the functional circuitry of the nervous system promise new insights into the relationship between genes, brain and behaviour. The cellular diversity of the brain necessitates a cellular resolution approach towards understanding the functional genomics of the nervous system. We describe here an anatomically comprehensive digital atlas containing the expression patterns of approximately 20,000 genes in the adult mouse brain. Data were generated using automated high-throughput procedures for in situ hybridization and data acquisition, and are publicly accessible online. Newly developed image-based informatics tools allow global genome-scale structural analysis and cross-correlation, as well as identification of regionally enriched genes. Unbiased fine-resolution analysis has identified highly specific cellular markers as well as extensive evidence of cellular heterogeneity not evident in classical neuroanatomical atlases. This highly standardized atlas provides an open, primary data resource for a wide variety of further studies concerning brain organization and function.
Although the molecular, cellular, and systems mechanisms required for initial memory processing have been intensively investigated, those underlying permanent memory storage remain elusive. We present neuroanatomical, pharmacological, and genetic results demonstrating that the anterior cingulate cortex plays a critical role in remote memory for contextual fear conditioning. Imaging of activity-dependent genes shows that the anterior cingulate is activated by remote memory and that this activation is impaired by a null alpha-CaMKII mutation that blocks remote memory. Accordingly, reversible inactivation of this structure in normal mice disrupts remote memory without affecting recent memory.
We argue that cortical maps, such as those for ocular dominance, orientation and retinotopic position in primary visual cortex, can be understood in terms of dimension-reducing mappings from many-dimensional parameter spaces to the surface of the cortex. The goal of these mappings is to preserve as far as possible neighbourhood relations in parameter space so that local computations in parameter space can be performed locally in the cortex. We have found that, in a simple case, certain self-organizing models generate maps that are near-optimally local, in the sense that they come close to minimizing the neuronal wiring required for local operations. When these self-organizing models are applied to the task of simultaneously mapping retinotopic position and orientation, they produce maps with orientation vortices resembling those produced in primary visual cortex. This approach also yields a new prediction, which is that the mapping of position in visual cortex will be distorted in the orientation fracture zones.
Zinc is present in presynaptic nerve terminals throughout the mammalian central nervous system and likely serves as an endogenous signaling substance. However, excessive exposure to extracellular zinc can damage central neurons. After transient forebrain ischemia in rats, chelatable zinc accumulated specifically in degenerating neurons in the hippocampal hilus and CA1, as well as in the cerebral cortex, thalamus, striatum, and amygdala. This accumulation preceded neurodegeneration, which could be prevented by the intraventricular injection of a zinc chelating agent. The toxic influx of zinc may be a key mechanism underlying selective neuronal death after transient global ischemic insults.
Emotion is normally regulated in the human brain by a complex circuit consisting of the orbital frontal cortex, amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, and several other interconnected regions. There are both genetic and environmental contributions to the structure and function of this circuitry. We posit that impulsive aggression and violence arise as a consequence of faulty emotion regulation. Indeed, the prefrontal cortex receives a major serotonergic projection, which is dysfunctional in individuals who show impulsive violence. Individuals vulnerable to faulty regulation of negative emotion are at risk for violence and aggression. Research on the neural circuitry of emotion regulation suggests new avenues of intervention for such at-risk populations.
Female rats were maintained on 8 or 27 percent protein diet by a pair-feeding schedule for 1 month before mating and throughout gestation. The brains of newborn rats from females on the 8 percent protein diet contained significantly less DNA and protein compared to the progeny of the females on the 27 percent diet. The data on DNA indicate that there are fewer cells; the protein content per cell was also lower. If, at birth, the brain cells are predominantly neurons, and their number becomes final at that time, then such dietary restriction may result in some permanent brain-neuron deficiency. This quantitative alteration in number as well as the qualitative one (protein per cell) may constitute a basis for the frequently reported impaired behavior of the offspring from protein-deprived mothers.
The 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose technique was used to measure regional cerebral glucose utilization by human subjects during functional activation. Normal male volunteers subjected to one or more sensory stimuli (tactile, visual, or auditory) exhibited focal increases in glucose metabolism in response to the stimulus. Unilateral visual hemifield stimulation caused the contralateral striate cortex to become more metabolically active than the striate cortex ipsilateral to the stimulated hemifield. Similarly, stroking the fingers and hand of one arm with brush produced an increase in metabolism in the contralateral postcentral gyrus, compared with the homologous ipsilateral region. The auditory stimulus, which consisted of a monaurally presented factual story caused an increase in glucose metabolism in the auditory cortex in the hemisphere contralateral to the stimulated ear. These results demonstrate that the technique is capable of providing functional maps in vivo related to both body region and submodality of sensory information in the human brain.
Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurological disorder characterized by progressive chorea, cognitive impairment and emotional disturbance. The disease usually occurs in midlife and symptoms progress inexorably to mental and physical incapacitation. It has been postulated that an excitotoxin is involved in the pathogenesis of HD. Schwarcz and colleagues have shown that quinolinic acid (QA) can produce axon-sparing lesions similar to those observed in HD. The lesions result in a depletion of neurotransmitters contained within striatal spiny neurones, for example gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), while dopamine is unaffected. Recently, we and others have demonstrated that in HD striatum there is a paradoxical 3-5-fold increase in both somatostatin and neuropeptide Y which is attributable to selective preservation of a subclass of striatal aspiny neurones in which these peptides are co-localized. In the present study we demonstrate that lesions due to quinolinic acid closely resemble those of HD as they result in marked depletions of both GABA and substance P, with selective sparing of somatostatin/neuropeptide Y neurones. Lesions produced by kainic acid (KA), ibotenic acid (IA) and N-methyl-D-aspartate (MeAsp) were unlike those produced by QA, as they affected all cell types without sparing somatostatin/neuropeptide Y neurones. These results suggest that QA or a similar compound could be responsible for neuronal degeneration in HD.
The computational power of single neurons is greatly enhanced by active dendritic conductances that have a large influence on their spike activity. In cortical output neurons such as the large pyramidal cells of layer 5 (L5), activation of apical dendritic calcium channels leads to plateau potentials that increase the gain of the input/output function and switch the cell to burst-firing mode. The apical dendrites are innervated by local excitatory and inhibitory inputs as well as thalamic and corticocortical projections, which makes it a formidable task to predict how these inputs influence active dendritic properties in vivo. Here we investigate activity in populations of L5 pyramidal dendrites of the somatosensory cortex in awake and anaesthetized rats following sensory stimulation using a new fibre-optic method for recording dendritic calcium changes. We show that the strength of sensory stimulation is encoded in the combined dendritic calcium response of a local population of L5 pyramidal cells in a graded manner. The slope of the stimulus-response function was under the control of a particular subset of inhibitory neurons activated by synaptic inputs predominantly in L5. Recordings from single apical tuft dendrites in vitro showed that activity in L5 pyramidal neurons disynaptically coupled via interneurons directly blocks the initiation of dendritic calcium spikes in neighbouring pyramidal neurons. The results constitute a functional description of a cortical microcircuit in awake animals that relies on the active properties of L5 pyramidal dendrites and their very high sensitivity to inhibition. The microcircuit is organized so that local populations of apical dendrites can adaptively encode bottom-up sensory stimuli linearly across their full dynamic range.
The neuropeptide receptors which are present in very small quantities in the cell and are embedded tightly in the plasma membrane have not been well characterized. Mammals contain three distinct tachykinin neuropeptides, substance P, substance K and neuromedin K, and it has been suggested that there are multiple tachykinin receptors. By electrophysiological measurement, we have previously shown that Xenopus oocytes injected with brain and stomach mRNAs faithfully express mammalian substance-P and substance-K receptors, respectively. Here we report the isolation of the cDNA clone for bovine substance-K receptor (SKR) by extending this method to develop a new cloning strategy. We constructed a stomach cDNA library with a cloning vector that allowed in vitro synthesis of mRNAs and then identified a particular cDNA clone by testing for receptor expression following injection of the mRNAs synthesized in vitro into the oocyte system. Because oocytes injected with exogenous mRNAs can express numerous receptors and channels, our new strategy will be applicable in the general molecular cloning of these proteins. The result provides the first indication that the neuropeptide receptor has sequence similarity with rhodopsin-type receptors (the G-protein-coupled receptor family) and thus possesses multiple membrane-spanning domains.
Differential spread of afterdischarge activity initiated electrically in ventral and dorsal parts of the hippocampal formation was studied by the [14C]deoxyglucose technique in rats. Afterdischarges initiated in either the ventral or dorsal hippocampal formation, without activation of the ventral subicular cortex, increased glucose utilization in the lateral septum. In contrast, afterdischarges initiated by direct activation of the ventral subicular cortex increased glucose utilization in extensive areas of the ipsilateral amygdala, claustrum, hypothalamus, preoptic region, and basal forebrain.
Amyloid deposition in senile plaques and the cerebral vasculature is a marker of Alzheimer's disease. Whether amyloid itself contributes to the neurodegenerative process or is simply a by-product of that process is unknown. Pheochromocytoma (PC12) and fibroblast (NIH 3T3) cell lines were transfected with portions of the gene for the human amyloid precursor protein. Stable PC12 cell transfectants expressing a specific amyloid-containing fragment of the precursor protein gradually degenerated when induced to differentiate into neuronal cells with nerve growth factor. Conditioned medium from these cells was toxic to neurons in primary hippocampal cultures, and the toxic agent could be removed by immunoabsorption with an antibody directed against the amyloid polypeptide. Thus, a peptide derived from the amyloid precursor may be neurotoxic.
Serotonergic dysregulation within the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is implicated in many neuropsychiatric disorders, but the precise role of serotonin within the PFC is poorly understood. Using a serial discrimination reversal paradigm, we showed that upon reversal, selective serotonin depletion of the marmoset PFC produced perseverative responding to the previously rewarded stimulus without any significant effects on either retention of a discrimination learned preoperatively or acquisition of a novel discrimination postoperatively. These results highlight the importance of prefrontal serotonin in behavioral flexibility and are highly relevant to obsessive-compulsive disorder, schizophrenia, and the cognitive sequelae of drug abuse in which perseveration is prominent.
Insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE), a Zn2+-metalloprotease, is involved in the clearance of insulin and amyloid-beta (refs 1-3). Loss-of-function mutations of IDE in rodents cause glucose intolerance and cerebral accumulation of amyloid-beta, whereas enhanced IDE activity effectively reduces brain amyloid-beta (refs 4-7). Here we report structures of human IDE in complex with four substrates (insulin B chain, amyloid-beta peptide (1-40), amylin and glucagon). The amino- and carboxy-terminal domains of IDE (IDE-N and IDE-C, respectively) form an enclosed cage just large enough to encapsulate insulin. Extensive contacts between IDE-N and IDE-C keep the degradation chamber of IDE inaccessible to substrates. Repositioning of the IDE domains enables substrate access to the catalytic cavity. IDE uses size and charge distribution of the substrate-binding cavity selectively to entrap structurally diverse polypeptides. The enclosed substrate undergoes conformational changes to form beta-sheets with two discrete regions of IDE for its degradation. Consistent with this model, mutations disrupting the contacts between IDE-N and IDE-C increase IDE catalytic activity 40-fold. The molecular basis for substrate recognition and allosteric regulation of IDE could aid in designing IDE-based therapies to control cerebral amyloid-beta and blood sugar concentrations.
In the mustache bat (Pteronotus pamellii rubiginosus) the frequency and amplitude of an acoustic signal are represented in the coordinates parallel to the surface of the Doppler-shifted-CF (constant frequency) processing area ofthe primary auditory cortex. In this area all cortical neurons studied were excited by contralateral stimuli, and almost all of them were either excited or inhibited by ipsilateral stimuli. These are called E-E (ipsilateral and contralateral excitatory) and I-E (ipsilateral inhibitory and contralateral excitatory) neurons, respectively. The I-E neurons are directionally sensitive, while the E-E neurons are not. The E-E neurons are equally sensitive to echoes between 30 degrees contralateral and 30 degrees ipsilateral. Of the electrode penetrations orthogonal to the Doppler-shifted-CF processing area, 57 percent were characterized by either E-E or I-E neurons. Thus, there are at least two types of binaural columns: E-E columns, mainly located in a ventral part of the Doppler-shifted-CF processing area, where neurons are tuned to weak echoes; and IE columns, mainly distributed in a dorsal part, where neurons are tuned to moderate to intense echoes. Therefore, neurons tuned to weaker echoes integrate or even multiply faint signals from both ears for effective detection of a distant small target, while neurons tuned to moderate to intense echoes are suited for processing directional information and are stimulated when a bat approaches a target at short range. The Doppler-shifted-CF processing area may be considered to consist of two functional subdivisions.
The development of distinct vertebrate neurons is defined by the unique profiles of genes that neurons express. It is accepted that neural genes are regulated at the point of transcription initiation, but the role of messenger RNA elongation in neural gene regulation has not been examined. Here we describe the mutant foggy, identified in a genetic screen for mutations that affect neuronal development in zebrafish, that displayed a reduction of dopamine-containing neurons and a corresponding surplus of serotonin-containing neurons in the hypothalamus. Positional cloning disclosed that Foggy is a brain-enriched nuclear protein that is structurally related to the transcription elongation factor Spt5 (refs 5-12). Foggy is not part of the basic transcription apparatus but a phosphorylation-dependent, dual regulator of transcription elongation. The mutation disrupts its repressive but not its stimulatory activity. Our results provide molecular, genetic and biochemical evidence that negative regulators of transcription elongation control key aspects of neuronal development.
Huntington's disease is a genetic disorder that results from degeneration of striatal neurons, particularly those containing GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid). There is no effective treatment for preventing or slowing this neuronal degeneration. Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) is a trophic factor for striatal neurons and therefore a potential therapeutic agent for Huntington's disease. Here we evaluate CNTF as a neuroprotective agent in a nonhuman primate model of Huntington's disease. We gave cynomolgus monkeys intrastriatal implants of polymer-encapsulated baby hamster kidney fibroblasts that had been genetically modified to secrete human CNTF. One week later, monkeys received unilateral injections of quinolinic acid into the previously implanted striatum to reproduce the neuropathology seen in Huntington's disease. Human CNTF was found to exert a neuroprotective effect on several populations of striatal cells, including GABAergic, cholinergic and diaphorase-positive neurons which were all destined to die following administration of quinolinic acid. Human CNTF also prevented the retrograde atrophy of layer V neurons in motor cortex and exerted a significant protective effect on the GABAergic innervation of the two important target fields of the striatal output neurons (the globus pallidus and pars reticulata of the substantia nigra). Our results show that human CNTF has a trophic influence on degenerating striatal neurons as well as on critical non-striatal regions such as the cerebral cortex, supporting the idea that human CNTF may help to prevent the degeneration of vulnerable striatal populations and cortical-striatal basal ganglia circuits in Huntington's disease.
The neuropeptide corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) is well known to act on the central nervous system in ways that mimic stress and result in decreases in exploration, increases in sympathetic activity, decreases in parasympathetic outflow, and decreases in appetitive behavior. Urocortin, a neuropeptide related to CRF, binds with high affinity to the CRF2 receptor, is more potent than CRF in suppressing appetite, but is less potent than CRF in producing anxiety-like effects and activation. Doses as low as 10 nanograms injected intracerebroventricularly were effective in decreasing food intake in food-deprived and free-feeding rats. These results suggest that urocortin may be an endogenous CRF-like factor in the brain responsible for the effects of stress on appetite.
Cutting the axons of the cholinergic neurons that project to the hippocampal formation results in death of most of these cells. Previous studies have shown that administration of nerve growth factor before or at the same time as the lesion will prevent this cell death. Here we demonstrate that basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF) administered into the brain reduces the death of cholinergic neurons in the medial septum and diagonal band of Broca after transection of their axons, in both young adult and aged rats. Moreover, FGF can partially protect against death of cholinergic neurons even when administered two days after axonal transection. These results indicate a possible function for FGF in the normal support of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons, but its range of activity could be wider, for FGF also supports noncholinergic neurons in vitro, it is localized in many of the central nervous system neurons, and it is found in relatively high concentrations in the brain.
Spatially resolved measurements of intracellular free calcium and of the changes produced by excitatory amino acids were made in neurons isolated from adult mammalian brain. Extremely long-lasting (minutes) Ca2+ gradients were induced in the apical dendrites of hippocampal CA1 neurons after brief (1 to 3 seconds), local application of either glutamate or N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA). These gradients reflect the continuous flux of Ca2+ into the dendrite. The sustained gradients, but not the immediate transient response to the agonists, were prevented by prior treatment with the protein kinase C inhibitor sphingosine. Expression of the long-lasting Ca2+ gradients generally required a priming or conditioning stimulus with the excitatory agonist. The findings demonstrate a coupling between NMDA receptor activation and long-lasting intracellular Ca2+ elevation that could contribute to certain use-dependent modifications of synaptic responses in hippocampal CA1 neurons.
Behavioural studies widely implicate sleep in memory consolidation in the learning of a broad range of behaviours. During sleep, brain regions are reactivated, and specific patterns of neural activity are replayed, consistent with patterns observed in previous waking behaviour. Birdsong learning is a paradigmatic model system for skill learning. Song development in juvenile zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) is characterized by sleep-dependent circadian fluctuations in singing behaviour, with immediate post-sleep deterioration in song structure followed by recovery later in the day. In sleeping adult birds, spontaneous bursting activity of forebrain premotor neurons in the robust nucleus of the arcopallium (RA) carries information about daytime singing. Here we show that, in juvenile zebra finches, playback during the day of an adult 'tutor' song induced profound and tutor-song-specific changes in bursting activity of RA neurons during the following night of sleep. The night-time neuronal changes preceded tutor-song-induced changes in singing, first observed the following day. Interruption of auditory feedback greatly reduced sleep bursting and prevented the tutor-song-specific neuronal remodelling. Thus, night-time neuronal activity is shaped by the interaction of the song model (sensory template) and auditory feedback, with changes in night-time activity preceding the onset of practice associated with vocal learning. We hypothesize that night-time bursting induces adaptive changes in premotor networks during sleep as part of vocal learning. By this hypothesis, adaptive changes driven by replay of sensory information at night and by evaluation of sensory feedback during the day interact to produce the complex circadian patterns seen early in vocal development.
Tyrosine kinase receptors stimulate the Ras signalling pathway by enhancing the activity of the SOS nucleotide-exchange factor. This occurs, at least in part, by the recruitment of an SOS-GRB2 complex to Ras in the plasma membrane. Here we describe a different signalling pathway to Ras that involves activation of the Ras-GRF exchange factor in response to Ca2+ influx. In particular, we show that the ability of Ras-GRF to activate Ras in vivo is markedly enhanced by raised Ca2+ concentrations. Activation is mediated by calmodulin binding to an IQ motif in Ras-GRF, because substitutions in conserved amino acids in this motif prevent both calmodulin binding to Ras-GRF and Ras-GRF activation in vivo. So far, full-length Ras-GRF has been detected only in brain neurons. Our findings implicate Ras-GRF in the regulation of neuronal functions that are influenced by Ca2+ signals.
Huntington's disease is an autosomal-dominant progressive neurodegenerative disorder resulting in specific neuronal loss and dysfunction in the striatum and cortex. The disease is universally fatal, with a mean survival following onset of 15-20 years and, at present, there is no effective treatment. The mutation in patients with Huntington's disease is an expanded CAG/polyglutamine repeat in huntingtin, a protein of unknown function with a relative molecular mass of 350,000 (M(r) 350K). The length of the CAG/polyglutamine repeat is inversely correlated with the age of disease onset. The molecular pathways mediating the neuropathology of Huntington's disease are poorly understood. Transgenic mice expressing exon 1 of the human huntingtin gene with an expanded CAG/polyglutamine repeat develop a progressive syndrome with many of the characteristics of human Huntington's disease. Here we demonstrate evidence of caspase-1 activation in the brains of mice and humans with the disease. In this transgenic mouse model of Huntington's disease, expression of a dominant-negative caspase-1 mutant extends survival and delays the appearance of neuronal inclusions, neurotransmitter receptor alterations and onset of symptoms, indicating that caspase-1 is important in the pathogenesis of the disease. In addition, we demonstrate that intracerebroventricular administration of a caspase inhibitor delays disease progression and mortality in the mouse model of Huntington's disease.
In the rat, the injection of insulin or the consumption of carbohydrate causes sequential increases in the concentrations of tryptophan in the plasma and the brain and of serotonin in the brain. Serotonin-containing neurons may thus participate in systems whereby the rat brain integrates information about the metabolic state in its relation to control of homeostatis and behavior.
Discussions of the evolution of intelligence have focused on monkeys and apes because of their close evolutionary relationship to humans. Other large-brained social animals, such as corvids, also understand their physical and social worlds. Here we review recent studies of tool manufacture, mental time travel, and social cognition in corvids, and suggest that complex cognition depends on a "tool kit" consisting of causal reasoning, flexibility, imagination, and prospection. Because corvids and apes share these cognitive tools, we argue that complex cognitive abilities evolved multiple times in distantly related species with vastly different brain structures in order to solve similar socioecological problems.
Kainic acid (KA), a powerful neurotoxic analogue of glutamate, has been extensively used as a tool for selectively lesioning neuronal cell bodies; however, axons or nerve terminals are spared from damage in the area injected with kainic acid. Injections of this neurotoxin in various brain regions were successfully used to locate cell bodies of neurones containing substance P, enkephalin and other putative neurotransmitters. While attempting to locate the cell bodies of the enkephalin containing neurones present in hippocampus using KA injections, we found that a few days after intracerebral injections of KA a drastic increase in the Met-enkephalin (ME) content of hippocampus occurs. We now describe the delayed increase in hippocampal ME content elicited by intracerebral KA injections and examine the possible mechanism that is operative in causing this increase. Moreover, we provide some evidence suggesting that the increase in ME content elicited by intracerebral injections of KA may be related to the recurrent motor seizures elicited by intracerebral injections of KA.
Two theories of the molecular mechanism of volatile anaesthetic action suggest either that anaesthetics cause a generalized perturbation of neuronal membrane structure, probably through a nonspecific interaction with membrane lipids, or that anaesthetics bind to sets of sites of appropriate molecular dimension on membrane proteins. Based on the recent finding that fluorinated anaesthetics can be observed in animal tissue by 19F nuclear magnetic resonance (19F-NMR) spectroscopy, we have used 19F-NMR to quantify the interaction between the volatile anaesthetic halothane and rat brain tissue. Steady-state brain halothane concentration was found to be a non-linear function of inspired concentration, with apparent saturation of brain occurring at inspired halothane concentrations above 2.5% by volume. Using a spin-echo pulse sequence it was found that halothane exists in two distinct chemical environments in brain, characterized by different spin-spin relaxation times (T2), chemical shifts and kinetics of occupancy. Halothane concentration in one of these environments (T2 = 3.6 ms) was saturated at approximately 2.5% inspired halothane; occupancy of this environment was found to correlate with the anaesthetic effect of the drug. In the other environment (T2 = 43 ms), brain halothane concentration was a linear function of inspired concentration. These data suggest the existence of a saturable anaesthetic site for halothane in brain and do not support the concept that anaesthetics act by nonspecific membrane perturbation.
In the ventrolateral frontal lobe of the human brain there is a distinct entity, cytoarchitectonic area 44 (Broca's area), which is crucial in speech production. There has been controversy over whether monkeys possess an area comparable to human area 44. We have addressed this question in the macaque monkey by combining quantitative architectonic analysis of the cortical areas within the ventrolateral frontal region with electrophysiological recording of neuron activity and electrical intracortical microstimulation. Here we show that, immediately in front of the ventral part of the agranular premotor cortical area 6, there is a distinct cortical area that is architectonically comparable to human area 44 and that this monkey area 44 is involved with the orofacial musculature. We suggest that area 44 might have evolved originally as an area exercising high-level control over orofacial actions, including those related to communicative acts, and that, in the human brain, area 44 eventually also came to control certain aspects of the speech act.
There is extensive evidence indicating that new neurons are generated in the dentate gyrus of the adult mammalian hippocampus, a region of the brain that is important for learning and memory. However, it is not known whether these new neurons become functional, as the methods used to study adult neurogenesis are limited to fixed tissue. We use here a retroviral vector expressing green fluorescent protein that only labels dividing cells, and that can be visualized in live hippocampal slices. We report that newly generated cells in the adult mouse hippocampus have neuronal morphology and can display passive membrane properties, action potentials and functional synaptic inputs similar to those found in mature dentate granule cells. Our findings demonstrate that newly generated cells mature into functional neurons in the adult mammalian brain.
Humans use distance information to scale the size of objects. Earlier studies demonstrated changes in neural response as a function of gaze direction and gaze distance in the dorsal visual cortical pathway to parietal cortex. These findings have been interpreted as evidence of the parietal pathway's role in spatial representation. Here, distance-dependent changes in neural response were also found to be common in neurons in the ventral pathway leading to inferotemporal cortex of monkeys. This result implies that the information necessary for object and spatial scaling is common to all visual cortical areas.
Expanded polyglutamine repeats have been proposed to cause neuronal degeneration in Huntington's disease (HD) and related disorders, through abnormal interactions with other proteins containing short polyglutamine tracts such as the transcriptional coactivator CREB binding protein, CBP. We found that CBP was depleted from its normal nuclear location and was present in polyglutamine aggregates in HD cell culture models, HD transgenic mice, and human HD postmortem brain. Expanded polyglutamine repeats specifically interfere with CBP-activated gene transcription, and overexpression of CBP rescued polyglutamine-induced neuronal toxicity. Thus, polyglutamine-mediated interference with CBP-regulated gene transcription may constitute a genetic gain of function, underlying the pathogenesis of polyglutamine disorders.
Molecular approaches to understanding the functional circuitry of the nervous system promise new insights into the relationship between genes, brain and behaviour. The cellular diversity of the brain necessitates a cellular resolution approach towards understanding the functional genomics of the nervous system. We describe here an anatomically comprehensive digital atlas containing the expression patterns of approximately 20,000 genes in the adult mouse brain. Data were generated using automated high-throughput procedures for in situ hybridization and data acquisition, and are publicly accessible online. Newly developed image-based informatics tools allow global genome-scale structural analysis and cross-correlation, as well as identification of regionally enriched genes. Unbiased fine-resolution analysis has identified highly specific cellular markers as well as extensive evidence of cellular heterogeneity not evident in classical neuroanatomical atlases. This highly standardized atlas provides an open, primary data resource for a wide variety of further studies concerning brain organization and function.
The functioning of the brain is affected by the molecular concentrations of many substances that are normally present in the brain. The optimum concentrations of these substances for a person may differ greatly from the concentrations provided by his normal diet and genetic machinery. Biochemical and genetic arguments support the idea that orthomolecular therapy, the provision for the individual person of the optimum concentrations of important normal constituents of the brain, may be the preferred treatment for many mentally ill patients. Mental symptoms of avitaminosis sometimes are observed long before any physical symptoms appear. It is likely that the brain is more sensitive to changes in concentration of vital substances than are other organs and tissues. Moreover, there is the possibility that for some persons the cerebrospinal concentration of a vital substance may be grossly low at the same time that the concentration in the blood and lymph is essentially normal. A physiological abnormality such as decreased permeability of the blood-brain barrier for the vital substance or increased rate of metabolism of the substance in the brain may lead to a cerebral deficiency and to a mental disease. Diseases of this sort may be called localized cerebral deficiency diseases. It is suggested that the genes responsible for abnormalities (deficiencies) in the concentration of vital substances in the brain may be responsible for increased penetrance of the postulated gene for schizophrenia, and that the so-called gene for schizophrenia may itself be a gene that leads to a localized cerebral deficiency in one or more vital substances.
When humans respond to sensory stimulation, their reaction times tend to be long and variable relative to neural transduction and transmission times. The neural processes responsible for the duration and variability of reaction times are not understood. Single-cell recordings in a motor area of the cerebral cortex in behaving rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) were used to evaluate two alternative mathematical models of the processes that underlie reaction times. Movements were initiated if and only if the neural activity reached a specific and constant threshold activation level. Stochastic variability in the rate at which neural activity grew toward that threshold resulted in the distribution of reaction times. This finding elucidates a specific link between motor behavior and activation of neurons in the cerebral cortex.
Palmitoylation regulates diverse aspects of neuronal protein trafficking and function. Here a global characterization of rat neural palmitoyl-proteomes identifies most of the known neural palmitoyl proteins-68 in total, plus more than 200 new palmitoyl-protein candidates, with further testing confirming palmitoylation for 21 of these candidates. The new palmitoyl proteins include neurotransmitter receptors, transporters, adhesion molecules, scaffolding proteins, as well as SNAREs and other vesicular trafficking proteins. Of particular interest is the finding of palmitoylation for a brain-specific Cdc42 splice variant. The palmitoylated Cdc42 isoform (Cdc42-palm) differs from the canonical, prenylated form (Cdc42-prenyl), both with regard to localization and function: Cdc42-palm concentrates in dendritic spines and has a special role in inducing these post-synaptic structures. Furthermore, assessing palmitoylation dynamics in drug-induced activity models identifies rapidly induced changes for Cdc42 as well as for other synaptic palmitoyl proteins, suggesting that palmitoylation may participate broadly in the activity-driven changes that shape synapse morphology and function.
The mammalian neocortex is subdivided into functionally distinct areas differing in cytoarchitecture and connectivity. Areal specification is thought to occur late in development and to be controlled by extrinsic cues, particularly thalamic afferents. We have produced a transgenic mouse line in which beta-galactosidase expression in the neocortex is largely restricted to layer-IV neurons of the somatosensory area. Transgene expression in these mice may be considered as an intrinsic marker of a somatosensory cortex identity. We investigated whether the fate of pieces of embryonic cortex from transgenic embryos is modified after transplantation to ectopic locations. Parietal or occipital cortex obtained on embryonic days 14-16 maintained their characteristics with respect to transgene expression after heterotopic transplantation to the cerebellum or neocortex of newborn hosts. This shows that the specification of neocortical areas involves a previously unsuspected early step of areal determination.
Typical natural visual scenes contain many objects, which need to be segregated from each other and from the background. Present theories subdivide the processes responsible for this segregation into a pre-attentive and attentive system. The pre-attentive system segregates image regions that 'pop out' rapidly and in parallel across the visual field. In the primary visual cortex, responses to pre-attentively selected image regions are enhanced. When objects do not segregate automatically from the rest of the image, the time-consuming attentive system is recruited. Here we investigate whether attentive selection is also associated with a modulation of firing rates in area V1 of the brain in monkeys trained to perform a curve-tracing task. Neuronal responses to the various segments of a target curve were simultaneously enhanced relative to responses evoked by a distractor curve, even if the two curves crossed each other. This indicates that object-based attention is associated with a response enhancement at the earliest level of the visual cortical processing hierarchy.
The cerebral cortex is a laminated sheet of neurons composed of the arrays of intersecting radial columns. During development, excitatory projection neurons originating from the proliferative units at the ventricular surface of the embryonic cerebral vesicles migrate along elongated radial glial fibres to form a cellular infrastructure of radial (vertical) ontogenetic columns in the overlaying cortical plate. However, a subpopulation of these clonally related neurons also undergoes a short lateral shift and transfers from their parental to the neighbouring radial glial fibres, and intermixes with neurons originating from neighbouring proliferative units. This columnar organization acts as the primary information processing unit in the cortex. The molecular mechanisms, role and significance of this lateral dispersion for cortical development are not understood. Here we show that an Eph receptor A (EphA) and ephrin A (Efna) signalling-dependent shift in the allocation of clonally related neurons is essential for the proper assembly of cortical columns. In contrast to the relatively uniform labelling of the developing cortical plate by various molecular markers and retrograde tracers in wild-type mice, we found alternating labelling of columnar compartments in Efna knockout mice that are caused by impaired lateral dispersion of migrating neurons rather than by altered cell production or death. Furthermore, in utero electroporation showed that lateral dispersion depends on the expression levels of EphAs and ephrin-As during neuronal migration. This so far unrecognized mechanism for lateral neuronal dispersion seems to be essential for the proper intermixing of neuronal types in the cortical columns, which, when disrupted, might contribute to neuropsychiatric disorders associated with abnormal columnar organization.
When dissimilar images are presented to the two eyes, perception alternates spontaneously between each monocular view, a phenomenon called binocular rivalry. Functional brain imaging in humans was used to study the neural basis of these subjective perceptual changes. Cortical regions whose activity reflected perceptual transitions included extrastriate areas of the ventral visual pathway, and parietal and frontal regions that have been implicated in spatial attention; whereas the extrastriate areas were also engaged by nonrivalrous perceptual changes, activity in the frontoparietal cortex was specifically associated with perceptual alternation only during rivalry. These results suggest that frontoparietal areas play a central role in conscious perception, biasing the content of visual awareness toward abstract internal representations of visual scenes, rather than simply toward space.
Developing axons of the corpus callosum of mice are guided across the cerebral midline by a slinglike glial structure that forms transiently between the hemispheres. If the "sling" is cut at precallosal stages, the would-be callosal fibers whirl into paired neuromas adjacent to the longitudinal cerebral fissure. In experiments on such surgically acallosal animals, the aberrant commissural axons maintained a potential to regrow across the hemispheres at prenatal and early postnatal stages if they were presented with a properly aligned, glia-covered scaffold spanning the hemispheres.
During development of the mammalian visual system, axon terminals of lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) neurons, initially intermixed within layer 4 of the visual cortex, gradually segregate according to eye preference to form ocular dominance columns. In addition to LGN axons and layer 4 neurons, subplate neurons may also participate in interactions leading to column formation. Deletion of subplate neurons before the formation of ocular dominance columns prevents the segregation of LGN axons within layer 4. Thus, interactions between LGN axons and layer 4 neurons are not sufficient; subplate neurons are also required for formation of ocular dominance columns in the visual cortex.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a trophic agent that promotes the outgrowth of nerve fibers from sympathetic and sensory ganglia. The neuronal differentiation stimulated by this hormone was examined in the NGF-responsive cell line PC12. Differential hybridization was used to screen a complementary DNA library constructed from PC12 cells treated with NGF and cycloheximide. One of the complementary DNA clones that was rapidly induced by NGF was found to have a nucleotide sequence that predicts a 54-kilodalton protein with homology to transcriptional regulatory proteins. This clone, NGFI-A, contains three tandemly repeated copies of the 28- to 30-amino acid "zinc finger" domain present in Xenopus laevis TFIIIA and other DNA-binding proteins. It also contains another highly conserved unit of eight amino acids that is repeated at least 11 times. The NGFI-A gene is expressed at relatively high levels in the brain, lung, and superior cervical ganglion of the adult rat.
Functional receptive fields of neurons in sensory cortices undergo progressive refinement during development. Such refinement may be attributed to the pruning of non-optimal excitatory inputs, reshaping of the excitatory tuning profile through modifying the strengths of individual inputs, or strengthening of cortical inhibition. These models have not been directly tested because of the technical difficulties in assaying the spatiotemporal patterns of functional synaptic inputs during development. Here we apply in vivo whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings to the recipient layer 4 neurons in the rat primary auditory cortex (A1) to determine the developmental changes in the frequency-intensity tonal receptive fields (TRFs) of their excitatory and inhibitory inputs. Surprisingly, we observe co-tuned excitation and inhibition immediately after the onset of hearing, suggesting that a tripartite thalamocortical circuit with relatively strong feedforward inhibition is formed independently of auditory experience. The frequency ranges of tone-driven excitatory and inhibitory inputs first expand within a few days of the onset of hearing and then persist into adulthood. The latter phase is accompanied by a sharpening of the excitatory but not inhibitory frequency tuning profile, which results in relatively broader inhibitory tuning in adult A1 neurons. Thus the development of cortical synaptic TRFs after the onset of hearing is marked by a slight breakdown of previously formed excitation-inhibition balance. Our results suggest that functional refinement of cortical TRFs does not require a selective pruning of inputs, but may depend more on a fine adjustment of excitatory input strengths.
Although many neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1) of primates are direction selective, they provide ambiguous information about the direction of motion of a stimulus. There is evidence that one of the ways in which the visual system resolves this ambiguity is by computing, from the responses of V1 neurons, velocity components in two or more spatial orientations and then combining these velocity components. Here I consider another potential neural mechanism for determining motion direction. When a localized image feature moves fast enough, it should become smeared in space owing to temporal integration in the visual system, creating a spatial signal-a 'motion streak'-oriented in the direction of the motion. The orientation masking and adaptation experiments reported here show that these spatial signals for motion direction exist in the human visual system for feature speeds above about 1 feature width per 100 ms. Computer simulations show that this psychophysical finding is consistent with the known response properties of V1 neurons, and that these spatial signals, when appropriately processed, are sufficient to determine motion direction in natural images.
Despite the importance of epigenetic regulation in neurological disorders, little is known about neuronal chromatin. Cerebellar Purkinje neurons have large and euchromatic nuclei, whereas granule cell nuclei are small and have a more typical heterochromatin distribution. While comparing the abundance of 5-methylcytosine in Purkinje and granule cell nuclei, we detected the presence of an unusual DNA nucleotide. Using thin-layer chromatography, high-pressure liquid chromatography, and mass spectrometry, we identified the nucleotide as 5-hydroxymethyl-2'-deoxycytidine (hmdC). hmdC constitutes 0.6% of total nucleotides in Purkinje cells, 0.2% in granule cells, and is not present in cancer cell lines. hmdC is a constituent of nuclear DNA that is highly abundant in the brain, suggesting a role in epigenetic control of neuronal function.
The concentration of noradrenaline, but not serotonin, in the brainstem of cats is reduced 3 hours after the production of a defense reaction by supracollicular decerebration, even when movements and changes in blood pressure are abolished by transection of the spinal cord. After midcollicular decerebration, which does not elicit a defense reaction, noradrenaline concentrations do not change. The decrease in its concentration accompanying the defense reaction produtced by brain lesions probably reflects activity, in this behavior, of neturons containinig noradrenaline.
Positron emission tomographic (PET) studies of human attention have begun to dissect isolable components of this complex higher brain function, including a midline attentional system in a region of the anterior cingulate cortex. The right hemisphere may play a special part in human attention; neglect, an important phenomenon associated with damage to attentional systems, is more severe, extensive and long-lasting after lesions to the right hemisphere. Here we use PET measurements of brain blood flow in healthy subjects to identify changes in regional brain activity during simple visual and somatosensory tasks of sustained attention or vigilance. We find localized increases in blood flow in the prefrontal and superior parietal cortex primarily in the right hemisphere, regardless of the modality or laterality of sensory input. The anterior cingulate was not activated during either task. These data localize the vigilance aspects of normal human attention to sensory stimuli, thereby clarifying the biology underlying asymmetries of attention to such stimuli that have been reported in clinical lesions.
Synaptic efficacy critically depends on the presynaptic intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i). We measured the calcium sensitivity of glutamate release in a rat auditory brainstem synapse by laser photolysis of caged calcium. A rise in [Ca2+]i to 1 micromolar readily evoked release. An increase to >30 micromolar depleted the releasable vesicle pool in <0.5 millisecond. A comparison with action potential-evoked release suggested that a brief increase of [Ca2+]i to approximately 10 micromolar would be sufficient to reproduce the physiological release pattern. Thus, the calcium sensitivity of release at this synapse is high, and the distinction between phasic and delayed release is less pronounced than previously thought.
Neurosecretory brain cells from late nymphal and adult cockroaches were grown for 1 to 3 months in a chemically defined medium in combined cultures with embryonic organs or oocytes from nymphal and adult specimens. Under these conditions, neurosecretory cells show vigorous axonal growth. Electron dense granules in cell perikarya and axons of 3-month-old cultures are suggestive of neurosecretory activity in vitro.
In excitatory synapses of the brain, specific receptors in the postsynaptic membrane lie ready to respond to the release of the neurotransmitter glutamate from the presynaptic terminal. Upon stimulation, these glutamate receptors activate multiple biochemical pathways that transduce signals into the postsynaptic neuron. Different kinds of synaptic activity elicit different patterns of postsynaptic signals that lead to short- or long-lasting strengthening or weakening of synaptic transmission. The complex molecular mechanisms that underlie postsynaptic signaling and plasticity are beginning to emerge.
Sensory information may be represented in the brain by stereotyped mapping of axonal inputs or by patterning that varies between individuals. In olfaction, a stereotyped map is evident in the first sensory processing centre, the olfactory bulb (OB), where different odours elicit activity in unique combinatorial patterns of spatially invariant glomeruli. Activation of each glomerulus is relayed to higher cortical processing centres by a set of ~20-50 'homotypic' mitral and tufted (MT) neurons. In the cortex, target neurons integrate information from multiple glomeruli to detect distinct features of chemically diverse odours. How this is accomplished remains unclear, perhaps because the cortical mapping of glomerular information by individual MT neurons has not been described. Here we use new viral tracing and three-dimensional brain reconstruction methods to compare the cortical projections of defined sets of MT neurons. We show that the gross-scale organization of the OB is preserved in the patterns of axonal projections to one processing centre yet reordered in another, suggesting that distinct coding strategies may operate in different targets. However, at the level of individual neurons neither glomerular order nor stereotypy is preserved in either region. Rather, homotypic MT neurons from the same glomerulus innervate broad regions that differ between individuals. Strikingly, even in the same animal, MT neurons exhibit extensive diversity in wiring; axons of homotypic MT pairs diverge from each other, emit primary branches at distinct locations and 70-90% of branches of homotypic and heterotypic pairs are non-overlapping. This pronounced reorganization of sensory maps in the cortex offers an anatomic substrate for expanded combinatorial integration of information from spatially distinct glomeruli and predicts an unanticipated role for diversification of otherwise similar output neurons.
Steroids may rapidly alter neuronal function and behavior through poorly characterized, direct actions on neuronal membranes. The membrane-bound receptors mediating these behavioral responses have not been identified. [3H]Corticosterone labels a population of specific, high-affinity recognition sites (dissociation constant = 0.51 nanomolar) in synaptic membranes from an amphibian brain. These binding sites were localized by receptor autoradiography in the neuropil, outside the regions of perikarya. The affinities of corticoids for this [3H]corticosterone binding site were linearly related to their potencies in rapidly suppressing male reproductive behavior. Thus, it appears that brain membranes contain a corticosteroid receptor that could participate in the regulation of behavior.
The mushroom bodies of the Drosophila brain are important for olfactory learning and memory. To investigate the requirement for mushroom body signaling during the different phases of memory processing, we transiently inactivated neurotransmission through this region of the brain by expressing a temperature-sensitive allele of the shibire dynamin guanosine triphosphatase, which is required for synaptic transmission. Inactivation of mushroom body signaling through alpha/beta neurons during different phases of memory processing revealed a requirement for mushroom body signaling during memory retrieval, but not during acquisition or consolidation.
Evans et al. and Mekel-Bobrov et al. (Reports, 9 September 2005, p. 1717 and 1720, respectively) reported that human genetic variants of Microcephalin (MCPH1) and abnormal spindle-like microcephaly associated (ASPM) are under strong positive selection. We genotyped these variants in 9000 children and find no meaningful associations with brain size and various cognitive measures, which indicates that contrary to previous speculations, ASPM and MCPH1 have not been selected for brain-related effects.
GABA (gamma-amino-butyric acid), the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, signals through ionotropic (GABA(A)/ GABA(c)) and metabotropic (GABA(B)) receptor systems. Here we report the cloning of GABA(B) receptors. Photoaffinity labelling experiments suggest that the cloned receptors correspond to two highly conserved GABA(B) receptor forms present in the vertebrate nervous system. The cloned receptors negatively couple to adenylyl cyclase and show sequence similarity to the metabotropic receptors for the excitatory neurotransmitter L-glutamate.
A complementary DNA encoding the rat NMDA receptor has been cloned and characterized. The single protein encoded by the cDNA forms a receptor-channel complex that has electrophysiological and pharmacological properties characteristic of the NMDA receptor. This protein has a significant sequence similarity to the AMPA/kainate receptors and contains four putative transmembrane segments following a large extracellular domain. The NMDA receptor messenger RNA is expressed in neuronal cells throughout the brain regions, particularly in the hippocampus, cerebral cortex and cerebellum.
Understanding cortical circuits will require mapping the connections between specific populations of neurons, as well as determining the dendritic locations where the synapses occur. The dendrites of individual cortical neurons overlap with numerous types of local and long-range excitatory axons, but axodendritic overlap is not always a good predictor of actual connection strength. Here we developed an efficient channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2)-assisted method to map the spatial distribution of synaptic inputs, defined by presynaptic ChR2 expression, within the dendritic arborizations of recorded neurons. We expressed ChR2 in two thalamic nuclei, the whisker motor cortex and local excitatory neurons and mapped their synapses with pyramidal neurons in layers 3, 5A and 5B (L3, L5A and L5B) in the mouse barrel cortex. Within the dendritic arborizations of L3 cells, individual inputs impinged onto distinct single domains. These domains were arrayed in an orderly, monotonic pattern along the apical axis: axons from more central origins targeted progressively higher regions of the apical dendrites. In L5 arborizations, different inputs targeted separate basal and apical domains. Input to L3 and L5 dendrites in L1 was related to whisker movement and position, suggesting that these signals have a role in controlling the gain of their target neurons. Our experiments reveal high specificity in the subcellular organization of excitatory circuits.
Although the entorhinal cortex is a major contributor of afferents to the hippocampus and dentate gyrus, knowledge of its own afferents has been vague. Regions of both the frontal and temporal lobes were found to contribute afferents to this region of the brain. These afferents form probable multisynaptic links in pathways connecting the classical sensory areas of the cortex and the limbic system.
Long interspersed nuclear elements-1 (LINE-1 or L1s) are abundant retrotransposons that comprise approximately 20% of mammalian genomes. Active L1 retrotransposons can impact the genome in a variety of ways, creating insertions, deletions, new splice sites or gene expression fine-tuning. We have shown previously that L1 retrotransposons are capable of mobilization in neuronal progenitor cells from rodents and humans and evidence of massive L1 insertions was observed in adult brain tissues but not in other somatic tissues. In addition, L1 mobility in the adult hippocampus can be influenced by the environment. The neuronal specificity of somatic L1 retrotransposition in neural progenitors is partially due to the transition of a Sox2/HDAC1 repressor complex to a Wnt-mediated T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) transcriptional activator. The transcriptional switch accompanies chromatin remodelling during neuronal differentiation, allowing a transient stimulation of L1 transcription. The activity of L1 retrotransposons during brain development can have an impact on gene expression and neuronal function, thereby increasing brain-specific genetic mosaicism. Further understanding of the molecular mechanisms that regulate L1 expression should provide new insights into the role of L1 retrotransposition during brain development. Here we show that L1 neuronal transcription and retrotransposition in rodents are increased in the absence of methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2), a protein involved in global DNA methylation and human neurodevelopmental diseases. Using neuronal progenitor cells derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells and human tissues, we revealed that patients with Rett syndrome (RTT), carrying MeCP2 mutations, have increased susceptibility for L1 retrotransposition. Our data demonstrate that L1 retrotransposition can be controlled in a tissue-specific manner and that disease-related genetic mutations can influence the frequency of neuronal L1 retrotransposition. Our findings add a new level of complexity to the molecular events that can lead to neurological disorders.
Implants of embryonic neural tissue from all regions of the neuraxis survive grafting to the brains of adult rats. After implantation, neurogenesis and differentiation continue, and connections are formed with the mature host brain. Thus, the intracephalic implants provide excellent model systems for studying cellular interactions that regulate synaptogenesis and determine the cytoarchitectonic organization of developing neural tissues.
Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) can induce dementia with alarming occurrence worldwide. The mechanism remains poorly understood, but discovery in brain of HIV-1-binding sites (chemokine receptors) provides new insights. HIV-1 infects macrophages and microglia, but not neurons, although neurons are injured and die by apoptosis. The predominant pathway to neuronal injury is indirect through release of macrophage, microglial and astrocyte toxins, although direct injury by viral proteins might also contribute. These toxins overstimulate neurons, resulting in the formation of free radicals and excitotoxicity, similar to other neurodegenerative diseases. Recent advances in understanding the signalling pathways mediating these events offer hope for therapeutic intervention.
The retinal fovea, which corresponds to the central degree or so of vision, is spatially over-represented in the visual cortex. It is about 0.01% of retina area, but at least 8% of the striate cortex. Does this simply reflect an equivalently uneven distribution of ganglion cells in the retina, or is the cortical representation of the fovea preferentially expanded? The answer hinges on the resolution of long-standing discrepancies between the retinal and cortical magnification factors. We approached the problem in a different way, using a retrograde transneuronal tracer from cortex to retina to relate directly the number of ganglion cells projecting to marked areas of striate cortex. We report here that ganglion cells near the fovea were allocated 3.3 to 5.9 times more cortical tissue than more peripheral ones, and conclude that the cortical representation of the most central retina is much greater than expected from the density of its ganglion cells.
cAMP (3',5' cyclic adenosine monophosphate) is a second messenger that in eukaryotic cells induces physiological responses ranging from growth, differentiation, and gene expression to secretion and neurotransmission. Most of these effects have been attributed to the binding of cAMP to cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). Here, a family of cAMP-binding proteins that are differentially distributed in the mammalian brain and body organs and that exhibit both cAMP-binding and guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) domains is reported. These cAMP-regulated GEFs (cAMP-GEFs) bind cAMP and selectively activate the Ras superfamily guanine nucleotide binding protein Rap1A in a cAMP-dependent but PKA-independent manner. Our findings suggest the need to reformulate concepts of cAMP-mediated signaling to include direct coupling to Ras superfamily signaling.
Dogs were trained preoperatively in both positive and inhibitory conditioned food reflexes on a schedule of either a 15-second or 1-minute intertrial interval. After lesions had been made in the medial surface of the prefrontal cortex, errors of disinhibition occurred in both schedules and in association with an increased "drive" for food. In contrast, lesions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex produced the disinhibition syndrome only in the group which was tested at short intertrial intervals, and no increase in food-directed activity was noticed. In each instance the postoperative recovery was very rapid. It is suggested that the quality of disinhibition in prefrontal animals is different, depending on the placement of the lesion.
Striking correlations between structure and function are found in the visual cortex of Old World primates. These include the co-localization of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD, the biosynthetic enzyme of the inhibitory neurotransmitter, gamma-aminobutyric acid) with the mitochondrial enzyme, cytochrome oxidase (CO) in functionally distinct subcompartments of ocular dominance columns. We report here immunocytochemical studies with a monoclonal antibody (CAT 301) showing that the antibody recognizes an uncharacterized antigen on surfaces of some neurones in certain layers of the monkey striate cortex (area 17), and in certain parts of the cat and monkey dorsal lateral geniculate nuclei (LGN). Patches of immunocytochemically stained neurones and neuropil, apparent in layers III, IVB and VI of the striate cortex of normal monkeys, become even more clearly delineated in animals from which one eye has been removed. The antibody-stained patches in the three layers line up radially with one another in lines passing through the centres of ocular dominance columns (demonstrable by CO staining in layers IVA and IVC). In layers III and VI the patches coexist with CO-positive patches and, in the horizontal dimension, both antibody and CO-positive patches are aligned to form rows. Stained neurones in the monkey LGN are primarily in the magnocellular layers and in the cat LGN are confined to laminae A and A1, the inter-laminar plexuses, the perigeniculate nucleus and the medial inter-laminar nucleus. The antigen we have localized is associated with particular cell populations, some of which may correspond to a specific, physiological class.
Noninvasive magnetoencephalography makes it possible to identify the cortical area in the human brain whose activity reflects the decay of passive sensory storage of information about auditory stimuli (echoic memory). The lifetime for decay of the neuronal activation trace in primary auditory cortex was found to predict the psychophysically determined duration of memory for the loudness of a tone. Although memory for the loudness of a specific tone is lost, the remembered loudness decays toward the global mean of all of the loudnesses to which a subject is exposed in a series of trials.
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is a potent polypeptide mitogen originally isolated from the adult male mouse submaxillary gland. It also acts as a gastrointestinal hormone. EGF-immunoreactive material has recently been identified within neuronal fibers and terminals in rodent brain. In the present study, EGF was found to enhance survival and process outgrowth of primary cultures of subneocortical telencephalic neurons of neonatal rat brain in a dose-dependent manner. This effect was observed with EGF concentrations as low as 100 picograms per milliliter (0.016 nanomolar) and was dependent on the continuous presence of EGF in the medium. Similar effects were observed with basic fibroblast growth factor, but several other growth-promoting substances, including other mitogens for glial elements, were without effect. Thus EGF, in addition to its mitogenic and hormonal activities, may act as a neurite elongation and maintenance factor for select neurons of the rodent central nervous system.
The cerebral cortex constructs a coherent representation of the world by integrating distinct features of the sensory environment. Although these features are processed vertically across cortical layers, horizontal projections interconnecting neighbouring cortical domains allow these features to be processed in a context-dependent manner. Despite the wealth of physiological and psychophysical studies addressing the function of horizontal projections, how they coordinate activity among cortical domains remains poorly understood. We addressed this question by selectively activating horizontal projection neurons in mouse somatosensory cortex, and determined how the resulting spatial pattern of excitation and inhibition affects cortical activity. We found that horizontal projections suppress superficial layers while simultaneously activating deeper cortical output layers. This layer-specific modulation does not result from a spatial separation of excitation and inhibition, but from a layer-specific ratio between these two opposing conductances. Through this mechanism, cortical domains exploit horizontal projections to compete for cortical space.
Cells in the neurogenic region of Drosophila embryos are initially bipotential; they can become either neuroblasts or epidermoblasts. Cell-cell interaction seems to play an important part in this developmental decision, which involves the function of a group of genes (the neurogenic genes). Loss-of-function mutations in any of the neurogenic genes result in nervous system hyperplasia and epidermal hypoplasia. Of the six known zygotic neurogenic genes, big brain (bib) is unique in several aspects. Most notably, all the other known neurogenic genes seem to fit into a cascade defined by genetic interactions, whereas bib does not show any detectable interaction with them. To understand how bib functions, we have now cloned the bib genomic and complementary DNAs. The predicted bib product shows significant sequence similarity to a family of transmembrane proteins, some of which form channels permeable to small molecules. Together with genetic studies, our results indicate that the bib product may mediate intercellular communication in a pathway separate from the one involving the products of the other neurogenic genes.
Understanding inter-individual differences in stress response requires the explanation of genetic influences at multiple phenotypic levels, including complex behaviours and the metabolic responses of brain regions to emotional stimuli. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is anxiolytic and its release is induced by stress. NPY is abundantly expressed in regions of the limbic system that are implicated in arousal and in the assignment of emotional valences to stimuli and memories. Here we show that haplotype-driven NPY expression predicts brain responses to emotional and stress challenges and also inversely correlates with trait anxiety. NPY haplotypes predicted levels of NPY messenger RNA in post-mortem brain and lymphoblasts, and levels of plasma NPY. Lower haplotype-driven NPY expression predicted higher emotion-induced activation of the amygdala, as well as diminished resiliency as assessed by pain/stress-induced activations of endogenous opioid neurotransmission in various brain regions. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP rs16147) located in the promoter region alters NPY expression in vitro and seems to account for more than half of the variation in expression in vivo. These convergent findings are consistent with the function of NPY as an anxiolytic peptide and help to explain inter-individual variation in resiliency to stress, a risk factor for many diseases.
Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) is required for proper development of the mammalian central nervous system. To be activated, Cdk5 has to associate with its regulatory subunit, p35. We have found that p25, a truncated form of p35, accumulates in neurons in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease. This accumulation correlates with an increase in Cdk5 kinase activity. Unlike p35, p25 is not readily degraded, and binding of p25 to Cdk5 constitutively activates Cdk5, changes its cellular location and alters its substrate specificity. In vivo the p25/Cdk5 complex hyperphosphorylates tau, which reduces tau's ability to associate with microtubules. Moreover, expression of the p25/Cdk5 complex in cultured primary neurons induces cytoskeletal disruption, morphological degeneration and apoptosis. These findings indicate that cleavage of p35, followed by accumulation of p25, may be involved in the pathogenesis of cytoskeletal abnormalities and neuronal death in neurodegenerative diseases.
A puzzling feature of the neocortex is the rich array of inhibitory interneurons. Multiple neuron recordings revealed numerous electrophysiological-anatomical subclasses of neocortical gamma-aminobutyric acid-ergic (GABAergic) interneurons and three types of GABAergic synapses. The type of synapse used by each interneuron to influence its neighbors follows three functional organizing principles. These principles suggest that inhibitory synapses could shape the impact of different interneurons according to their specific spatiotemporal patterns of activity and that GABAergic interneuron and synapse diversity may enable combinatorial inhibitory effects in the neocortex.
Recordings were made from single neurons in the hand area of the human motor cortex while peripheral physiologic stimuli were applied. Such cells responded only to active and passive hand movements. Tactile and autditory (click) stimuli were itneffective. The majority of cells were activated only by movements of the contralateral hand, but a significant number (4 of 16) could be excited if a given movement was made by either hand. Of the cells responding to active movement, some showed an increased discharge before onset of the voluntary action. Such cells were excited by the same movement executed passively, a result that indicates sensory feedback from receptors activated by that movement.
The physiological roles of Met-enkephalin and Leu-enkephalin are still unknown. They may act as neurotransmitters in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Met-enkephalin has been detected in several species in a variety of tissues including brain, spinal cord and gut using bioassays, opiate receptor assays and radioimmunoassays (RIA). It has also been detected in human gut immunocytochemically and in human brain and cerebrospinal fluid by opiate receptor assay and RIA. However, all reported assays show some degree of cross-reaction with Leu-enkephalin and unequivocal differentiation between the two enkephalins and the larger endorphins has not always been possible. Thus the existence of Met-enkephalin in human tissues and fluids remains in doubt. Using a highly specific RIA, we have now obtained evidence that Met-enkephalin-like material circulates in the plasma of normal subjects and may be secreted by the adrenal gland. Chromatographically the material exists in plasma mainly as the intact pentapeptide and not as the biologically inactive degradation product Gly-Gly-Phe-Met as would be expected from metabolic studies.
There is a remarkable lack of scientific evidence to support the option to use alpha-stat or pH-stat management, as to which is more beneficial to brain protection during deep hypothermic CPB. This study examined cortical blood flow (CBF), cerebral oxygenation, and brain oxygen consumption in relation to deep hypothermic CPB with alpha-stat or pH-stat management.
Cerebral cortex and hippocampus of rat were disrupted in a specially designed tissue-press and prepared as a 2 percent suspension in 10 percent buffered Ficoll medium and fractionated by density-gradient centrifugation in the B XIV zonal rotor. The suspension was injected into a buffered 30 percent Ficoll, 58 percent sucrose discontinuous gradient previously loaded in the B XlV zonal rotor spinning at 3500 revolutions per minute. Intact neuronal perikarya were recovered as a discrete band in the dense sucrose zone of the gradient after centrifugation at 35,000 revolutions per minute for 45 minutes.
Yoo and Lubec show that the amount of p25 is decreased in the brains they studied from patients with Alzheimer's disease or Down's syndrome. Their results persuaded us to conduct a more extensive survey of the p25/p35 ratio in AD brains (to be published elsewhere), as the number of samples was small in both of our studies (eight AD brains in our original study and six in theirs). After analysing a further 25 AD brains and those from 25 age-matched controls, we found that p25 levels are consistently higher in AD brains and that the difference is statistically significant (Student's t-test). This is in agreement with our original observations, as well as being consistent with earlier reports of increased Cdk5 kinase activity in AD brain and of increased amounts of p25 in an animal model of neurodegeneration.
By electrocoagulation of the thalamic posterior commissure, the electroencephalographic arousal by high frequency stimulation of the thalamic unspecific nuclei was prevented, whereas the synchronizing influence on the cerebral cortex remained intact. On this ground, the role of the "thalamic reticular system" in the control of the cerebral rhythms is discussed.
Controversy exists over whether aluminium has a role in the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease is neuropathologically characterized by the occurrence of a minimum density of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques in the hippocampus and the association cortex of the brain. The purported association of aluminium with Alzheimer's disease is based on: (1) the experimental induction of fibrillary changes in the neurons of animals by the injection of aluminium salts into brain tissue; (2) reported detection of aluminium in neuritic plaques and tangle-bearing neurons; (3) epidemiological studies linking aluminium levels in the environment, notably water supplies, with an increased prevalence of dementia; and (4) a reported decrease in the rate of disease progression following the administration of desferroxamine, an aluminium chelator, to clinically diagnosed sufferers of Alzheimer's disease. Here we use nuclear microscopy, a new analytical technique involving million-volt nuclear particles, to identify and analyse plaques in postmortem tissue from patients with Alzheimer's disease without using chemical staining techniques and fail to demonstrate the presence of aluminium in plaque cores in untreated tissue.
Acute exposure to cocaine transiently induces several Fos family transcription factors in the nucleus accumbens, a region of the brain that is important for addiction. In contrast, chronic exposure to cocaine does not induce these proteins, but instead causes the persistent expression of highly stable isoforms of deltaFosB. deltaFosB is also induced in the nucleus accumbens by repeated exposure to other drugs of abuse, including amphetamine, morphine, nicotine and phencyclidine. The sustained accumulation of deltaFosB in the nucleus accumbens indicates that this transcription factor may mediate some of the persistent neural and behavioural plasticity that accompanies chronic drug exposure. Using transgenic mice in which deltaFosB can be induced in adults in the subset of nucleus accumbens neurons in which cocaine induces the protein, we show that deltaFosB expression increases the responsiveness of an animal to the rewarding and locomotor-activating effects of cocaine. These effects of deltaFosB appear to be mediated partly by induction of the AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole) glutamate receptor subunit GluR2 in the nucleus accumbens. These results support a model in which deltaFosB, by altering gene expression, enhances sensitivity to cocaine and may thereby contribute to cocaine addiction.
The firing rate responses of neurons in the primary visual cortex grow with stimulus contrast, the variation in the luminance of an image relative to the mean luminance. These responses, however, are reduced after a cell is exposed for prolonged periods to high-contrast visual stimuli. This phenomenon, known as contrast adaptation, occurs in the cortex and is not present at earlier stages of visual processing. To investigate the cellular mechanisms underlying cortical adaptation, intracellular recordings were performed in the visual cortex of cats, and the effects of prolonged visual stimulation were studied. Surprisingly, contrast adaptation barely affected the stimulus-driven modulations in the membrane potential of cortical cells. Moreover, it did not produce sizable changes in membrane resistance. The major effect of adaptation, evident both in the presence and in the absence of a visual stimulus, was a tonic hyperpolarization. Adaptation affects a class of synaptic inputs, most likely excitatory in nature, that exert a tonic influence on cortical cells.
Mechanisms controlling brain size include the regulation of neural progenitor cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and migration. Here we show that ephrin-A/EphA receptor signalling plays a key role in controlling the size of the mouse cerebral cortex by regulating cortical progenitor cell apoptosis. In vivo gain of EphA receptor function, achieved through ectopic expression of ephrin-A5 in early cortical progenitors expressing EphA7, caused a transient wave of neural progenitor cell apoptosis, resulting in premature depletion of progenitors and a subsequent dramatic decrease in cortical size. In vitro treatment with soluble ephrin-A ligands similarly induced the rapid death of cultured dissociated cortical progenitors in a caspase-3-dependent manner, thereby confirming a direct effect of ephrin/Eph signalling on apoptotic cascades. Conversely, in vivo loss of EphA function, achieved through EphA7 gene disruption, caused a reduction in apoptosis occurring normally in forebrain neural progenitors, resulting in an increase in cortical size and, in extreme cases, exencephalic forebrain overgrowth. Together, these results identify ephrin/Eph signalling as a physiological trigger for apoptosis that can alter brain size and shape by regulating the number of neural progenitors.
It has been proposed that three major receptor subtypes subserve the putative transmitter role of glutamate and aspartate in the mammalian central nervous system. One subtype is classified by the specific agonist N-methylaspartate (NMA) and the specific antagonist 4-amino-2-phosphonovaleric acid. It has been shown recently that excitation of neurones by NMA is also selectively reduced by dissociative anaesthetics such as ketamine and phencyclidine and by sigma opiates, drugs of abuse with common psychotomimetic properties. Responses to NMA have an unusual voltage relation which may result from a voltage-dependent block of the activated channel by physiological concentrations of magnesium. No synaptic potential with properties similar to those of responses to NMA, however, has yet been reported. We describe here an excitatory postsynaptic potential (e.p.s.p.) evoked by electrical stimulation of the white matter and recorded intracellularly from pyramidal cells in slices of rat somatosensory cortex. This e.p.s.p. has the appropriate voltage relation and sensitivity to Mg2+ and ketamine to be an NMA receptor-mediated synapse and a potential central site for the psychotomimetic actions of ketamine.
Neurons in the visual cortex respond preferentially to edge-like stimuli of a particular orientation. It is a long-standing hypothesis that orientation selectivity arises during development through the activity-dependent refinement of cortical circuitry. Unambiguous evidence for such a process has, however, remained elusive. Here we argue that, if orientation preferences arise through activity-dependent refinement of initially unselective patterns of synaptic connections, this process should leave distinct signatures in the emerging spatial pattern of preferred orientations. Preferred orientations typically change smoothly and progressively across the cortex. This smooth progression is disrupted at the centres of so-called pinwheels, where neurons exhibiting the whole range of orientation preferences are located in close vicinity. Assuming that orientation selectivity develops through a set of rules that we do not specify, we demonstrate mathematically that the spatial density of pinwheels is rigidly constrained by basic symmetry principles. In particular, the spatial density of pinwheels, which emerge when orientation selectivity is first established, is larger than a model-independent minimal value. As a consequence, lower densities, if observed in adult animals, are predicted to develop through the motion and annihilation of pinwheel pairs.
That animals and humans can accomplish the same goal using different effectors and different goals using the same effectors attests to the remarkable flexibility of the central nervous system. This phenomenon has been termed 'motor equivalence', an example being the writing of a name with a pencil held between the toes or teeth. The idea of motor equivalence has reappeared because single-cell studies in monkeys have shown that parameters of voluntary movement (such as direction) may be specified in the brain, relegating muscle activation to spinal interneuronal systems. Using a novel experimental paradigms and a full-head SQUID (for superconducting quantum interference device) array to record magnetic fields corresponding to ongoing brain activity, we demonstrate: (1), a robust relationship between time-dependent activity in sensorimotor cortex and movement velocity, independent of explicit task requirements; and (2) neural activations that are specific to task demands alone. It appears, therefore, that signatures of motor equivalence in humans may be found in dynamic patterns of cortical activity.
Penicillin enhances the excitatory postsynaptic potential of the squid stellate ganglion. This effect suggests the hypothesis that the epileptic focus created by the topical application of penicillin to the mammalian cerebral cortex is produced by the facilitation of excitatory synaptic coupling within the preexisting positive recurrent feedback system.
Some of the neurons in the nucleus intercollicularis and auditory cortex of the echolocating bat Eptesicus fuscus respond selectively to sonar echoes occurring with specific echo delays or pulse-echo intervals. They do not respond for a wide range of other types of sounds or for sonar echoes at longer or shorter pulse-echo intervals; they may, therefore, be specialized for detection and ranging of sonar targets.
The ability of human observers to detect Vernier breaks of as little as 5 s arc has been termed hyperacuity as this distance is substantially less than the angular separation of the bars of the highest spatial frequency of grating (approximately 1 arc min) that can be detected. Although the visual cortex is a likely candidate for the location of detectors involved in this performance, it is not known whether there are cells sensitive enough to detect deviations from co-linearity that are small compared with their spatial resolution (defined in terms of the highest spatial frequency that the cell can detect). We report here the results of physiological experiments on single units in area 17 of the cat visual cortex in which we studied the effect of introducing a Vernier break into a bar stimulus moved across the receptive field of the cell at a constant velocity. Our results show that the responses of most simple and complex cells are significantly reduced by the introduction of a Vernier break that is substantially smaller than the spatial resolution of the cell. The most sensitive cells in our sample could discriminate Vernier offsets of 3-6 arc min with a reliability of approximately 70%. This was much smaller than their spatial resolution, which was in the range 25-30 arc min. We interpret these results in terms of mechanisms that could underly the orientation selectivity of cortical neurones and suggest how our results relate to human Vernier acuity.
