The traditional approach to studying brain function is to measure physiological responses to controlled sensory, motor and cognitive paradigms. However, most of the brain's energy consumption is devoted to ongoing metabolic activity not clearly associated with any particular stimulus or behaviour. Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies in humans aimed at understanding this ongoing activity have shown that spontaneous fluctuations of the blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal occur continuously in the resting state. In humans, these fluctuations are temporally coherent within widely distributed cortical systems that recapitulate the functional architecture of responses evoked by experimentally administered tasks. Here, we show that the same phenomenon is present in anaesthetized monkeys even at anaesthetic levels known to induce profound loss of consciousness. We specifically demonstrate coherent spontaneous fluctuations within three well known systems (oculomotor, somatomotor and visual) and the 'default' system, a set of brain regions thought by some to support uniquely human capabilities. Our results indicate that coherent system fluctuations probably reflect an evolutionarily conserved aspect of brain functional organization that transcends levels of consciousness.
Electroluminescence in organic light-emitting diodes arises from a charge-transfer reaction between the injected positive and negative charges by which they combine to form singlet excitons that subsequently decay radiatively. The quantum yield of this process (the number of photons generated per electron or hole injected) is often thought to have a statistical upper limit of 25 per cent. This is based on the assumption that the formation cross-section of singlet excitons, sigmaS, is approximately the same as that of any one of the three equivalent non-radiative triplet exciton states, sigmaT; that is, sigmaS/sigmaT approximately 1. However, recent experimental and theoretical work suggests that sigmaS/sigmaT may be greater than 1. Here we report direct measurements of sigmaS/sigmaT for a large number of pi-conjugated polymers and oligomers. We have found that there exists a strong systematic, but not monotonic, dependence of sigmaS/sigmaT on the optical gap of the organic materials. We present a detailed physical picture of the charge-transfer reaction for correlated pi-electrons, and quantify this process using exact valence bond calculations. The calculated sigmaS/sigmaT reproduces the experimentally observed trend. The calculations also show that the strong dependence of sigmaS/sigmaT on the optical gap is a signature of the discrete excitonic energy spectrum, in which higher energy excitonic levels participate in the charge recombination process.
Silicon microstructures only a few hundred atoms wide can be fabricated and used to study electron transport in narrow channels. Spatially localized voltage probes as close together as 0.1 micrometer can be used to investigate a variety of physical phenomena, including velocity saturation due to phonon emission, the local potentials caused by scattering from a single trapped electron, and quantum tunneling or hopping among very few electron states.
The experimental realization of Bose-Einstein condensates of dilute gases has allowed investigations of fundamental concepts in quantum mechanics at ultra-low temperatures, such as wave-like behaviour and interference phenomena. The formation of an interference pattern depends fundamentally on the phase coherence of a system; the latter may be quantified by the spatial correlation function. Phase coherence over a long range is the essential factor underlying Bose-Einstein condensation and related macroscopic quantum phenomena, such as superconductivity and superfluidity. Here we report a direct measurement of the phase coherence properties of a weakly interacting Bose gas of rubidium atoms. Effectively, we create a double slit for magnetically trapped atoms using a radio wave field with two frequency components. The correlation function of the system is determined by evaluating the interference pattern of two matter waves originating from the spatially separated 'slit' regions of the trapped gas. Above the critical temperature for Bose-Einstein condensation, the correlation function shows a rapid gaussian decay, as expected for a thermal gas. Below the critical temperature, the correlation function has a different shape: a slow decay towards a plateau is observed, indicating the long-range phase coherence of the condensate fraction.
In conventional superconductors, lattice vibrations (phonons) mediate the attraction between electrons that is responsible for superconductivity. The high transition temperatures (high-T(c)) of the copper oxide superconductors has led to collective spin excitations being proposed as the mediating excitations in these materials. The mediating excitations must be strongly coupled to the conduction electrons, have energy greater than the pairing energy, and be present at T(c). The most obvious feature in the magnetic excitations of high-T(c) superconductors such as YBa2Cu3O6+x is the so-called 'resonance'. Although the resonance may be strongly coupled to the superconductivity, it is unlikely to be the main cause, because it has not been found in the La2-x(Ba,Sr)(x)CuO4 family and is not universally present in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta (ref. 9). Here we use inelastic neutron scattering to characterize possible mediating excitations at higher energies in YBa2Cu3O6.6. We observe a square-shaped continuum of excitations peaked at incommensurate positions. These excitations have energies greater than the superconducting pairing energy, are present at T(c), and have spectral weight far exceeding that of the 'resonance'. The discovery of similar excitations in La2-xBa(x)CuO4 (ref. 10) suggests that they are a general property of the copper oxides, and a candidate for mediating the electron pairing.
Entanglement is recognized as a key resource for quantum computation and quantum cryptography. For quantum metrology, the use of entangled states has been discussed and demonstrated as a means of improving the signal-to-noise ratio. In addition, entangled states have been used in experiments for efficient quantum state detection and for the measurement of scattering lengths. In quantum information processing, manipulation of individual quantum bits allows for the tailored design of specific states that are insensitive to the detrimental influences of an environment. Such 'decoherence-free subspaces' (ref. 10) protect quantum information and yield significantly enhanced coherence times. Here we use a decoherence-free subspace with specifically designed entangled states to demonstrate precision spectroscopy of a pair of trapped Ca+ ions; we obtain the electric quadrupole moment, which is of use for frequency standard applications. We find that entangled states are not only useful for enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio in frequency measurements--a suitably designed pair of atoms also allows clock measurements in the presence of strong technical noise. Our technique makes explicit use of non-locality as an entanglement property and provides an approach for 'designed' quantum metrology.
Superconductivity in the high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) copper oxides competes with other possible ground states. The physical explanation for superconductivity can be constrained by determining the nature of the closest competing ground state, and establishing if that state is universal among the high-T(c) materials. Antiferromagnetism has been theoretically predicted to be the competing ground state. A competing ground state is revealed when superconductivity is destroyed by the application of a magnetic field, and antiferromagnetism has been observed in hole-doped materials under the influence of modest fields. None of the previous experiments have revealed the quantum phase transition from the superconducting state to the antiferromagnetic state, because they failed to reach the upper critical field B(c2). Here we report the results of transport and neutron-scattering experiments on electron-doped Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4 (refs 13, 14), where B(c2) can be reached. The applied field reveals a static, commensurate, anomalously conducting long-range ordered antiferromagnetic state, in which the induced moment scales approximately linearly with the field strength until it saturates at B(c2). This and previous experiments on the hole-doped materials therefore establishes antiferromagnetic order as a competing ground state in the high-T(c) copper oxide materials, irrespective of electron or hole doping.
A new recognition probe for biomolecules, [en2Os(eta 2-H2)]2+ (1; en, ethylenediamine), is reported. In aqueous solution, 1 binds readily to a variety of biomolecules, including nucleotides, RNA, amino acids, peptides, and phospholipids. In each case, binding leads to a characteristic proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) for the dihydrogen that appears in a spectral window in the range delta = 0 to -20 parts per million, and as well to characteristic values of the coupling JHD and of the relaxation time T1. Small structural differences in molecules such as DGMP (2'-deoxyguanosine 5'-monophosphate) and IMP (inosine 5'-monophosphate) or Asp and Glu can readily be distinguished, such as when 1 binds to the N-7 position of the nucleobase of DGMP or IMP and when 1 binds to the carboxylate of Asp or Glu. Upon one-electron oxidation of the metal center, diamagnetic 1 is converted to a paramagnetic probe.
Bose-Einstein condensation of cesium atoms is achieved by evaporative cooling using optical trapping techniques. The ability to tune the interactions between the ultracold atoms by an external magnetic field is crucial to obtain the condensate and offers intriguing features for potential applications. We explore various regimes of condensate self-interaction (attractive, repulsive, and null interaction strength) and demonstrate properties of imploding, exploding, and non-interacting quantum matter.
Recent experimental results are beginning to limit seriously the theories that can be considered to explain high-temperature superconductivity. The unmistakable observations of a Fermi surface, by several groups and methods, make it the focus of realistic theories of the metallic phases. Data from angle-resolved photoemission, positron annihilaton, and de Haas-van Alphen experiments are in agreement with band theory predictions, implying that the metallic phases cannot be pictured as doped insulators. The character of the low energy excitations ("quasiparticles"), which interact strongly with atomic motions, with magnetic fluctuations, and possibly with charge fluctuations, must be sorted out before the superconducting pairing mechanism can be given a microscopic basis.
A new method for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) based on the detection of relatively strong signal from intermolecular zero-quantum coherences (iZQCs) is reported. Such a signal would not be observable in the conventional framework of magnetic resonance; it originates in long-range dipolar couplings (10 micrometers to 1 millimeter) that are traditionally ignored. Unlike conventional MRI, where image contrast is based on variations in spin density and relaxation times (often with injected contrast agents), contrast with iZQC images comes from variations in the susceptibility over a distance dictated by gradient strength. Phantom and in vivo (rat brain) data confirm that iZQC images give contrast enhancement. This contrast might be useful in the detection of small tumors, in that susceptibility correlates with oxygen concentration and in functional MRI.
Experiments on individual molecules using scanning probe microscopies have demonstrated an exciting diversity of physical, chemical, mechanical, and electronic phenomena. They have permitted deeper insight into the quantum electronics of molecular systems and have provided unique information on their conformational and mechanical properties. Concomitant developments in experimentation and theory have allowed a diverse range of molecules to be studied, varying in complexity from simple diatomics to biomolecular systems. At the level of an individual molecule, the interplays of mechanical and electronical behavior and chemical properties manifest themselves in an unusually clear manner. In revealing the crucial role of thermal, stochastic, and quantum-tunneling processes, they suggest that dynamics is inescapable and may play a decisive role in the evolution of nanotechnology.
Picosecond time-resolved Raman spectra of hemoglobin generated with blue pulses (20 to 30 picoseconds) that were resonant with the Soret band and of sufficient intensity to completely photodissociate the starting liganded sample are reported. For both R- and T-state liganded hemoglobins, the peak frequencies in the spectrum of the deoxy transient were the same at approximately 25 picoseconds as those observed at 10 nanoseconds subsequent to photodissociation. In particular, the large R-T differences in the frequency of the stretching mode for the iron-proximal histidine bond (VFe-His) detected in previously reported nanosecond-resolved spectra were also evident in the picosecond-resolved spectra. The implications of this finding with respect to the distribution of strain energy in the liganded protein and the origin of the time course for geminate recombination are discussed. On the basis of these results, a microscopic model is proposed in which delocalization of strain energy is strongly coupled to the coordinate of the iron. The model is used to explain the origin of the R-T differences in the rates of ligand dissociation.
The strength of radiative transitions in atoms is governed by selection rules that depend on the occupation of atomic orbitals with electrons. Experiments have shown similar electron occupation of the quantized energy levels in semiconductor quantum dots--often described as artificial atoms. But unlike real atoms, the confinement potential of quantum dots is anisotropic, and the electrons can easily couple with phonons of the material. Here we report electrical pump-and-probe experiments that probe the allowed and 'forbidden' transitions between energy levels under phonon emission in quantum dots with one or two electrons (artificial hydrogen and helium atoms). The forbidden transitions are in fact allowed by higher-order processes where electrons flip their spin. We find that the relaxation time is about 200 micro s for forbidden transitions, 4 to 5 orders of magnitude longer than for allowed transitions. This indicates that the spin degree of freedom is well separated from the orbital degree of freedom, and that the total spin in the quantum dots is an excellent quantum number. This is an encouraging result for potential applications of quantum dots as basic entities for spin-based quantum information storage.
Interaction of high-power laser light with materials often causes irreversible damage of the near-surface region. It is shown that copper single-crystal surfaces can be patterned by laser light. Irradiation with green light produced adatoms and vacancies, which self-organized into nanoscale pyramids. This restructuring can be removed by annealing. In contrast to green light, infrared laser irradiation at equivalent absorbed energy density did not produce any structural change. This, for metallic systems, unforeseen spectral difference in laser light action points to a concerted process as the source for structural modification, which involves long-lived primary excitation of localized d-electrons through interband transition together with phonon excitation.
Magnetoencephalography is the detection of the magnetic field distribution across the surface of the head, which is generated by a neuronal discharge within the brain. Magnetoencephalography is used in clinical epilepsy to localize the epileptogenic region prior to its surgical removal. A discussion of the instrumentation based on the superconducting quantum interference device that is used for detecting the magnetic field distribution, the analytical techniques, current research, and future directions of magnetoencephalography in epilepsy research is presented.
It is widely accepted that strong and variable radiation detected over all accessible energy bands in a number of active galaxies arises from a relativistic, Doppler-boosted jet pointing close to our line of sight. The size of the emitting zone and the location of this region relative to the central supermassive black hole are, however, poorly known, with estimates ranging from light-hours to a light-year or more. Here we report the coincidence of a gamma (gamma)-ray flare with a dramatic change of optical polarization angle. This provides evidence for co-spatiality of optical and gamma-ray emission regions and indicates a highly ordered jet magnetic field. The results also require a non-axisymmetric structure of the emission zone, implying a curved trajectory for the emitting material within the jet, with the dissipation region located at a considerable distance from the black hole, at about 10(5) gravitational radii.
Inelastic neutron scattering was used to study the wave vector- and frequency-dependent magnetic fluctuations in single crystals of superconducting YBa2Cu3O6+x. The spectra contain several important features, including a gap in the superconducting state, a pseudogap in the normal state, and the much-discussed resonance peak. The appearance of the pseudogap determined from transport and nuclear resonance coincides with formation of the resonance in the magnetic excitations. The exchange energy associated with the resonance has the temperature and doping dependences as well as the magnitude to describe approximately the electronic specific heat near the superconducting transition temperature (Tc).
Electronic transport through nanostructures is greatly affected by the presence of superconducting leads. If the interface between the nanostructure and the superconductors is sufficiently transparent, a dissipationless current (supercurrent) can flow through the device owing to the Josephson effect. A Josephson coupling, as measured by the zero-resistance supercurrent, has been obtained using tunnel barriers, superconducting constrictions, normal metals and semiconductors. The coupling mechanisms vary from tunnelling to Andreev reflection. The latter process has hitherto been observed only in normal-type systems with a continuous density of electronic states. Here we investigate a supercurrent flowing through a discrete density of states-that is, the quantized single particle energy states of a quantum dot, or 'artificial atom', placed between superconducting electrodes. For this purpose, we exploit the quantum properties of finite-sized carbon nanotubes. By means of a gate electrode, successive discrete energy states are tuned on- and off-resonance with the Fermi energy in the superconducting leads, resulting in a periodic modulation of the critical current and a non-trivial correlation between the conductance in the normal state and the supercurrent. We find, in good agreement with existing theory, that the product of the critical current and the normal state resistance becomes an oscillating function, in contrast to being constant as in previously explored regimes.
The payload complement on Spacelab 1 included a spectrometer for observations of the brighter cosmic x-ray sources. The primary scientific objective was to study the detailed spectral features of cosmic x-ray sources and their associated temporal variations over a wide energy range from about 2 to 80 kiloelectron volts. The instrument, based on the gas scintillation proportional counter, had a geometrical area of some 180 square centimeters with an energy resolution of about 9 percent at 7 kiloelectron volts. The results presented here show new results from two galactic binary x-ray sources, Cygnus X-3 and Centaurus X-3, and from the Perseus cluster of galaxies. The excellent energy resolution of the instrument permits line features to be identified in these sources with unprecedented quality.
At this point it would be presumptuous to suggest either that we understand very much about the electronic structure of solid surfaces or that we can specify in detail exactly what each of our tools for studying such structure is telling us. I think it is fair to say, however, that FES, UPS, and INS do make it possible for us to determine energy level spectra which can with some confidence be ascribed to the resonances of electrons in surface orbitals. It is true that INS is the more surface-selective of the two electron spectroscopies capable of producing data over at least a 10-ev energy range. We have seen intriguing differences between INS and UPS which, when we come to understand them, will most certainly reveal important characteristics of surface electronic structure and greatly expand our ability to distinguish electronic states in the surface from those in the selvedge. Possibly it is not too much to hope that the combined use of INS and UPS with incidence angle as an independent variable will give us information on the geometrical extent of surface orbitals, as well as the net electrical charge and the electric potential gradient in the region of the surface in which the orbitals lie.
The regular satellites of the giant planets are believed to have finished their accretion concurrent with the planets, about 4.5 Gyr ago. A population of Saturn's small moons orbiting just outside the main rings are dynamically young (less than 10(7) yr old), which is inconsistent with the formation timescale for the regular satellites. They are also underdense ( approximately 600 kg m(-3)) and show spectral characteristics similar to those of the main rings. It has been suggested that they accreted at the rings' edge, but hitherto it has been impossible to model the formation process fully owing to a lack of computational power. Here we report a hybrid simulation in which the viscous spreading of Saturn's rings beyond the Roche limit (the distance beyond which the rings are gravitationally unstable) gives rise to the small moons. The moonlets' mass distribution and orbital architecture are reproduced. The current confinement of the main rings and the existence of the dusty F ring are shown to be direct consequences of the coupling of viscous evolution and satellite formation. Saturn's rings, like a mini protoplanetary disk, may be the last place where accretion was recently active in the Solar System, some 10(6)-10(7) yr ago.
Despite over two decades of intense research efforts, the origin of high-temperature superconductivity in the copper oxides remains elusive. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy experiments have revealed a kink in the dispersion relations (energy versus wavevector) of electronic states in the copper oxides at binding energies of 50-80 meV, raising the hope that this anomaly could be a key to understanding high-temperature superconductivity. The kink is often interpreted in terms of interactions between the electrons and a bosonic field. Although there is no consensus on the nature of the bosons (or even whether a boson model is appropriate), both phonons and spin fluctuations have been proposed as possible candidates. Here we report first-principles calculations of the role of phonons and the electron-phonon interaction in the photoemission spectra of La(2 - x)Sr(x)CuO4. Our calculations within the standard formalism demonstrate that the phonon-induced renormalization of the electron energies and the Fermi velocity is almost one order of magnitude smaller than the effect observed in photoemission experiments. Therefore, our result rules out electron-phonon interaction in bulk La(2 - x)Sr(x)CuO4 as the exclusive origin of the measured kink. Our conclusions are consistent with those reached independently in a recent study of the related compound YBa2Cu3O7.
Electrons in atoms possess both spin and orbital degrees of freedom. In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, these are independent, resulting in large degeneracies in atomic spectra. However, relativistic effects couple the spin and orbital motion, leading to the well-known fine structure in their spectra. The electronic states in defect-free carbon nanotubes are widely believed to be four-fold degenerate, owing to independent spin and orbital symmetries, and also to possess electron-hole symmetry. Here we report measurements demonstrating that in clean nanotubes the spin and orbital motion of electrons are coupled, thereby breaking all of these symmetries. This spin-orbit coupling is directly observed as a splitting of the four-fold degeneracy of a single electron in ultra-clean quantum dots. The coupling favours parallel alignment of the orbital and spin magnetic moments for electrons and antiparallel alignment for holes. Our measurements are consistent with recent theories that predict the existence of spin-orbit coupling in curved graphene and describe it as a spin-dependent topological phase in nanotubes. Our findings have important implications for spin-based applications in carbon-based systems, entailing new design principles for the realization of quantum bits (qubits) in nanotubes and providing a mechanism for all-electrical control of spins in nanotubes.
The nature of the stable phase of iron in the Earth's solid inner core is still highly controversial. Laboratory experiments suggest the possibility of an uncharacterized phase transformation in iron at core conditions and seismological observations have indicated the possible presence of complex, inner-core layering. Theoretical studies currently suggest that the hexagonal close packed (h.c.p.) phase of iron is stable at core pressures and that the body centred cubic (b.c.c.) phase of iron becomes elastically unstable at high pressure. In other h.c.p. metals, however, a high-pressure b.c.c. form has been found to become stabilized at high temperature. We report here a quantum mechanical study of b.c.c.-iron able to model its behaviour at core temperatures as well as pressures, using ab initio molecular dynamics free-energy calculations. We find that b.c.c.-iron indeed becomes entropically stabilized at core temperatures, but in its pure state h.c.p.-iron still remains thermodynamically more favourable. The inner core, however, is not pure iron, and our calculations indicate that the b.c.c. phase will be stabilized with respect to the h.c.p. phase by sulphur or silicon impurities in the core. Consequently, a b.c.c.-structured alloy may be a strong candidate for explaining the observed seismic complexity of the inner core.
Vibrational spectroscopy with inelastic neutron scattering can provide spectra that are more detailed and easier to interpret than optical spectra. The spectral intensity depends on energy transfer and kinetic momentum transfer, allowing determination of the potential function. Experiments reveal that the proton involved in intermolecular hydrogen bonding in N-methylacetamide and polyglycine I vibrates almost independently. An ionic representation (N(delta-)...H(+)...O(delta-)) of the hydrogen bond is more realistic than the normally accepted covalent model (NH...O). For polyglycine I, the proton experiences a local, symmetric double-minimum potential arising from dynamic exchange between the amide-like (CONH) and imidol-like (HOCN) forms of the peptide unit.
Two recent instrumental improvements in high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy make possible the recording of complete surface vibrational spectra on the millisecond time scale. This is the first spectroscopic probe capable of directly measuring fundamental surface rate processes in real time with a resolution less than or equal to 1 millisecond. Such measurements are the key to understanding surface kinetics at the molecular level. This article summarizes experiments on the adsorption and decomposition of formic acid on Cu(100) to investigate the temperature and coverage dependence of the formate intermediate. Other results are cited that provide a detailed description of the decomposition of methanol on Ni(110). Also reported are direct measurements of the residence time of carbon monoxide on Cu(100) and the associated desorption kinetics.
The tip-surface region of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) emits light when the energy of the tunneling electrons is sufficient to excite luminescent processes. These processes provide access to dynamic aspects of the local electronic structure that are not directly amenable to conventional STM experiments. From monolayer films of carbon-60 fullerenes on gold(110) surfaces, intense emission is observed when the STM tip is placed above an individual molecule. The diameter of this emission spot associated with carbon-60 is approximately 4 angstroms. These results demonstrate the highest spatial resolution of light emission to date with a scanning probe technique.
Two classes of rotating neutron stars-soft gamma-ray repeaters (SGRs) and anomalous X-ray pulsars-are magnetars, whose X-ray emission is powered by a very strong magnetic field (B approximately 10(15) G). SGRs occasionally become 'active', producing many short X-ray bursts. Extremely rarely, an SGR emits a giant flare with a total energy about a thousand times higher than in a typical burst. Here we report that SGR 1806-20 emitted a giant flare on 27 December 2004. The total (isotropic) flare energy is 2 x 10(46) erg, which is about a hundred times higher than the other two previously observed giant flares. The energy release probably occurred during a catastrophic reconfiguration of the neutron star's magnetic field. If the event had occurred at a larger distance, but within 40 megaparsecs, it would have resembled a short, hard gamma-ray burst, suggesting that flares from extragalactic SGRs may form a subclass of such bursts.
People exert large amounts of problem-solving effort playing computer games. Simple image- and text-recognition tasks have been successfully 'crowd-sourced' through games, but it is not clear if more complex scientific problems can be solved with human-directed computing. Protein structure prediction is one such problem: locating the biologically relevant native conformation of a protein is a formidable computational challenge given the very large size of the search space. Here we describe Foldit, a multiplayer online game that engages non-scientists in solving hard prediction problems. Foldit players interact with protein structures using direct manipulation tools and user-friendly versions of algorithms from the Rosetta structure prediction methodology, while they compete and collaborate to optimize the computed energy. We show that top-ranked Foldit players excel at solving challenging structure refinement problems in which substantial backbone rearrangements are necessary to achieve the burial of hydrophobic residues. Players working collaboratively develop a rich assortment of new strategies and algorithms; unlike computational approaches, they explore not only the conformational space but also the space of possible search strategies. The integration of human visual problem-solving and strategy development capabilities with traditional computational algorithms through interactive multiplayer games is a powerful new approach to solving computationally-limited scientific problems.
Electronic spins in semiconductors have been used extensively to explore the limits of external control over quantum mechanical phenomena. A long-standing goal of this research has been to identify or develop robust quantum systems that can be easily manipulated, for future use in advanced information and communication technologies. Recently, a point defect in diamond known as the nitrogen-vacancy centre has attracted a great deal of interest because it possesses an atomic-scale electronic spin state that can be used as an individually addressable, solid-state quantum bit (qubit), even at room temperature. These exceptional quantum properties have motivated efforts to identify similar defects in other semiconductors, as they may offer an expanded range of functionality not available to the diamond nitrogen-vacancy centre. Notably, several defects in silicon carbide (SiC) have been suggested as good candidates for exploration, owing to a combination of computational predictions and magnetic resonance data. Here we demonstrate that several defect spin states in the 4H polytype of SiC (4H-SiC) can be optically addressed and coherently controlled in the time domain at temperatures ranging from 20 to 300 kelvin. Using optical and microwave techniques similar to those used with diamond nitrogen-vacancy qubits, we study the spin-1 ground state of each of four inequivalent forms of the neutral carbon-silicon divacancy, as well as a pair of defect spin states of unidentified origin. These defects are optically active near telecommunication wavelengths, and are found in a host material for which there already exist industrial-scale crystal growth and advanced microfabrication techniques. In addition, they possess desirable spin coherence properties that are comparable to those of the diamond nitrogen-vacancy centre. This makes them promising candidates for various photonic, spintronic and quantum information applications that merge quantum degrees of freedom with classical electronic and optical technologies.
The origin of the solar wind in solar coronal holes has long been unclear. We establish that the solar wind starts flowing out of the corona at heights above the photosphere between 5 megameters and 20 megameters in magnetic funnels. This result is obtained by a correlation of the Doppler-velocity and radiance maps of spectral lines emitted by various ions with the force-free magnetic field as extrapolated from photospheric magnetograms to different altitudes. Specifically, we find that Ne7+ ions mostly radiate around 20 megameters, where they have outflow speeds of about 10 kilometers per second, whereas C3+ ions with no average flow speed mainly radiate around 5 megameters. Based on these results, a model for understanding the solar wind origin is suggested.
In the emerging field of quantum computation and quantum information, superconducting devices are promising candidates for the implementation of solid-state quantum bits (qubits). Single-qubit operations, direct coupling between two qubits and the realization of a quantum gate have been reported. However, complex manipulation of entangled states-such as the coupling of a two-level system to a quantum harmonic oscillator, as demonstrated in ion/atom-trap experiments and cavity quantum electrodynamics-has yet to be achieved for superconducting devices. Here we demonstrate entanglement between a superconducting flux qubit (a two-level system) and a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). The latter provides the measurement system for detecting the quantum states; it is also an effective inductance that, in parallel with an external shunt capacitance, acts as a harmonic oscillator. We achieve generation and control of the entangled state by performing microwave spectroscopy and detecting the resultant Rabi oscillations of the coupled system.
Despite recent advances in understanding high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) superconductors, there is no consensus on the origin of the superconducting 'glue': that is, the mediator that binds electrons into superconducting pairs. The main contenders are lattice vibrations (phonons) and spin-excitations, with the additional possibility of pairing without mediators. In conventional superconductors, phonon-mediated pairing was unequivocally established by data from tunnelling experiments. Proponents of phonons as the high-T(c) glue were therefore encouraged by the recent scanning tunnelling microscopy experiments on hole-doped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8-delta (BSCCO) that reveal an oxygen lattice vibrational mode whose energy is anticorrelated with the superconducting gap energy scale. Here we report high-resolution scanning tunnelling microscopy measurements of the electron-doped high-T(c) superconductor Pr0.88LaCe0.12CuO4 (PLCCO) (T(c) = 24 K) that reveal a bosonic excitation (mode) at energies of 10.5 +/- 2.5 meV. This energy is consistent with both spin-excitations in PLCCO measured by inelastic neutron scattering (resonance mode) and a low-energy acoustic phonon mode, but differs substantially from the oxygen vibrational mode identified in BSCCO. Our analysis of the variation of the local mode energy and intensity with the local gap energy scale indicates an electronic origin of the mode consistent with spin-excitations rather than phonons.
A cornerstone of Einstein's special relativity is Lorentz invariance-the postulate that all observers measure exactly the same speed of light in vacuum, independent of photon-energy. While special relativity assumes that there is no fundamental length-scale associated with such invariance, there is a fundamental scale (the Planck scale, l(Planck) approximately 1.62 x 10(-33) cm or E(Planck) = M(Planck)c(2) approximately 1.22 x 10(19) GeV), at which quantum effects are expected to strongly affect the nature of space-time. There is great interest in the (not yet validated) idea that Lorentz invariance might break near the Planck scale. A key test of such violation of Lorentz invariance is a possible variation of photon speed with energy. Even a tiny variation in photon speed, when accumulated over cosmological light-travel times, may be revealed by observing sharp features in gamma-ray burst (GRB) light-curves. Here we report the detection of emission up to approximately 31 GeV from the distant and short GRB 090510. We find no evidence for the violation of Lorentz invariance, and place a lower limit of 1.2E(Planck) on the scale of a linear energy dependence (or an inverse wavelength dependence), subject to reasonable assumptions about the emission (equivalently we have an upper limit of l(Planck)/1.2 on the length scale of the effect). Our results disfavour quantum-gravity theories in which the quantum nature of space-time on a very small scale linearly alters the speed of light.
Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy was carried out on (La(1.28)Nd(0.6) Sr(0.12))CuO(4), a model system of the charge- and spin-ordered state, or stripe phase. The electronic structure contains characteristic features consistent with other cuprates, such as the flat band at low energy near the Brillouin zone face. However, the low-energy excitation near the expected d-wave node region is strongly suppressed. The frequency-integrated spectral weight is confined inside one-dimensional segments in the momentum space (defined by horizontal momenta &cjs3539;k(x)&cjs3539; = pi/4 and vertical momenta &cjs3539;k(y)&cjs3539; = pi/4), deviating strongly from the more rounded Fermi surface expected from band calculations. This departure from the two-dimensional Fermi surface persists to a very high energy scale. These results provide important information for establishing a theory to understand the charge and spin ordering in cuprates and their relation with high-temperature superconductivity.
The ability to distinguish colour from intensity variations is a difficult computational problem for the visual system because each of the three cone photoreceptor types absorb all wavelengths of light, although their peak sensitivities are at relatively short (S cones), medium (M cones), or long (L cones) wavelengths. The first stage in colour processing is the comparison of the outputs of different cone types by spectrally opponent neurons in the retina and upstream in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Some neurons receive opponent inputs from L and M cones, whereas others receive input from S cones opposed by combined signals from L and M cones. Here we report how the outputs of the L/M- and S-opponent geniculate cell types are combined in time at the next stage of colour processing, in the macaque primary visual cortex (V1). Some V1 neurons respond to a single chromatic region, with either a short (68-95 ms) or a longer (96-135 ms) latency, whereas others respond to two chromatic regions with a difference in latency of 20-30 ms. Across all types, short latency responses are mostly evoked by L/M-opponent inputs whereas longer latency responses are evoked mostly by S-opponent inputs. Furthermore, neurons with late S-cone inputs exhibit dynamic changes in the sharpness of their chromatic tuning over time. We propose that the sparse, S-opponent signal in the lateral geniculate nucleus is amplified in area V1, possibly through recurrent excitatory networks. This results in a delayed, sluggish cortical S-cone signal which is then integrated with L/M-opponent signals to rotate the lateral geniculate nucleus chromatic axes.
The scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) relies on localized electron tunnelling between a sharp probe tip and a conducting sample to attain atomic-scale spatial resolution. In the 25-year period since its invention, the STM has helped uncover a wealth of phenomena in diverse physical systems--ranging from semiconductors to superconductors to atomic and molecular nanosystems. A severe limitation in scanning tunnelling microscopy is the low temporal resolution, originating from the diminished high-frequency response of the tunnel current readout circuitry. Here we overcome this limitation by measuring the reflection from a resonant inductor-capacitor circuit in which the tunnel junction is embedded, and demonstrate electronic bandwidths as high as 10 MHz. This approximately 100-fold bandwidth improvement on the state of the art translates into fast surface topography as well as delicate measurements in mesoscopic electronics and mechanics. Broadband noise measurements across the tunnel junction using this radio-frequency STM have allowed us to perform thermometry at the nanometre scale. Furthermore, we have detected high-frequency mechanical motion with a sensitivity approaching approximately 15 fm Hz(-1/2). This sensitivity is on par with the highest available from nanoscale optical and electrical displacement detection techniques, and the radio-frequency STM is expected to be capable of quantum-limited position measurements.
Analytical tools that have spatial resolution at the nanometre scale are indispensable for the life and physical sciences. It is desirable that these tools also permit elemental and chemical identification on a scale of 10 nm or less, with large penetration depths. A variety of techniques in X-ray imaging are currently being developed that may provide these combined capabilities. Here we report the achievement of sub-15-nm spatial resolution with a soft X-ray microscope--and a clear path to below 10 nm--using an overlay technique for zone plate fabrication. The microscope covers a spectral range from a photon energy of 250 eV (approximately 5 nm wavelength) to 1.8 keV (approximately 0.7 nm), so that primary K and L atomic resonances of elements such as C, N, O, Al, Ti, Fe, Co and Ni can be probed. This X-ray microscopy technique is therefore suitable for a wide range of studies: biological imaging in the water window; studies of wet environmental samples; studies of magnetic nanostructures with both elemental and spin-orbit sensitivity; studies that require viewing through thin windows, coatings or substrates (such as buried electronic devices in a silicon chip); and three-dimensional imaging of cryogenically fixed biological cells.
Magnetic reconnection is a process that converts magnetic energy into bi-directional plasma jets; it is believed to be the dominant process by which solar-wind energy enters the Earth's magnetosphere. This energy is subsequently dissipated by magnetic storms and aurorae. Previous single-spacecraft observations revealed only single jets at the magnetopause--while the existence of a counter-streaming jet was implicitly assumed, no experimental confirmation was available. Here we report in situ two-spacecraft observations of bi-directional jets at the magnetopause, finding evidence for a stable and extended reconnection line; the latter implies substantial entry of the solar wind into the magnetosphere. We conclude that reconnection is determined by large-scale interactions between the solar wind and the magnetosphere, rather than by local conditions at the magnetopause.
Resistively detected nuclear spin relaxation measurements in closely separated two-dimensional electron systems reveal strong low-frequency electron-spin fluctuations in the quantum Hall regime. As the temperature is decreased, the spin fluctuations, manifested by a sharp enhancement of the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T1, continue to grow down to the lowest temperature of 66 millikelvin. The observed divergent behavior of 1/T1 signals a gapless spin excitation mode and is a hallmark of canted antiferromagnetic order. Our data demonstrate the realization of a two-dimensional system with planar broken symmetry, in which fluctuations do not freeze out when approaching the zero temperature limit.
An individual magnetic atom doped into a semiconductor is a promising building block for bottom-up spintronic devices and quantum logic gates. Moreover, it provides a perfect model system for the atomic-scale investigation of fundamental effects such as magnetism in dilute magnetic semiconductors. However, dopants in semiconductors so far have not been studied by magnetically sensitive techniques with atomic resolution that correlate the atomic structure with the dopant's magnetism. Here we show electrical excitation and read-out of a spin associated with a single magnetic dopant in a semiconductor host. We use spin-resolved scanning tunnelling spectroscopy to measure the spin excitations and the magnetization curve of individual iron surface-dopants embedded within a two-dimensional electron gas confined to an indium antimonide (110) surface. The dopants act like isolated quantum spins the states of which are governed by a substantial magnetic anisotropy that forces the spin to lie in the surface plane. This result is corroborated by our first principles calculations. The demonstrated methodology opens new routes for the investigation of sample systems that are more widely studied in the field of spintronics-that is, Mn in GaAs (ref. 5), magnetic ions in semiconductor quantum dots, nitrogen-vacancy centres in diamond and phosphorus spins in silicon.
Interfaces between complex oxides are emerging as one of the most interesting systems in condensed matter physics. In this special setting, in which translational symmetry is artificially broken, a variety of new and unusual electronic phases can be promoted. Theoretical studies predict complex phase diagrams and suggest the key role of the charge carrier density in determining the systems' ground states. A particularly fascinating system is the conducting interface between the band insulators LaAlO(3) and SrTiO(3) (ref. 3). Recently two possible ground states have been experimentally identified: a magnetic state and a two-dimensional superconducting condensate. Here we use the electric field effect to explore the phase diagram of the system. The electrostatic tuning of the carrier density allows an on/off switching of superconductivity and drives a quantum phase transition between a two-dimensional superconducting state and an insulating state. Analyses of the magnetotransport properties in the insulating state are consistent with weak localization and do not provide evidence for magnetism. The electric field control of superconductivity demonstrated here opens the way to the development of new mesoscopic superconducting circuits.
Nuclear magnetic resonance studies of mitochondria isolated from ischemic hearts after coronary vessel occlusion indicated a decrease in water proton relaxation times. This change coincided with a decrease in the hydration of the samples. It is suggested that in ischemia, changes in macromolecular hydration may be one of the first mechanisms to alter function in the mitochondria, which are vital to the energy-transducing process in heart muscle.
The superposition principle is a fundamental tenet of quantum mechanics. It allows a quantum system to be 'in two places at the same time', because the quantum state of a physical system can simultaneously include measurably different physical states. The preparation and use of such superposed states forms the basis of quantum computation and simulation. The creation of complex superpositions in harmonic systems (such as the motional state of trapped ions, microwave resonators or optical cavities) has presented a significant challenge because it cannot be achieved with classical control signals. Here we demonstrate the preparation and measurement of arbitrary quantum states in an electromagnetic resonator, superposing states with different numbers of photons in a completely controlled and deterministic manner. We synthesize the states using a superconducting phase qubit to phase-coherently pump photons into the resonator, making use of an algorithm that generalizes a previously demonstrated method of generating photon number (Fock) states in a resonator. We completely characterize the resonator quantum state using Wigner tomography, which is equivalent to measuring the resonator's full density matrix.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy continues to evolve as a primary technique in the study of solids. This review briefly describes some developments in modern NMR that demonstrate its exciting potential as an analytical tool in fields as diverse as physics, chemistry, biology, geology, and materials science. Topics covered include motional narrowing by sample reorientation, multiple-quantum and overtone spectroscopy, probing porous solids with guest atoms and molecules, two-dimensional NMR studies of chemical exchange and spin diffusion, experiments at extreme temperatures, NMR imaging of solid materials, and low-frequency and zero-field magnetic resonance. These developments permit increasingly complex structural and dynamical behavior to be probed at a molecular level and thus add to our understanding of macroscopic properties of materials.
Formation of electron pairs is essential to superconductivity. For conventional superconductors, tunnelling spectroscopy has established that pairing is mediated by bosonic modes (phonons); a peak in the second derivative of tunnel current d2I/dV2 corresponds to each phonon mode. For high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) superconductivity, however, no boson mediating electron pairing has been identified. One explanation could be that electron pair formation and related electron-boson interactions are heterogeneous at the atomic scale and therefore challenging to characterize. However, with the latest advances in d2I/dV2 spectroscopy using scanning tunnelling microscopy, it has become possible to study bosonic modes directly at the atomic scale. Here we report d2I/dV2 imaging studies of the high-T(c) superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta. We find intense disorder of electron-boson interaction energies at the nanometre scale, along with the expected modulations in d2I/dV2 (refs 9, 10). Changing the density of holes has minimal effects on both the average mode energies and the modulations, indicating that the bosonic modes are unrelated to electronic or magnetic structure. Instead, the modes appear to be local lattice vibrations, as substitution of 18O for 16O throughout the material reduces the average mode energy by approximately 6 per cent--the expected effect of this isotope substitution on lattice vibration frequencies. Significantly, the mode energies are always spatially anticorrelated with the superconducting pairing-gap energies, suggesting an interplay between these lattice vibration modes and the superconductivity.
A nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) event is popularly viewed as the flip of a single spin in a magnetc field, stimulated by the absorption or emission of only one quantum of radio-frequency energy. Nevertheless, resonances between nuclear spin states that differ by more than one unit in the Zeeman quantum number also can be induced in systems of coupled spins by suitably designed sequences of radio-frequency pulses. Pairs of states excited in this way oscillate coherently at the frequencies of the corresponding multiple-quantum transitions and produce a response that may be monitored indirectly in a two-dimensional time-domain experiment. The pattern of multiple-quantum excitation and response, influenced largely by the concerted interactions of groups of coupled nuclei, simplifies the NMR spectrum in some instances and provides significant new information in others. Applications of multiple-quantum NMR extend to problems in many different areas, ranging from studies of the structure and function of proteins and nucleic acids in solution to investigations of the arrangements of atoms in amorphous semiconductors. The specific spectroscopic techniques are varied as well and include methods designed, for example, to simplify spectral analysis for liquids and liquid crystals, eliminate inhomogeneous broadening, study interatomic connectivity in liquid-state molecules, identify clusters of atoms in solids, enhance the spatial resolution in solid-state imaging experiments, and probe correlated molecular motions.
Experiments on a constant-density two-dimensional hole system in a gallium arsenide quantum well revealed that the metallic behavior observed in the zero-magnetic-field temperature dependence of the resistivity depends on the symmetry of the confinement potential and the resulting spin splitting of the valence band.
Entanglement lies at the heart of quantum mechanics, and in recent years has been identified as an essential resource for quantum information processing and computation. The experimentally challenging production of highly entangled multi-particle states is therefore important for investigating both fundamental physics and practical applications. Here we report the creation of highly entangled states of neutral atoms trapped in the periodic potential of an optical lattice. Controlled collisions between individual neighbouring atoms are used to realize an array of quantum gates, with massively parallel operation. We observe a coherent entangling-disentangling evolution in the many-body system, depending on the phase shift acquired during the collision between neighbouring atoms. Such dynamics are indicative of highly entangled many-body states; moreover, these are formed in a single operational step, independent of the size of the system.
Myosins are actin-activated ATPases that are able to translocate along actin filaments using energy derived from ATP hydrolysis. Non-muscle cells contain conventional myosins, which are similar in sequence and structure to muscle myosin, and a number of unconventional myosins whose head sequences are similar but tail sequences are unrelated to conventional myosins. The myosin superfamily currently consists of nine classes; Drosophila 95F is an unconventional myosin and the original member of class VI, which includes a homologue found in pig kidney. Some unconventional myosins have been suggested as mediators of some types of intracellular transport, but there is little direct evidence for this function (but see ref. 6). We have observed transport of cytoplasmic particles in live Drosophila embryos in three dimensions using computational optical sectioning microscopy. We present here evidence that this transport is actin-based, ATP-dependent and catalysed by one such unconventional myosin, the 95F myosin. This is, to our knowledge, the first direct observation of transport catalysed by an unconventional myosin in living cells.
Energy-transducing membranes of living organisms couple spontaneous to non-spontaneous processes through the intermediacy of protonmotive force (p.m.f.)--an imbalance in electrochemical potential of protons across the membrane. In most organisms, p.m.f. is generated by redox reactions that are either photochemically driven, such as those in photosynthetic reaction centres, or intrinsically spontaneous, such as those of oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria. Transmembrane proteins (such as the cytochromes and complexes I, III and IV in the electron-transport chain in the inner mitochondrial membrane) couple the redox reactions to proton translocation, thereby conserving a fraction of the redox chemical potential as p.m.f. Many transducer proteins couple p.m.f. to the performance of biochemical work, such as biochemical synthesis and mechanical and transport processes. Recently, an artificial photosynthetic membrane was reported in which a photocyclic process was used to transport protons across a liposomal membrane, resulting in acidification of the liposome's internal volume. If significant p.m.f. is generated in this system, then incorporating an appropriate transducer into the liposomal bilayer should make it possible to drive a non-spontaneous chemical process. Here we report the incorporation of F0F1-ATP synthase into liposomes containing the components of the proton-pumping photocycle. Irradiation of this artificial membrane with visible light results in the uncoupler- and inhibitor-sensitive synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) against an ATP chemical potential of approximately 12 kcal mol(-1), with a quantum yield of more than 7%. This system mimics the process by which photosynthetic bacteria convert light energy into ATP chemical potential.
In outer space, high-energy irradiation of cryogenic ice mixtures of abundant water and carbon dioxide is expected to form solid carbonic acid. Experiments and thermodynamic analyses show that crystalline carbonic acid sublimates without decomposition. Free-energy considerations based on highly accurate molecular quantum mechanics, in combination with vapor pressures resulting from experimental sublimation rates, suggest that in the gas phase, a monomer and dimer of carbonic acid are in equilibrium, comparable to that of formic acid. Gaseous carbonic acid could be present in comets, on Mars and outer solar system bodies, in interstellar icy grains, and in Earth's upper atmosphere.
Lasers are usually described by their output frequency and intensity. However, laser operation is an inherently nonlinear process. Knowledge about the dynamic behaviour of lasers is thus of great importance for detailed understanding of laser operation and for improvement in performance for applications. Of particular interest is the time domain within the coherence time of the optical transition. This time is determined by the oscillation period of the laser radiation and thus is very short. Rigorous quantum mechanical models predict interesting effects like quantum beats, lasing without inversion, and photon echo processes. As these models are based on quantum coherence and interference, knowledge of the phase within the optical cycle is of particular interest. Laser radiation has so far been measured using intensity detectors, which are sensitive to the square of the electric field. Therefore information about the sign and phase of the laser radiation is lost. Here we use an electro-optic detection scheme to measure the amplitude and phase of stimulated radiation, and correlate this radiation directly with an input probing pulse. We have applied this technique to semiconductor quantum cascade lasers, which are coherent sources operating at frequencies between the optical (>100 THz) and electronic (<0.5 THz) ranges. In addition to the phase information, we can also determine the spectral gain, the bias dependence of this gain, and obtain an insight into the evolution of the laser field.
The electromotive force (e.m.f.) predicted by Faraday's law reflects the forces acting on the charge, -e, of an electron moving through a device or circuit, and is proportional to the time derivative of the magnetic field. This conventional e.m.f. is usually absent for stationary circuits and static magnetic fields. There are also forces that act on the spin of an electron; it has been recently predicted that, for circuits that are in part composed of ferromagnetic materials, there arises an e.m.f. of spin origin even for a static magnetic field. This e.m.f. can be attributed to a time-varying magnetization of the host material, such as the motion of magnetic domains in a static magnetic field, and reflects the conversion of magnetic to electrical energy. Here we show that such an e.m.f. can indeed be induced by a static magnetic field in magnetic tunnel junctions containing zinc-blende-structured MnAs quantum nanomagnets. The observed e.m.f. operates on a timescale of approximately 10(2)-10(3) seconds and results from the conversion of the magnetic energy of the superparamagnetic MnAs nanomagnets into electrical energy when these magnets undergo magnetic quantum tunnelling. As a consequence, a huge magnetoresistance of up to 100,000 per cent is observed for certain bias voltages. Our results strongly support the contention that, in magnetic nanostructures, Faraday's law of induction must be generalized to account for forces of purely spin origin. The huge magnetoresistance and e.m.f. may find potential applications in high sensitivity magnetic sensors, as well as in new active devices such as 'spin batteries'.
The role of the metal-oxide interface in determining the spin polarization of electrons tunneling from or into ferromagnetic transition metals in magnetic tunnel junctions is reported. The spin polarization of cobalt in tunnel junctions with an alumina barrier is positive, but it is negative when the barrier is strontium titanate or cerium lanthanite. The results are ascribed to bonding effects at the transition metal-barrier interface. The influence of the electronic structure of metal-oxide interfaces on the spin polarization raises interesting fundamental problems and opens new ways to optimize the magnetoresistance of tunnel junctions.
Despite the long history of the Fischer-Tropsch reaction, carbon monoxide has proven remarkably resistant to selective homologation under mild conditions. Here, we find that an organouranium(III) complex induces efficient reductive trimerization of carbon monoxide at room temperature and pressure. The result is a triangular, cyclic C3O(2-)3, or deltate, dianion held between two uranium(IV) units. The bonding within the C3O(2-)3 unit and its coordination to the two U centers have been analyzed by x-ray diffraction and density functional theory computational studies, which show a stabilizing C-C agostic interaction between the C3 core and one U center. Solution nuclear magnetic resonance studies reveal a rapid equilibration of the deltate unit between the U centers.
In conventional superconductors, the most direct evidence of the mechanism responsible for superconductivity comes from tunnelling experiments, which provide a clear picture of the underlying electron-phonon interactions. As the coherence length in conventional superconductors is large, the tunnelling process probes several atomic layers into the bulk of the material; the observed structure in the current-voltage characteristics at the phonon energies gives, through inversion of the Eliashberg equations, the electron-phonon spectral density alpha2F(omega). The situation is different for the high-temperature copper oxide superconductors, where the coherence length (particularly for c-axis tunnelling) can be very short. Because of this, methods such as optical spectroscopy and neutron scattering provide a better route for investigating the underlying mechanism, as they probe bulk properties. Accurate reflection measurements at infrared wavelengths and precise polarized neutron-scattering data are now available for a variety of the copper oxides, and here we show that the conducting carriers (probed by infrared spectroscopy) are strongly coupled to a resonance structure in the spectrum of spin fluctuations (measured by neutron scattering). The coupling strength inferred from those results is sufficient to account for the high transition temperatures of the copper oxides, highlighting a prominent role for spin fluctuations in driving superconductivity in these materials.
We report construction of a portable nuclear magnetic resonance sensor with a single-sided open probe design. The resulting magnetic field inhomogeneity is compensated by a pulse sequence that takes advantage of parallel inhomogeneity in the applied radio frequency field. We can thereby acquire fluorine-19 spectra of liquid fluorocarbons with 8 parts per million resolution, surmounting the long-standing obstacle of obtaining chemical shift information with open probe instruments.
The development of new observational, experimental, and computational technologies is changing our understanding of the origins of the elements by thermonuclear burning in stars. Gamma-ray lines from newly made radioactive nuclei have been identified using instruments onboard low-Earth orbiting satellites. Grains in meteorites have isotopic anomalies which suggest that the grains were put together in a stellar explosion such as a supernova. Computer simulations allow such anomalies to be used to probe how these events happen. The simulations are being independently tested by experiments with high-energy density lasers. These developments are beginning to provide a quantitative diagnostic of galactic evolution, and of the epoch of formation of the first stars and galaxies.
Although graphite is known as one of the most chemically inert materials, we have found that graphene, a single atomic plane of graphite, can react with atomic hydrogen, which transforms this highly conductive zero-overlap semimetal into an insulator. Transmission electron microscopy reveals that the obtained graphene derivative (graphane) is crystalline and retains the hexagonal lattice, but its period becomes markedly shorter than that of graphene. The reaction with hydrogen is reversible, so that the original metallic state, the lattice spacing, and even the quantum Hall effect can be restored by annealing. Our work illustrates the concept of graphene as a robust atomic-scale scaffold on the basis of which new two-dimensional crystals with designed electronic and other properties can be created by attaching other atoms and molecules.
A single sheet of carbon, graphene, exhibits unexpected electronic properties that arise from quantum state symmetries, which restrict the scattering of its charge carriers. Understanding the role of defects in the transport properties of graphene is central to realizing future electronics based on carbon. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy was used to measure quasiparticle interference patterns in epitaxial graphene grown on SiC(0001). Energy-resolved maps of the local density of states reveal modulations on two different length scales, reflecting both intravalley and intervalley scattering. Although such scattering in graphene can be suppressed because of the symmetries of the Dirac quasiparticles, we show that, when its source is atomic-scale lattice defects, wave functions of different symmetries can mix.
We present a scheme that enables gigahertz-bandwidth three-dimensional control of electron spins in a semiconductor heterostructure with the use of a single voltage signal. Microwave modulation of the Lande g tensor produces frequency-modulated electron spin precession. Driving at the Larmor frequency results in g-tensor modulation resonance, which is functionally equivalent to electron spin resonance but without the use of time-dependent magnetic fields. These results provide proof of the concept that quantum spin information can be locally manipulated with the use of high-speed electrical circuits.
Advanced methods of phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy provided a method whereby biological phosphonates and phosphates can be determined on simple lipid fractions of biological origin. The spectra consist of two easily distinguished resonance bands; one corresponds to families of phosphonates, and the other corresponds to families of orthophosphates.
Receiver domains are the dominant molecular switches in bacterial signalling. Although several structures of non-phosphorylated receiver domains have been reported, a detailed structural understanding of the activation arising from phosphorylation has been impeded by the very short half-lives of the aspartylphosphate linkages. Here we present the first structure of a receiver domain in its active state, the phosphorylated receiver domain of the bacterial enhancer-binding protein NtrC (nitrogen regulatory protein C). Nuclear magnetic resonance spectra were taken during steady-state autophosphorylation/dephosphorylation, and three-dimensional spectra from multiple samples were combined. Phosphorylation induces a large conformational change involving a displacement of beta-strands 4 and 5 and alpha-helices 3 and 4 away from the active site, a register shift and an axial rotation in helix 4. This creates an exposed hydrophobic surface that is likely to transmit the signal to the transcriptional activation domain.
Artificial networks can be used to identify hydrogen nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR) spectra of complex oligosaccharides. Feed-forward neural networks with back-propagation of errors can distinguish between spectra of oligosaccharides that differ by only one glycosyl residue in twenty. The artificial neural networks use features of the strongly overlapping region of the spectra (hump region) as well as features of the resolved regions of the spectra (structural reporter groups) to recognize spectra and efficiently recognized 1H-NMR spectra even when the spectra were perturbed by minor variations in their chemical shifts. Identification of spectra by neural network-based pattern recognition techniques required less than 0.1 second. It is anticipated that artificial neural networks can be used to identify the structures of any complex carbohydrate that has been previously characterized and for which a 1H-NMR spectrum is available.
Research in semiconductor spintronics aims to extend the scope of conventional electronics by using the spin degree of freedom of an electron in addition to its charge. Significant scientific advances in this area have been reported, such as the development of diluted ferromagnetic semiconductors, spin injection into semiconductors from ferromagnetic metals and discoveries of new physical phenomena involving electron spin. Yet no viable means of developing spintronics in semiconductors has been presented. Here we report a theoretical design that is a conceptual step forward-spin accumulation is used as the basis of a semiconductor computer circuit. Although the giant magnetoresistance effect in metals has already been commercially exploited, it does not extend to semiconductor/ferromagnet systems, because the effect is too weak for logic operations. We overcome this obstacle by using spin accumulation rather than spin flow. The basic element in our design is a logic gate that consists of a semiconductor structure with multiple magnetic contacts; this serves to perform fast and reprogrammable logic operations in a noisy, room-temperature environment. We then introduce a method to interconnect a large number of these gates to form a 'spin computer'. As the shrinking of conventional complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) transistors reaches its intrinsic limit, greater computational capability will mean an increase in both circuit area and power dissipation. Our spin-based approach may provide wide margins for further scaling and also greater computational capability per gate.
An atom in open space can be detected by means of resonant absorption and reemission of electromagnetic waves, known as resonance fluorescence, which is a fundamental phenomenon of quantum optics. We report on the observation of scattering of propagating waves by a single artificial atom. The behavior of the artificial atom, a superconducting macroscopic two-level system, is in a quantitative agreement with the predictions of quantum optics for a pointlike scatterer interacting with the electromagnetic field in one-dimensional open space. The strong atom-field interaction as revealed in a high degree of extinction of propagating waves will allow applications of controllable artificial atoms in quantum optics and photonics.
Neutral atomic Bose condensates and degenerate Fermi gases have been used to realize important many-body phenomena in their most simple and essential forms, without many of the complexities usually associated with material systems. However, the charge neutrality of these systems presents an apparent limitation-a wide range of intriguing phenomena arise from the Lorentz force for charged particles in a magnetic field, such as the fractional quantum Hall effect in two-dimensional electron systems. The limitation can be circumvented by exploiting the equivalence of the Lorentz force and the Coriolis force to create synthetic magnetic fields in rotating neutral systems. This was demonstrated by the appearance of quantized vortices in pioneering experiments on rotating quantum gases, a hallmark of superfluids or superconductors in a magnetic field. However, because of technical issues limiting the maximum rotation velocity, the metastable nature of the rotating state and the difficulty of applying stable rotating optical lattices, rotational approaches are not able to reach the large fields required for quantum Hall physics. Here we experimentally realize an optically synthesized magnetic field for ultracold neutral atoms, which is evident from the appearance of vortices in our Bose-Einstein condensate. Our approach uses a spatially dependent optical coupling between internal states of the atoms, yielding a Berry's phase sufficient to create large synthetic magnetic fields, and is not subject to the limitations of rotating systems. With a suitable lattice configuration, it should be possible to reach the quantum Hall regime, potentially enabling studies of topological quantum computation.
Conventional concepts of chemical bonding appear inadequate to explain the structures of the anhydrous polyborates. A cage-type structure with occluded oxide ion is proposed for the octaborate, hexaborate, and tetraborate ions. The proposed structure is discussed in terms of the composition, x-ray diffraction patterns, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of the sodium polyborates.
All computers process information electronically. A processing method based on magnetism is reported here, in which networks of interacting submicrometer magnetic dots are used to perform logic operations and propagate information at room temperature. The logic states are signaled by the magnetization direction of the single-domain magnetic dots; the dots couple to their nearest neighbors through magnetostatic interactions. Magnetic solitons carry information through the networks, and an applied oscillating magnetic field feeds energy into the system and serves as a clock. These networks offer a several thousandfold increase in integration density and a hundredfold reduction in power dissipation over current microelectronic technology.
The addition of soluble metal salts of calcium, iron, or copper to cultures of Bacillus subtilis grown in web form nucleated precipitation at the surface of the bacterial cell walls. The mineralized cell filaments can be drawn into a fiber that when dried consists of a bacterial thread backbone carrying an inorganic solid. The ratios of organic to inorganic components (by weight) in the stiff brittle materials, called bionites, were: 1.08 for fe(2)bactonite, 1.8 for calbactonite, 2.3 for fe(3)bactonite, and 5 for cu(2)bactonite. X-ray photoelectron spectra suggest that the fe(3)bactonite contains Fe2O3, that calbactonite contains calcium carbonate, and that cu(2)bactonite contains CuCl (Cu I). Acid-base reactions of the bionites are compatible with these identifications. Burning out the organic phase of the febactonites yields a black magnetic material, presumably magnetite. The burnt cubactonite appears to yield elemental Cu(s). Calbactonite upon hydration was able to retain a genetically engineered enzymatic activity.
We demonstrate a deterministic approach to the implementation of solid-state cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) systems based on a precise spatial and spectral overlap between a single self-assembled quantum dot and a photonic crystal membrane nanocavity. By fine-tuning nanocavity modes with a high quality factor into resonance with any given quantum dot exciton, we observed clear signatures of cavity QED (such as the Purcell effect) in all fabricated structures. This approach removes the major hindrances that had limited the application of solid-state cavity QED and enables the realization of experiments previously proposed in the context of quantum information processing.
We have used adenosine diphosphate analogs containing electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spin moieties and EPR spectroscopy to show that the nucleotide-binding site of kinesin-family motors closes when the motor.diphosphate complex binds to microtubules. Structural analyses demonstrate that a domain movement in the switch 1 region at the nucleotide site, homologous to domain movements in the switch 1 region in the G proteins [heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins], explains the EPR data. The switch movement primes the motor both for the free energy-yielding nucleotide hydrolysis reaction and for subsequent conformational changes that are crucial for the generation of force and directed motion along the microtubule.
Demonstrating and exploiting the quantum nature of macroscopic mechanical objects would help us to investigate directly the limitations of quantum-based measurements and quantum information protocols, as well as to test long-standing questions about macroscopic quantum coherence. Central to this effort is the necessity of long-lived mechanical states. Previous efforts have witnessed quantum behaviour, but for a low-quality-factor mechanical system. The field of cavity optomechanics and electromechanics, in which a high-quality-factor mechanical oscillator is parametrically coupled to an electromagnetic cavity resonance, provides a practical architecture for cooling, manipulation and detection of motion at the quantum level. One requirement is strong coupling, in which the interaction between the two systems is faster than the dissipation of energy from either system. Here, by incorporating a free-standing, flexible aluminium membrane into a lumped-element superconducting resonant cavity, we have increased the single-photon coupling strength between these two systems by more than two orders of magnitude, compared to previously obtained coupling strengths. A parametric drive tone at the difference frequency between the mechanical oscillator and the cavity resonance dramatically increases the overall coupling strength, allowing us to completely enter the quantum-enabled, strong-coupling regime. This is evidenced by a maximum normal-mode splitting of nearly six bare cavity linewidths. Spectroscopic measurements of these 'dressed states' are in excellent quantitative agreement with recent theoretical predictions. The basic circuit architecture presented here provides a feasible path to ground-state cooling and subsequent coherent control and measurement of long-lived quantum states of mechanical motion.
Studies of the ground and excited states in semiconductor quantum dots containing 1 to 12 electrons showed that the quantum numbers of the states in the excitation spectra can be identified and compared with exact calculations. A magnetic field induces transitions between the ground and excited states. These transitions were analyzed in terms of crossings between single-particle states, singlet-triplet transitions, spin polarization, and Hund's rule. These impurity-free quantum dots allow "atomic physics" experiments to be performed in magnetic field regimes not accessible for atoms.
The low-energy charged particle (LECP) instrument on Voyager 2 measured within the magnetosphere of Neptune energetic electrons (22 kiloelectron volts </= E </= 20 megaelectron volts) and ions (28 keV </= E </= 150 MeV) in several energy channels, including compositional information at higher (>/=0.5 MeV per nucleon) energies, using an array of solid-state detectors in various configurations. The results obtained so far may be summarized as follows: (i) A variety of intensity, spectral, and anisotropy features suggest that the satellite Triton is important in controlling the outer regions of the Neptunian magnetosphere. These features include the absence of higher energy (>/=150 keV) ions or electrons outside 14.4 R(N) (where R(N) = radius of Neptune), a relative peak in the spectral index of low-energy electrons at Triton's radial distance, and a change of the proton spectrum from a power law with gamma >/= 3.8 outside, to a hot Maxwellian (kT [unknown] 55 keV) inside the satellite's orbit. (ii) Intensities decrease sharply at all energies near the time of closest approach, the decreases being most extended in time at the highest energies, reminiscent of a spacecraft's traversal of Earth's polar regions at low altitudes; simultaneously, several spikes of spectrally soft electrons and protons were seen (power input approximately 5 x 10(-4) ergs cm(-2) s(-1)) suggestive of auroral processes at Neptune. (iii) Composition measurements revealed the presence of H, H(2), and He(4), with relative abundances of 1300:1:0.1, suggesting a Neptunian ionospheric source for the trapped particle population. (iv) Plasma pressures at E >/= 28 keV are maximum at the magnetic equator with beta approximately 0.2, suggestive of a relatively empty magnetosphere, similar to that of Uranus. (v) A potential signature of satellite 1989N1 was seen, both inbound and outbound; other possible signatures of the moons and rings are evident in the data but cannot be positively identified in the absence of an accurate magnetic-field model close to the planet. Other results indude the absence of upstream ion increases or energetic neutrals [particle intensity (j) < 2.8 x 10(-3) cm(-2) s(-1) keV(-1) near 35 keV, at approximately 40 R(N)] implying an upper limit to the volume-averaged atomic H density at R </= 6 R(N) of </= 20 cm(-3); and an estimate of the rate of darkening of methane ice at the location of 1989N1 ranging from approximately 10(5) years (1-micrometer depth) to approximately 2 x 10(6) years (10-micrometers depth). Finally, the electron fluxes at the orbit of Triton represent a power input of approximately 10(9) W into its atmosphere, apparently accounting for the observed ultraviolet auroral emission; by contrast, the precipitating electron (>22 keV) input on Neptune is approximately 3 x 10(7) W, surprisingly small when compared to energy input into the atmosphere of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus.
The chemical dynamics of highly vibrationally excited molecules have been studied by measuring the quantum state-resolved scattering probabilities of nitric oxide (NO) molecules on clean and oxygen-covered copper (111) surfaces, where the incident NO was prepared in single quantum states with vibrational energies of as much as 300 kilojoules per mole. The dependence of vibrationally elastic and inelastic scattering on oxygen coverage strongly suggests that highly excited NO (v = 13 and 15) reacts on clean copper (111) with a probability of 0.87 +/- 0.05, more than three orders of magnitude greater than the reaction probability of ground-state NO. Vibrational promotion of surface chemistry on metals (up to near-unit reaction probability) is possible despite the expected efficient relaxation of vibrational energy at metal surfaces.
Scalable quantum computation and communication require error control to protect quantum information against unavoidable noise. Quantum error correction protects information stored in two-level quantum systems (qubits) by rectifying errors with operations conditioned on the measurement outcomes. Error-correction protocols have been implemented in nuclear magnetic resonance experiments, but the inherent limitations of this technique prevent its application to quantum information processing. Here we experimentally demonstrate quantum error correction using three beryllium atomic-ion qubits confined to a linear, multi-zone trap. An encoded one-qubit state is protected against spin-flip errors by means of a three-qubit quantum error-correcting code. A primary ion qubit is prepared in an initial state, which is then encoded into an entangled state of three physical qubits (the primary and two ancilla qubits). Errors are induced simultaneously in all qubits at various rates. The encoded state is decoded back to the primary ion one-qubit state, making error information available on the ancilla ions, which are separated from the primary ion and measured. Finally, the primary qubit state is corrected on the basis of the ancillae measurement outcome. We verify error correction by comparing the corrected final state to the uncorrected state and to the initial state. In principle, the approach enables a quantum state to be maintained by means of repeated error correction, an important step towards scalable fault-tolerant quantum computation using trapped ions.
A capacitance standard based directly on the definition of capacitance was built. Single-electron tunneling devices were used to place N electrons of charge e onto a cryogenic capacitor C, and the resulting voltage change DeltaV was measured. Repeated measurements of C = Ne/DeltaV with this method have a relative standard deviation of 0.3 x 10(-6). This standard offers a natural basis for capacitance analogous to the Josephson effect for voltage and the quantum Hall effect for resistance.
Nanostructures in which strong (Coulomb) interactions exist between electrons are predicted to exhibit temporal electronic correlations. Although there is ample experimental evidence that such correlations exist, electron dynamics in engineered nanostructures have been observed directly only on long timescales. The faster dynamics associated with electrical currents or charge fluctuations are usually inferred from direct (or quasi-direct) current measurements. Recently, interest in electron dynamics has risen, in part owing to the realization that additional information about electronic interactions can be found in the shot noise or higher statistical moments of a direct current. Furthermore, interest in quantum computation has stimulated investigation of quantum bit (qubit) readout techniques, which for many condensed-matter systems ultimately reduces to single-shot measurements of individual electronic charges. Here we report real-time observation of individual electron tunnelling events in a quantum dot using an integrated radio-frequency single-electron transistor. We use electron counting to measure directly the quantum dot's tunnelling rate and the occupational probabilities of its charge state. Our results provide evidence in favour of long (10 micros or more) inelastic scattering times in nearly isolated dots.
A consequence of relativity is that in the presence of an electric field, the spin and momentum states of an electron can be coupled; this is known as spin-orbit coupling. Such an interaction opens a pathway to the manipulation of electron spins within non-magnetic semiconductors, in the absence of applied magnetic fields. This interaction has implications for spin-based quantum information processing and spintronics, forming the basis of various device proposals. For example, the concept of spin field-effect transistors is based on spin precession due to the spin-orbit coupling. Most studies, however, focus on non-spin-selective electrical measurements in quantum structures. Here we report the direct measurement of coherent electron spin precession in zero magnetic field as the electrons drift in response to an applied electric field. We use ultrafast optical techniques to spatiotemporally resolve spin dynamics in strained gallium arsenide and indium gallium arsenide epitaxial layers. Unexpectedly, we observe spin splitting in these simple structures arising from strain in the semiconductor films. The observed effect provides a flexible approach for enabling electrical control over electron spins using strain engineering. Moreover, we exploit this strain-induced field to electrically drive spin resonance with Rabi frequencies of up to approximately 30 MHz.
High-velocity submicrometre-sized dust particles expelled from the jovian system have been identified by dust detectors on board several spacecraft. On the basis of periodicities in the dust impact rate, Jupiter's moon Io was found to be the dominant source of the streams. The grains become positively charged within the plasma environment of Jupiter's magnetosphere, and gain energy from its co-rotational electric field. Outside the magnetosphere, the dynamics of the grains are governed by the interaction with the interplanetary magnetic field that eventually forms the streams. A similar process was suggested for Saturn. Here we report the discovery by the Cassini spacecraft of bursts of high-velocity dust particles (> or = 100 km s(-1)) within approximately 70 million kilometres of Saturn. Most of the particles detected at large distances appear to originate from the outskirts of Saturn's outermost main ring. All bursts of dust impacts detected within 150 Saturn radii are characterized by impact directions markedly different from those measured between the bursts, and they clearly coincide with the spacecraft's traversals through streams of compressed solar wind.
Ever since the conversion of the 11-cis retinal chromophore to its all-trans form in rhodopsin was identified as the primary photochemical event in vision, experimentalists and theoreticians have tried to unravel the molecular details of this process. The high quantum yield of 0.65 (ref. 2), the production of the primary ground-state rhodopsin photoproduct within a mere 200 fs (refs 3-7), and the storage of considerable energy in the first stable bathorhodopsin intermediate all suggest an unusually fast and efficient photoactivated one-way reaction. Rhodopsin's unique reactivity is generally attributed to a conical intersection between the potential energy surfaces of the ground and excited electronic states enabling the efficient and ultrafast conversion of photon energy into chemical energy. But obtaining direct experimental evidence for the involvement of a conical intersection is challenging: the energy gap between the electronic states of the reacting molecule changes significantly over an ultrashort timescale, which calls for observational methods that combine high temporal resolution with a broad spectral observation window. Here we show that ultrafast optical spectroscopy with sub-20-fs time resolution and spectral coverage from the visible to the near-infrared allows us to follow the dynamics leading to the conical intersection in rhodopsin isomerization. We track coherent wave-packet motion from the photoexcited Franck-Condon region to the photoproduct by monitoring the loss of reactant emission and the subsequent appearance of photoproduct absorption, and find excellent agreement between the experimental observations and molecular dynamics calculations that involve a true electronic state crossing. Taken together, these findings constitute the most compelling evidence to date for the existence and importance of conical intersections in visual photochemistry.
At Venus the Energetic Particles Detector (EPD) on the Galileo spacecraft measured the differential energy spectra and angular distributions of ions >22 kiloelectron volts (keV) and electrons > 15 keV in energy. The only time particles were observed by EPD was in a series of episodic events [0546 to 0638 universal time (UT)] near closest approach (0559:03 UT). Angular distributions were highly anisotropic, ordered by the magnetic field, and showed ions arriving from the hemisphere containing Venus and its bow shock. The spectra showed a power law form with intensities observed into the 120- to 280-keV range. Comparisons with model bow shock calculations show that these energetic ions are associated with the venusian foreshock-bow shock region. Shock-drift acceleration in the venusian bow shock seems the most likely process responsible for the observed ions.
The antiferromagnetic ground state of copper oxide Mott insulators is achieved by localizing an electron at each copper atom in real space (r-space). Removing a small fraction of these electrons (hole doping) transforms this system into a superconducting fluid of delocalized Cooper pairs in momentum space (k-space). During this transformation, two distinctive classes of electronic excitations appear. At high energies, the mysterious 'pseudogap' excitations are found, whereas, at lower energies, Bogoliubov quasi-particles-the excitations resulting from the breaking of Cooper pairs-should exist. To explore this transformation, and to identify the two excitation types, we have imaged the electronic structure of Bi(2)Sr(2)CaCu(2)O(8+delta) in r-space and k-space simultaneously. We find that although the low-energy excitations are indeed Bogoliubov quasi-particles, they occupy only a restricted region of k-space that shrinks rapidly with diminishing hole density. Concomitantly, spectral weight is transferred to higher energy r-space states that lack the characteristics of excitations from delocalized Cooper pairs. Instead, these states break translational and rotational symmetries locally at the atomic scale in an energy-independent way. We demonstrate that these unusual r-space excitations are, in fact, the pseudogap states. Thus, as the Mott insulating state is approached by decreasing the hole density, the delocalized Cooper pairs vanish from k-space, to be replaced by locally translational- and rotational-symmetry-breaking pseudogap states in r-space.
Piezoelectric materials, which convert mechanical to electrical energy (and vice versa), are crucial in medical imaging, telecommunication and ultrasonic devices. A new generation of single-crystal materials, such as Pb(Zn1/3Nb2/3)O3-PbTiO3 (PZN-PT) and Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3-PbTiO3 (PMN-PT), exhibit a piezoelectric effect that is ten times larger than conventional ceramics, and may revolutionize these applications. However, the mechanism underlying the ultrahigh performance of these new materials-and consequently the possibilities for further improvements-are not at present clear. Here we report a first-principles study of the ferroelectric perovskite, BaTiO3, which is similar to single-crystal PZN-PT but is a simpler system to analyse. We show that a large piezoelectric response can be driven by polarization rotation induced by an external electric field. Our computations suggest how to design materials with better performance, and may stimulate further interest in the fundamental theory of dielectric systems in finite electric fields.
A water-soluble, 62-residue, di-alpha-helical peptide has been synthesized which accommodates two bis-histidyl haem groups. The peptide assembles into a four-helix dimer with 2-fold symmetry and four parallel haems that closely resemble native haems in their spectral and electrochemical properties, including haem-haem redox interaction. This protein is an essential intermediate in the synthesis of molecular 'maquettes', a novel class of simplified versions of the metalloproteins involved in redox catalysis and in energy conversion in respiratory and photosynthetic electron transfer.
New applications such as hybrid electric vehicles and power backup require rechargeable batteries that combine high energy density with high charge and discharge rate capability. Using ab initio computational modeling, we identified useful strategies to design higher rate battery electrodes and tested them on lithium nickel manganese oxide [Li(Ni(0.5)Mn(0.5))O2], a safe, inexpensive material that has been thought to have poor intrinsic rate capability. By modifying its crystal structure, we obtained unexpectedly high rate-capability, considerably better than lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO2), the current battery electrode material of choice.
In standard near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM), a subwavelength probe acts as an optical 'stethoscope' to map the near field produced at the sample surface by external illumination. This technique has been applied using visible, infrared, terahertz and gigahertz radiation to illuminate the sample, providing a resolution well beyond the diffraction limit. NSOM is well suited to study surface waves such as surface plasmons or surface-phonon polaritons. Using an aperture NSOM with visible laser illumination, a near-field interference pattern around a corral structure has been observed, whose features were similar to the scanning tunnelling microscope image of the electronic waves in a quantum corral. Here we describe an infrared NSOM that operates without any external illumination: it is a near-field analogue of a night-vision camera, making use of the thermal infrared evanescent fields emitted by the surface, and behaves as an optical scanning tunnelling microscope. We therefore term this instrument a 'thermal radiation scanning tunnelling microscope' (TRSTM). We show the first TRSTM images of thermally excited surface plasmons, and demonstrate spatial coherence effects in near-field thermal emission.
The topographic and magnetic surface structure of a natural single crystal of magnetite (Fe(3)0(4)), a common mineral, has been studied from the submicrometer scale down to the atomic scale with a scanning tunneling microscope having nonmagnetic tungsten as well as ferromagnetic iron probe tips. Several different (001) crystal planes were imaged to atomic resolution with both kinds of tips. A selective imaging of the octahedrally coordinated Fe B-sites in the Fe-O planes, and even a selective imaging of the different magnetic ions Fe(2+) and Fe(3+), has been achieved, demonstrating for the first time that magnetic imaging can be realized at the atomic level.
The ability to cool and manipulate atoms with light has yielded atom interferometry, precision spectroscopy, Bose-Einstein condensates and atom lasers. The extension of controlled manipulation to molecules is expected to be similarly rewarding, but molecules are not as amenable to manipulation by light owing to a far more complex energy-level spectrum. However, time-varying electric and magnetic fields have been successfully used to control the position and velocity of ions, suggesting that these schemes can also be used to manipulate neutral particles having an electric or magnetic dipole moment. Although the forces exerted on neutral species are many orders of magnitude smaller than those exerted on ions, beams of neutral dipolar molecules have been successfully slowed down in a series of pulsed electric fields and subsequently loaded into an electrostatic trap. Here we extend the scheme to include a prototype electrostatic storage ring made of a hexapole torus with a circumference of 80 cm. After injection, decelerated bunches of deuterated ammonia molecules, each containing about 106 molecules in a single quantum state and with a translational temperature of 10 mK, travel up to six times around the ring. Stochastic cooling might provide a means to increase the phase-space density of the stored molecules in the storage ring, and we expect this to open up new opportunities for molecular spectroscopy and studies of cold molecular collisions.
Entanglement is the fundamental characteristic of quantum physics-much experimental effort is devoted to harnessing it between various physical systems. In particular, entanglement between light and material systems is interesting owing to their anticipated respective roles as 'flying' and stationary qubits in quantum information technologies (such as quantum repeaters and quantum networks). Here we report the demonstration of entanglement between a photon at a telecommunication wavelength (1,338 nm) and a single collective atomic excitation stored in a crystal. One photon from an energy-time entangled pair is mapped onto the crystal and then released into a well-defined spatial mode after a predetermined storage time. The other (telecommunication wavelength) photon is sent directly through a 50-metre fibre link to an analyser. Successful storage of entanglement in the crystal is proved by a violation of the Clauser-Horne-Shimony-Holt inequality by almost three standard deviations (S = 2.64 +- 0.23). These results represent an important step towards quantum communication technologies based on solid-state devices. In particular, our resources pave the way for building multiplexed quantum repeaters for long-distance quantum networks.
Granular superconductivity occurs when microscopic superconducting grains are separated by non-superconducting regions; Josephson tunnelling between the grains establishes the macroscopic superconducting state. Although crystals of the copper oxide high-transition-temperature (high-Tc) superconductors are not granular in a structural sense, theory suggests that at low levels of hole doping the holes can become concentrated at certain locations resulting in hole-rich superconducting domains. Granular superconductivity arising from tunnelling between such domains would represent a new view of the underdoped copper oxide superconductors. Here we report scanning tunnelling microscope studies of underdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta that reveal an apparent segregation of the electronic structure into superconducting domains that are approximately 3 nm in size (and local energy gap <50 meV), located in an electronically distinct background. We used scattering resonances at Ni impurity atoms as 'markers' for local superconductivity; no Ni resonances were detected in any region where the local energy gap Delta > 50 +/- 2.5 meV. These observations suggest that underdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta is a mixture of two different short-range electronic orders with the long-range characteristics of a granular superconductor.
The desire to maximize the sensitivity of read/write heads (and thus the information density) of magnetic storage devices has stimulated interest in the discovery and design of new magnetic materials exhibiting magnetoresistance. Recent discoveries include the 'colossal' magnetoresistance in the manganites and the enhanced magnetoresistance in low-carrier-density ferromagnets. An important feature of these systems is that the electrons involved in electrical conduction are different from those responsible for the magnetism. The latter are localized and act as scattering sites for the mobile electrons, and it is the field tuning of the scattering strength that ultimately gives rise to the observed magnetoresistance. Here we argue that magnetoresistance can arise by a different mechanism in certain ferromagnets--quantum interference effects rather than simple scattering. The ferromagnets in question are disordered, low-carrier-density magnets where the same electrons are responsible for both the magnetic properties and electrical conduction. The resulting magnetoresistance is positive (that is, the resistance increases in response to an applied magnetic field) and only weakly temperature-dependent below the Curie point.
Spicules are dynamic jets propelled upwards (at speeds of approximately 20 km s(-1)) from the solar 'surface' (photosphere) into the magnetized low atmosphere of the Sun. They carry a mass flux of 100 times that of the solar wind into the low solar corona. With diameters close to observational limits (< 500 km), spicules have been largely unexplained since their discovery in 1877: none of the existing models can account simultaneously for their ubiquity, evolution, energetics and recently discovered periodicity. Here we report a synthesis of modelling and high-spatial-resolution observations in which numerical simulations driven by observed photospheric velocities directly reproduce the observed occurrence and properties of individual spicules. Photospheric velocities are dominated by convective granulation (which has been considered before for spicule formation) and by p-modes (which are solar global resonant acoustic oscillations visible in the photosphere as quasi-sinusoidal velocity and intensity pulsations). We show that the previously ignored p-modes are crucial: on inclined magnetic flux tubes, the p-modes leak sufficient energy from the global resonant cavity into the chromosphere to power shocks that drive upward flows and form spicules.
Metallic single-walled carbon nanotubes have been proposed to be good one-dimensional conductors. However, the finite curvature of the graphene sheet that forms the nanotubes and the broken symmetry due to the local environment may modify their electronic properties. We used low-temperature atomically resolved scanning tunneling microscopy to investigate zigzag and armchair nanotubes, both thought to be metallic. "Metallic" zigzag nanotubes were found to have energy gaps with magnitudes that depend inversely on the square of the tube radius, whereas isolated armchair tubes do not have energy gaps. Additionally, armchair nanotubes packed in bundles have pseudogaps, which exhibit an inverse dependence on tube radius. These observed energy gaps suggest that most "metallic" single-walled nanotubes are not true metals, and they have implications for our understanding of the electronic properties and potential applications of carbon nanotubes.
The presence or absence of a quantum critical point and its location in the phase diagram of high-temperature superconductors have been subjects of intense scrutiny. Clear evidence for quantum criticality, particularly in the transport properties, has proved elusive because the important low-temperature region is masked by the onset of superconductivity. We present measurements of the low-temperature in-plane resistivity of several highly doped La2-xSrxCuO4 single crystals in which the superconductivity had been stripped away by using high magnetic fields. In contrast to other quantum critical systems, the resistivity varies linearly with temperature over a wide doping range with a gradient that scales monotonically with the superconducting transition temperature. It is maximal at a critical doping level (pc) approximately 0.19 at which superconductivity is most robust. Moreover, its value at pc corresponds to the onset of quasi-particle incoherence along specific momentum directions, implying that the interaction that first promotes high-temperature superconductivity may ultimately destroy the very quasi-particle states involved in the superconducting pairing.
It has been roughly three decades since laser cooling techniques produced ultracold atoms, leading to rapid advances in a wide array of fields. Laser cooling has not yet been extended to molecules because of their complex internal structure. However, this complexity makes molecules potentially useful for a wide range of applications. For example, heteronuclear molecules possess permanent electric dipole moments that lead to long-range, tunable, anisotropic dipole-dipole interactions. The combination of the dipole-dipole interaction and the precise control over molecular degrees of freedom possible at ultracold temperatures makes ultracold molecules attractive candidates for use in quantum simulations of condensed-matter systems and in quantum computation. Also, ultracold molecules could provide unique opportunities for studying chemical dynamics and for tests of fundamental symmetries. Here we experimentally demonstrate laser cooling of the polar molecule strontium monofluoride (SrF). Using an optical cycling scheme requiring only three lasers, we have observed both Sisyphus and Doppler cooling forces that reduce the transverse temperature of a SrF molecular beam substantially, to a few millikelvin or less. At present, the only technique for producing ultracold molecules is to bind together ultracold alkali atoms through Feshbach resonance or photoassociation. However, proposed applications for ultracold molecules require a variety of molecular energy-level structures (for example unpaired electronic spin, Omega doublets and so on). Our method provides an alternative route to ultracold molecules. In particular, it bridges the gap between ultracold (submillikelvin) temperatures and the ~1-K temperatures attainable with directly cooled molecules (for example with cryogenic buffer-gas cooling or decelerated supersonic beams). Ultimately, our technique should allow the production of large samples of molecules at ultracold temperatures for species that are chemically distinct from bialkalis.
In nature, tiny amounts of inorganic impurities, such as metals, are incorporated in the protein structures of some biomaterials and lead to unusual mechanical properties of those materials. A desire to produce these biomimicking new materials has stimulated materials scientists, and diverse approaches have been attempted. In contrast, research to improve the mechanical properties of biomaterials themselves by direct metal incorporation into inner protein structures has rarely been tried because of the difficulty of developing a method that can infiltrate metals into biomaterials, resulting in a metal-incorporated protein matrix. We demonstrated that metals can be intentionally infiltrated into inner protein structures of biomaterials through multiple pulsed vapor-phase infiltration performed with equipment conventionally used for atomic layer deposition (ALD). We infiltrated zinc (Zn), titanium (Ti), or aluminum (Al), combined with water from corresponding ALD precursors, into spider dragline silks and observed greatly improved toughness of the resulting silks. The presence of the infiltrated metals such as Al or Ti was verified by energy-dispersive x-ray (EDX) and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra measured inside the treated silks. This result of enhanced toughness of spider silk could potentially serve as a model for a more general approach to enhance the strength and toughness of other biomaterials.
The motion of electrons through quantum dots is strongly modified by single-electron charging and the quantization of energy levels. Much effort has been directed towards extending studies of electron transport to chemical nanostructures, including molecules, nanocrystals and nanotubes. Here we report the fabrication of single-molecule transistors based on individual C60 molecules connected to gold electrodes. We perform transport measurements that provide evidence for a coupling between the centre-of-mass motion of the C60 molecules and single-electron hopping--a conduction mechanism that has not been observed previously in quantum dot studies. The coupling is manifest as quantized nano-mechanical oscillations of the C60 molecule against the gold surface, with a frequency of about 1.2 THz. This value is in good agreement with a simple theoretical estimate based on van der Waals and electrostatic interactions between C60 molecules and gold electrodes.
The dilference between the energy spectra of iron and other cosmic rays is interpreted in terms of two source mechanisms. One mechanism, possibly acceleration at neutron star surfaces, produces the iron, and another is responsible for the rest of the primary nuclei. Within this model, observations of high-energy cosmic rays could determine whether secondary nuclei are produced in the sources or in the interstellar medium.
Solid-state cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) systems offer a robust and scalable platform for quantum optics experiments and the development of quantum information processing devices. In particular, systems based on photonic crystal nanocavities and semiconductor quantum dots have seen rapid progress. Recent experiments have allowed the observation of weak and strong coupling regimes of interaction between the photonic crystal cavity and a single quantum dot in photoluminescence. In the weak coupling regime, the quantum dot radiative lifetime is modified; in the strong coupling regime, the coupled quantum dot also modifies the cavity spectrum. Several proposals for scalable quantum information networks and quantum computation rely on direct probing of the cavity-quantum dot coupling, by means of resonant light scattering from strongly or weakly coupled quantum dots. Such experiments have recently been performed in atomic systems and superconducting circuit QED systems, but not in solid-state quantum dot-cavity QED systems. Here we present experimental evidence that this interaction can be probed in solid-state systems, and show that, as expected from theory, the quantum dot strongly modifies the cavity transmission and reflection spectra. We show that when the quantum dot is coupled to the cavity, photons that are resonant with its transition are prohibited from entering the cavity. We observe this effect as the quantum dot is tuned through the cavity and the coupling strength between them changes. At high intensity of the probe beam, we observe rapid saturation of the transmission dip. These measurements provide both a method for probing the cavity-quantum dot system and a step towards the realization of quantum devices based on coherent light scattering and large optical nonlinearities from quantum dots in photonic crystal cavities.
Methyl radicals stabilized on surfaces of porous Vycor glass at 77 degrees show three types of paramagnetic resonance spectra. One of them represents physically trapped radicals, whereas the other two types indicate interactions with surface sites.
There are two theories about how honeybees estimate the distance to food sources. One theory proposes that distance flown is estimated in terms of energy consumption. The other suggests that the cue is visual, and is derived from the extent to which the image of the world has moved on the eye during the trip. Here the two theories are tested by observing dances of bees that have flown through a short, narrow tunnel to collect a food reward. The results show that the honeybee's "odometer" is visually driven. They also provide a calibration of the dance and the odometer in visual terms.
Nuclear-magnetic-resonance spectroscopy can determine the three-dimensional structure of proteins in solution. However, its potential has been limited by the difficulty of interpreting NMR spectra in the presence of broadened and overlapping resonance lines and low signal-to-noise ratios. Here we present stereo-array isotope labelling (SAIL), a technique that can overcome many of these problems by applying a complete stereospecific and regiospecific pattern of stable isotopes that is optimal with regard to the quality and information content of the resulting NMR spectra. SAIL uses exclusively chemically and enzymatically synthesized amino acids for cell-free protein expression. We demonstrate for the 17-kDa protein calmodulin and the 41-kDa maltodextrin-binding protein that SAIL offers sharpened lines, spectral simplification without loss of information, and the ability to rapidly collect the structural restraints required to solve a high-quality solution structure for proteins twice as large as commonly solved by NMR. It thus makes a large class of proteins newly accessible to detailed solution structure determination.
Anomalous X-ray pulsars (AXPs) differ from ordinary radio pulsars in that their X-ray luminosity is orders of magnitude greater than their rate of rotational energy loss, and so they require an additional energy source. One possibility is that AXPs are highly magnetized neuron stars or 'magnetars' having surface magnetic fields greater than 10(14) G. This would make them similar to the soft gamma-ray repeaters (SGRs), but alternative models that do not require extreme magnetic fields also exist. An optical counterpart to the AXP 4U0142+61 was recently discovered, consistent with emission from a magnetar, but also from a magnetized hot white dwarf, or an accreting isolated neutron star. Here we report the detection of optical pulsations from 4U0142+61. The pulsed fraction of optical light (27 per cent) is five to ten times greater than that of soft X-rays, from which we conclude that 4U0142+61 is a magnetar. Although this establishes a direct relationship between AXPs and the soft gamma-ray repeaters, the evolutionary connection between AXPs, SGRs and radio pulsars remains controversial.
The ability to create quantum degenerate gases has led to the realization of Bose-Einstein condensation of molecules, atom-atom entanglement and the accurate measurement of the Casimir force in atom-surface interactions. With a few exceptions, the achievement of quantum degeneracy relies on evaporative cooling of magnetically trapped atoms to ultracold temperatures. Magnetic traps confine atoms whose electronic magnetic moments are aligned anti-parallel to the magnetic field. This alignment must be preserved during the collisional thermalization of the atomic cloud. Quantum degeneracy has been reached in spherically symmetric, S-state atoms (atoms with zero internal orbital angular momentum). However, collisional relaxation of the atomic magnetic moments of non-S-state atoms (non-spherical atoms with non-zero internal orbital angular momentum) is thought to proceed rapidly. Here we demonstrate magnetic trapping of non-S-state rare-earth atoms, observing a suppression of the interaction anisotropy in collisions. The atoms behave effectively like S-state atoms because their unpaired electrons are shielded by two outer filled electronic shells that are spherically symmetric. Our results are promising for the creation of quantum degenerate gases with non-S-state atoms, and may facilitate the search for time variation of fundamental constants and the development of a quantum computer with highly magnetic atoms.
Shot noise measurements have been used to measure the charge of quasiparticles in the fractional quantum Hall (FQH) regime. To induce shot noise in an otherwise noiseless current of quasiparticles, a barrier is placed in its path to cause weak backscattering. The measured shot noise is proportional to the charge of the quasiparticles; for example, at filling factor v=1/3, noise corresponding to q=e/3 appears. For increasingly opaque barriers, the measured charge increases monotonically, approaching q=e asymptotically. It was therefore believed that only electrons, or alternatively, three bunched quasiparticles, can tunnel through high-potential barriers encountered by a noiseless current of quasiparticles. Here we investigate the interaction of e/3 quasiparticles with a strong barrier in FQH samples and find that bunching of quasiparticles in the strong backscattering limit depends on the average dilution of the quasiparticle current. For a very dilute current, bunching ceases altogether and the transferred charge approaches q=e/3. This surprising result demonstrates that quasiparticles can tunnel individually through high-potential barriers originally thought to be opaque for them.
The radiation-induced polymerization of formaldehyde has been studied in the solid state. The time of addition of one new link to a polymer chain increases exponentially in accordance with the Arrhenius law at 140 to 80 K, but approaches a constant value (approximately 10(-2) second) at temperatures below 10 K. Thus, a low-temperature limit to a chemical reaction rate has been observed. It is interpreted as a quantum effect caused by tunneling from the zero vibration level of the initial state, and a semiquantitative theory is given. The phenomenon should be taken into account for understanding tunneling of electrons in biological systems when such tunneling is accompanied by conformational changes. It could also be significant in slow, exothermic chemical reactions at low and ultralow temperatures, which may have had a role in chemical and biological evolution (cold prehistory of life?).
The comprehension of visually presented sentences produces brain activation that increases with the linguistic complexity of the sentence. The volume of neural tissue activated (number of voxels) during sentence comprehension was measured with echo-planar functional magnetic resonance imaging. The modulation of the volume of activation by sentence complexity was observed in a network of four areas: the classical left-hemisphere language areas (the left laterosuperior temporal cortex, or Wernicke's area, and the left inferior frontal gyrus, or Broca's area) and their homologous right-hemisphere areas, although the right areas had much smaller volumes of activation than did the left areas. These findings generally indicate that the amount of neural activity that a given cognitive process engenders is dependent on the computational demand that the task imposes.
Jupiter's aurora is the most powerful in the Solar System. It is powered largely by energy extracted from planetary rotation, although there seems also to be a contribution from the solar wind. This contrasts with Earth's aurora, which is generated through the interaction of the solar wind with the magnetosphere. The major features of Jupiter's aurora (based on far-ultraviolet, near-infrared and visible-wavelength observations) include a main oval that generally corotates with the planet and a region of patchy, diffuse emission inside the oval on Jupiter's dusk side. Here we report the discovery of a rapidly evolving, very bright and localized emission poleward of the northern main oval, in a region connected magnetically to Jupiter's outer magnetosphere. The intensity of the emission increased by a factor of 30 within 70 s, and then decreased on a similar timescale, all captured during a single four-minute exposure. This type of flaring emission has not previously been reported for Jupiter (similar, but smaller, transient events have been observed at Earth), and it may be related directly to changes in the solar wind.
Photosynthesis makes use of sunlight to convert carbon dioxide into useful biomass and is vital for life on Earth. Crucial components for the photosynthetic process are antenna proteins, which absorb light and transmit the resultant excitation energy between molecules to a reaction centre. The efficiency of these electronic energy transfers has inspired much work on antenna proteins isolated from photosynthetic organisms to uncover the basic mechanisms at play. Intriguingly, recent work has documented that light-absorbing molecules in some photosynthetic proteins capture and transfer energy according to quantum-mechanical probability laws instead of classical laws at temperatures up to 180 K. This contrasts with the long-held view that long-range quantum coherence between molecules cannot be sustained in complex biological systems, even at low temperatures. Here we present two-dimensional photon echo spectroscopy measurements on two evolutionarily related light-harvesting proteins isolated from marine cryptophyte algae, which reveal exceptionally long-lasting excitation oscillations with distinct correlations and anti-correlations even at ambient temperature. These observations provide compelling evidence for quantum-coherent sharing of electronic excitation across the 5-nm-wide proteins under biologically relevant conditions, suggesting that distant molecules within the photosynthetic proteins are 'wired' together by quantum coherence for more efficient light-harvesting in cryptophyte marine algae.
A qubit was designed that can be fabricated with conventional electron beam lithography and is suited for integration into a large quantum computer. The qubit consists of a micrometer-sized loop with three or four Josephson junctions; the two qubit states have persistent currents of opposite direction. Quantum superpositions of these states are obtained by pulsed microwave modulation of the enclosed magnetic flux by currents in control lines. A superconducting flux transporter allows for controlled transfer between qubits of the flux that is generated by the persistent currents, leading to entanglement of qubit information.
In principle, a complex assembly of strongly interacting electrons can self-organize into a wide variety of collective states, but relatively few such states have been identified in practice. We report that, in the close vicinity of a metamagnetic quantum critical point, high-purity strontium ruthenate Sr3Ru2O7 possesses a large magnetoresistive anisotropy, consistent with the existence of an electronic nematic fluid. We discuss a striking phenomenological similarity between our observations and those made in high-purity two-dimensional electron fluids in gallium arsenide devices.
Single-photon sources have recently been demonstrated using a variety of devices, including molecules, mesoscopic quantum wells, colour centres, trapped ions and semiconductor quantum dots. Compared with a Poisson-distributed source of the same intensity, these sources rarely emit two or more photons in the same pulse. Numerous applications for single-photon sources have been proposed in the field of quantum information, but most--including linear-optical quantum computation--also require consecutive photons to have identical wave packets. For a source based on a single quantum emitter, the emitter must therefore be excited in a rapid or deterministic way, and interact little with its surrounding environment. Here we test the indistinguishability of photons emitted by a semiconductor quantum dot in a microcavity through a Hong-Ou-Mandel-type two-photon interference experiment. We find that consecutive photons are largely indistinguishable, with a mean wave-packet overlap as large as 0.81, making this source useful in a variety of experiments in quantum optics and quantum information.
A phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance imaging technique has been used to obtain information on phosphorus metabolites from different spatial regions of tissues in vivo. The technique for selection of planes through the tissue is based on phase-encoding of spin echoes and was used to obtain one-dimensional discrimination of phosphorus-31 spectra from different parts of the tissue simultaneously. Specimens were resolved into 16 distinct slices and a signal-to-noise ratio of about 20 to 1 was obtained in 1/2 hour. Results are presented for phantoms, rat legs, and gerbil heads.
Very high resolution lasers allow spectroscopic pictures to be taken following a collision between two molecular reactants. The features of these "pictures" are the electronic, vibrational, rotational, and translational motions of the atomic particles, which relate the quantum states of the reactants to the quantum states of the products. Such state-to-state kinetic information can be used to test the shape and nature of the interaction potential that controls the collision process. The potential itself is akin to a map of the terrain through mountains and valleys where elevation is a measure of energy instead of height. Accurate mapping of this potential surface leads to an understanding of the forces which control rates and mechanisms of chemical reactions. The application of four different advanced laser techniques to the study of collisions between "hot" hydrogen(H) atoms and carbon dioxide(CO(2)) molecules has provided a wealth of information about both reactive and nonreactive collisions for this system. The availability of data for rotationally, vibrationally, and translationally inelastic excitation of CO(2) by H atoms, when compared with data for reactive events producing OH + CO, provides insights into the dynamics of collisions between H and CO(2), and illustrates the future promise of these powerful techniques for elucidating features of potential energy surfaces.
A laser method based upon carbon ion implantation and pulsed laser melting of copper has been used to produce continuous diamond thin film. Carbon ions were implanted with ion energies in the range of 60 to 120 keV, and doses of 1.0 x 10(18) to 2.0 x 10(18) ions cm(-2). The ion-implanted specimens were treated with nanosecond excimer laser pulses with the following parameters: energy density, 3.0 to 5.0 J cm(-2); wavelength, 0.308 microm; pulse width, 45 nanoseconds. The specimens were characterized with scanning electron microscopy (SEM), x-ray diffraction, Rutherford backscattering/ion channeling, Auger, and Raman spectroscopy. The macroscopic Raman spectra contained a strong peak at 1332 cm(-1) with full width at half maximum of 5 cm(-1), which is very close to the quality of the spectra obtained from single-crystal diamond. The selected area electron diffraction patterns and imaging confirmed the films to be defect-free single crystal over large areas of up to several square micrometers with no grain boundaries. Low voltage SEM imaging of surface features indicated the film to be continuous with presence of growth steps.
Highly correlated electronic systems--such as transition-metal oxides that are doped Mott insulators--are complex systems which exhibit puzzling phenomena, including high-temperature superconductivity and colossal magnetoresistivity. Recent studies suggest that in such systems collective electronic phenomena are important, arising from long-range Coulomb interactions and magnetic effects. The qualitative behaviour of these systems is strongly dependent on charge filling (the level of doping) and the lattice constant. Here we report a time-efficient and systematic experimental approach for studying the phase diagrams of condensed-matter systems. It involves the continuous mapping of the physical properties of epitaxial thin films of perovskite manganites (a class of doped Mott insulator) as their composition is varied. We discover evidence that suggests the presence of phase boundaries of electronic origin at room temperature.
Standard quantum computation is based on sequences of unitary quantum logic gates that process qubits. The one-way quantum computer proposed by Raussendorf and Briegel is entirely different. It has changed our understanding of the requirements for quantum computation and more generally how we think about quantum physics. This new model requires qubits to be initialized in a highly entangled cluster state. From this point, the quantum computation proceeds by a sequence of single-qubit measurements with classical feedforward of their outcomes. Because of the essential role of measurement, a one-way quantum computer is irreversible. In the one-way quantum computer, the order and choices of measurements determine the algorithm computed. We have experimentally realized four-qubit cluster states encoded into the polarization state of four photons. We characterize the quantum state fully by implementing experimental four-qubit quantum state tomography. Using this cluster state, we demonstrate the feasibility of one-way quantum computing through a universal set of one- and two-qubit operations. Finally, our implementation of Grover's search algorithm demonstrates that one-way quantum computation is ideally suited for such tasks.
Conventional magnetic resonance methods that provide interior temperature profiles, which find use in clinical applications such as hyperthermic therapy, can develop inaccuracies caused by the inherently inhomogeneous magnetic field within tissues or by probe dynamics, and work poorly in important applications such as fatty tissues. We present a magnetic resonance method that is suitable for imaging temperature in a wide range of environments. It uses the inherently sharp resonances of intermolecular zero-quantum coherences, in this case flipping up a water spin while flipping down a nearby fat spin. We show that this method can rapidly and accurately assign temperatures in vivo on an absolute scale.
Classical and semiclassical methods are unrivaled in providing an intuitive and computationally tractable approach to the study of atomic, molecular, and nuclear dynamics. An important advantage of such methods is their ability to uncover in a single picture underlying structures that may be hard to extract from the profusion of data supplied by detailed quantum calculations. Modern trends in semiclassical mechanics are described, particularly the combination of group theoretical methods with techniques of nonlinear dynamics. Application is made to intramolecular energy transfer and to the electronic structure of atomic Rydberg states in external electric and magnetic fields.
The behaviour of liquid crystal (LC) molecules near a surface is of both fundamental and technological interest: it gives rise to various surface phase-transition and wetting phenomena, and surface-induced ordering of the LC molecules is integral to the operation of LC displays. Here we report the observation of a pure isotropic-nematic (IN) surface phase transition-clearly separated from the bulk IN transition-in a nematic LC on a substrate. Differences in phase behaviour between surface and bulk are expected, but have hitherto proved difficult to distinguish, owing in part to the close proximity of their transition temperatures. We have overcome these difficulties by using a mixture of nematic LCs: small, surface-induced composition variations lead to complete separation of the surface and bulk transitions, which we then study independently as a function of substrate and applied magnetic field. We find the surface IN transition to be of first order on surfaces with a weak anchoring energy and continuous on surfaces with a strong anchoring. We show that the presence of high magnetic fields does not change the surface IN transition temperature, whereas the bulk IN transition temperature increases with field. We attribute this to the interaction energy between the surface and bulk phases, which is tuned by magnetic-field-induced order in the surface-wetting layer.
The transfer of electrons from one molecule to another by quantum mechanical tunneling has recently been implicated in biological electron transport. This report describes observations of electron transfer between aromatic molecules in a rigid matrix, in which electrons apparently tunnel through tens of angstroms of inert solvent. The kinetics tend to confirm the tunneling process, which is likely to be an important means of electron transfer when diffusion is blocked by steric factors or immobilization of the reactants.
Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals combine the physical and chemical properties of molecules with the optoelectronic properties of semiconductors. Their colour is highly controllable, a direct consequence of quantum confinement on the electronic states. Such nanocrystals are a form of 'artificial atoms' (ref. 4) that may find applications in optoelectronic systems such as light-emitting diodes and photovoltaic cells, or as components of future nanoelectronic devices. The ability to control the electron occupation (especially in n-type or p-type nanocrystals) is important for tailoring the electrical and optical properties, and should lead to a wider range of practical devices. But conventional doping by introducing impurity atoms has been unsuccessful so far: impurities tend to be expelled from the small crystalline cores (as observed for magnetic impurities), and thermal ionization of the impurities (which provides free carriers) is hindered by strong confinement. Here we report the fabrication of n-type nanocrystals using an electron transfer approach commonly employed in the field of conducting organic polymers. We find that semiconductor nanocrystals prepared as colloids can be made n-type, with electrons in quantum confined states.
A dosimeter, with little wavelength dependence and large useful energy range for electromagnetic radiation, which is simple to use and read, has been developed. It appears to have applications in personnel monitoring as well as radiation research.
The heat generated by computations is not only an obstacle to circuit miniaturization but also a fundamental aspect of the relationship between information theory and thermodynamics. In principle, reversible operations may be performed at no energy cost; given that irreversible computations can always be decomposed into reversible operations followed by the erasure of data, the problem of calculating their energy cost is reduced to the study of erasure. Landauer's principle states that the erasure of data stored in a system has an inherent work cost and therefore dissipates heat. However, this consideration assumes that the information about the system to be erased is classical, and does not extend to the general case where an observer may have quantum information about the system to be erased, for instance by means of a quantum memory entangled with the system. Here we show that the standard formulation and implications of Landauer's principle are no longer valid in the presence of quantum information. Our main result is that the work cost of erasure is determined by the entropy of the system, conditioned on the quantum information an observer has about it. In other words, the more an observer knows about the system, the less it costs to erase it. This result gives a direct thermodynamic significance to conditional entropies, originally introduced in information theory. Furthermore, it provides new bounds on the heat generation of computations: because conditional entropies can become negative in the quantum case, an observer who is strongly correlated with a system may gain work while erasing it, thereby cooling the environment.
Condensed-matter systems that are both low-dimensional and strongly interacting often exhibit unusual electronic properties. Strongly correlated electrons with greatly enhanced effective mass are present in heavy fermion compounds, whose electronic structure is essentially three-dimensional. We realized experimentally a two-dimensional heavy fermion system, adjusting the dimensionality in a controllable fashion. Artificial superlattices of the antiferromagnetic heavy fermion compound CeIn3 and the conventional metal LaIn3 were grown epitaxially. By reducing the thickness of the CeIn3 layers, the magnetic order was suppressed and the effective electron mass was further enhanced. Heavy fermions confined to two dimensions display striking deviations from the standard Fermi liquid low-temperature electronic properties, and these are associated with the dimensional tuning of quantum criticality.
Various physical implementations of quantum computers are being investigated, although the requirements that must be met to make such devices a reality in the laboratory at present involve capabilities well beyond the state of the art. Recent solid-state approaches have used quantum dots, donor-atom nuclear spins or electron spins; in these architectures, the basic two-qubit quantum gate is generated by a tunable exchange interaction between spins (a Heisenberg interaction), whereas the one-qubit gates require control over a local magnetic field. Compared to the Heisenberg operation, the one-qubit operations are significantly slower, requiring substantially greater materials and device complexity--potentially contributing to a detrimental increase in the decoherence rate. Here we introduced an explicit scheme in which the Heisenberg interaction alone suffices to implement exactly any quantum computer circuit. This capability comes at a price of a factor of three in additional qubits, and about a factor of ten in additional two-qubit operations. Even at this cost, the ability to eliminate the complexity of one-qubit operations should accelerate progress towards solid-state implementations of quantum computation.
The anomalous Hall effect is a fundamental transport process in solids arising from the spin-orbit coupling. In a quantum anomalous Hall insulator, spontaneous magnetic moments and spin-orbit coupling combine to give rise to a topologically nontrivial electronic structure, leading to the quantized Hall effect without an external magnetic field. Based on first-principles calculations, we predict that the tetradymite semiconductors Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3, and Sb2Te3 form magnetically ordered insulators when doped with transition metal elements (Cr or Fe), in contrast to conventional dilute magnetic semiconductors where free carriers are necessary to mediate the magnetic coupling. In two-dimensional thin films, this magnetic order gives rise to a topological electronic structure characterized by a finite Chern number, with the Hall conductance quantized in units of e2/h (where e is the charge of an electron and h is Planck's constant).
Tracing the transient atomic motions that lie at the heart of chemical reactions requires high-resolution multidimensional structural information on the timescale of molecular vibrations, which commonly range from 10 fs to 1 ps. For simple chemical systems, it has been possible to map out in considerable detail the reactive potential-energy surfaces describing atomic motions and resultant reaction dynamics, but such studies remain challenging for complex chemical and biological transformations. A case in point is the green fluorescent protein (GFP) from the jellyfish Aequorea victoria, which is a widely used gene expression marker owing to its efficient bioluminescence. This feature is known to arise from excited-state proton transfer (ESPT), yet the atomistic details of the process are still not fully understood. Here we show that femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy provides sufficiently detailed and time-resolved vibrational spectra of the electronically excited chromophore of GFP to reveal skeletal motions involved in the proton transfer that produces the fluorescent form of the protein. In particular, we observe that the frequencies and intensities of two marker bands, the C-O and C = N stretching modes at opposite ends of the conjugated chromophore, oscillate out of phase with a period of 280 fs; we attribute these oscillations to impulsively excited low-frequency phenoxyl-ring motions, which optimize the geometry of the chromophore for ESPT. Our findings illustrate that femtosecond simulated Raman spectroscopy is a powerful approach to revealing the real-time nuclear dynamics that make up a multidimensional polyatomic reaction coordinate.
The challenges associated with synthesizing expanded semiconductor frameworks with cage-like crystal structures continue to be of interest. Filled low-density germanium and silicon framework structures have distinct properties that address important issues in thermoelectric phonon glass-electron crystals, superconductivity and the possibility of Kondo insulators. Interest in empty framework structures of silicon and germanium is motivated by their predicted wide optical bandgaps of the same magnitude as quantum dots and porous silicon, making them and their alloys promising materials for silicon-based optoelectronic devices. Although almost-empty Na(1-x)Si136 has already been reported, the synthesis of guest-free germanium clathrate has so far been unsuccessful. Here we report the high-yield synthesis and characteristics of germanium with the empty clathrate-II structure through the oxidation of Zintl anions in ionic liquids under ambient conditions. The approach demonstrates the potential of ionic liquids as media for the reactions of polar intermetallic phases.
The nature of quantum spin liquids, a novel state of matter where strong quantum fluctuations destroy the long-range magnetic order even at zero temperature, is a long-standing issue in physics. We measured the low-temperature thermal conductivity of the recently discovered quantum spin liquid candidate, the organic insulator EtMe3Sb[Pd(dmit)2]2. A sizable linear temperature dependence term is clearly resolved in the zero-temperature limit, indicating the presence of gapless excitations with an extremely long mean free path, analogous to excitations near the Fermi surface in pure metals. Its magnetic field dependence suggests a concomitant appearance of spin-gap-like excitations at low temperatures. These findings expose a highly unusual dichotomy that characterizes the low-energy physics of this quantum system.
Flares and X-ray jets on the Sun arise in active regions where magnetic flux emerges from the solar interior amd interacts with the ambient magnetic field. The interactions are believed to occur in electric current sheets separating regions of opposite magnetic polarity. The current sheets located in the corona or upper chromosphere have long been thought to act as an important source of coronal heating, requiring their location in the corona or upper chromosphere. The dynamics and energetics of these sheets are governed by a complex magnetic field structure that, until now, has been difficult to measure. Here we report the determination of the full magnetic vector in an interaction region near the base of the solar corona. The observations reveal two magnetic features that characterize young active regions on the Sun: a set of rising magnetic loops and a tangential discontinuity of the magnetic field direction, the latter being the observational signature of an electric current sheet. This provides strong support for coronal heating models based on the dissipation of magnetic energy at current sheets.
The space environments--or magnetospheres--of magnetized planets emit copious quantities of energetic neutral atoms (ENAs) at energies between tens of electron volts to hundreds of kiloelectron volts (keV). These energetic atoms result from charge exchange between magnetically trapped energetic ions and cold neutral atoms, and they carry significant amounts of energy and mass from the magnetospheres. Imaging their distribution allows us to investigate the structure of planetary magnetospheres. Here we report the analysis of 50-80 keV ENA images of Jupiter's magnetosphere, where two distinct emission regions dominate: the upper atmosphere of Jupiter itself, and a torus of emission residing just outside the orbit of Jupiter's satellite Europa. The trans-Europa component shows that, unexpectedly, Europa generates a gas cloud comparable in gas content to that associated with the volcanic moon Io. The quantity of gas found indicates that Europa has a much greater impact than hitherto believed on the structure of, and the energy flow within, Jupiter's magnetosphere.
Quantum computation requires quantum logic gates that use the interaction within pairs of quantum bits (qubits) to perform conditional operations. Superconducting qubits may offer an attractive route towards scalable quantum computing. In previous experiments on coupled superconducting qubits, conditional gate behaviour and entanglement were demonstrated. Here we demonstrate selective execution of the complete set of four different controlled-NOT (CNOT) quantum logic gates, by applying microwave pulses of appropriate frequency to a single pair of coupled flux qubits. All two-qubit computational basis states and their superpositions are used as input, while two independent single-shot SQUID detectors measure the output state, including qubit-qubit correlations. We determined the gate's truth table by directly measuring the state transfer amplitudes and by acquiring the relevant quantum phase shift using a Ramsey-like interference experiment. The four conditional gates result from the symmetry of the qubits in the pair: either qubit can assume the role of control or target, and the gate action can be conditioned on either the 0-state or the 1-state. These gates are now sufficiently characterized to be used in quantum algorithms, and together form an efficient set of versatile building blocks.
The most important process that allows solar-wind plasma to cross the magnetopause and enter Earth's magnetosphere is the merging between solar-wind and terrestrial magnetic fields of opposite sense-magnetic reconnection. It is at present not known whether reconnection can happen in a continuous fashion or whether it is always intermittent. Solar flares and magnetospheric substorms--two phenomena believed to be initiated by reconnection--are highly burst-like occurrences, raising the possibility that the reconnection process is intrinsically intermittent, storing and releasing magnetic energy in an explosive and uncontrolled manner. Here we show that reconnection at Earth's high-latitude magnetopause is driven directly by the solar wind, and can be continuous and even quasi-steady over an extended period of time. The dayside proton auroral spot in the ionosphere--the remote signature of high-latitude magnetopause reconnection--is present continuously for many hours. We infer that reconnection is not intrinsically intermittent; its steadiness depends on the way that the process is driven.
The magnetic field is one of the most fundamental and ubiquitous physical observables, carrying information about all electromagnetic phenomena. For the past 30 years, superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) operating at 4 K have been unchallenged as ultrahigh-sensitivity magnetic field detectors, with a sensitivity reaching down to 1 fT Hz(-1/2) (1 fT = 10(-15) T). They have enabled, for example, mapping of the magnetic fields produced by the brain, and localization of the underlying electrical activity (magnetoencephalography). Atomic magnetometers, based on detection of Larmor spin precession of optically pumped atoms, have approached similar levels of sensitivity using large measurement volumes, but have much lower sensitivity in the more compact designs required for magnetic imaging applications. Higher sensitivity and spatial resolution combined with non-cryogenic operation of atomic magnetometers would enable new applications, including the possibility of mapping non-invasively the cortical modules in the brain. Here we describe a new spin-exchange relaxation-free (SERF) atomic magnetometer, and demonstrate magnetic field sensitivity of 0.54 fT Hz(-1/2) with a measurement volume of only 0.3 cm3. Theoretical analysis shows that fundamental sensitivity limits of this device are below 0.01 fT Hz(-1/2). We also demonstrate simple multichannel operation of the magnetometer, and localization of magnetic field sources with a resolution of 2 mm.
The association of a supernova with GRB030329 strongly supports the 'collapsar' model of gamma-ray bursts, where a relativistic jet forms after the progenitor star collapses. Such jets cannot be spatially resolved because gamma-ray bursts lie at cosmological distances; their existence is instead inferred from 'breaks' in the light curves of the afterglows, and from the theoretical desire to reduce the estimated total energy of the burst by proposing that most of it comes out in narrow beams. Temporal evolution of the polarization of the afterglows may provide independent evidence for the jet structure of the relativistic outflow. Small-level polarization ( approximately 1-3 per cent) has been reported for a few bursts, but its temporal evolution has yet to be established. Here we report polarimetric observations of the afterglow of GRB030329. We establish the polarization light curve, detect sustained polarization at the per cent level, and find significant variability. The data imply that the afterglow magnetic field has a small coherence length and is mostly random, probably generated by turbulence, in contrast with the picture arising from the high polarization detected in the prompt gamma-rays from GRB021206 (ref. 18).
The harmonic approximation for the potential energy of proteins is known to be inadequate for the calculation of many protein properties. To study the effect of anharmonic terms on protein vibrations, the anharmonic wave functions for the ground state and low-lying excited states of the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) were calculated. The results suggest that anharmonic treatments are essential for protein vibrational spectroscopy. The calculation uses the vibrational self-consistent field approximation, which includes anharmonicity and interaction among modes in a mean-field sense. Properties obtained include the quantum coordinate fluctuations, zero-point energies, and the vibrational absorption spectrum.
We describe the operation of, and demonstrate logic functionality in, networks of physically coupled, nanometer-scale magnets designed for digital computation in magnetic quantum-dot cellular automata (MQCA) systems. MQCA offer low power dissipation and high integration density of functional elements and operate at room temperature. The basic MQCA logic gate, that is, the three-input majority logic gate, is demonstrated.
We have measured carbon nanotube quantum dots with multiple electrostatic gates and used the resulting enhanced control to investigate a nanotube double quantum dot. Transport measurements reveal honeycomb charge stability diagrams as a function of two nearly independent gate voltages. The device can be tuned from weak to strong interdot tunnel-coupling regimes, and the transparency of the leads can be controlled independently. We extract values of energy-level spacings, capacitances, and interaction energies for this system. This ability to control electron interactions in the quantum regime in a molecular conductor is important for applications such as quantum computation.
After eating, the human brain senses a biochemical change and then signals satiation, but precisely when this occurs is unknown. Even for well-established physiological systems like glucose-insulin regulation, the timing of interaction between hormonal processes and neural events is inferred mostly from blood sampling. Recently, neuroimaging studies have provided in vivo information about the neuroanatomical correlates of the regulation of energy intake. Temporal orchestration of such systems, however, is crucial to the integration of neuronal and hormonal signals that control eating behaviour. The challenge of this functional magnetic resonance imaging study is to map not only where but also when the brain will respond after food ingestion. Here we use a temporal clustering analysis technique to demonstrate that eating-related neural activity peaks at two different times with distinct localization. Importantly, the differentiated responses are interacting with an internal signal, the plasma insulin. These results support the concept of temporal parcellation of brain activity, which reflects the different natures of stimuli and responses. Moreover, this study provides a neuroimaging basis for detecting dynamic processes without prior knowledge of their timing, such as the acute effects of medication and nutrition in the brain.
The study of superfluid fermion pairs in a periodic potential has important ramifications for understanding superconductivity in crystalline materials. By using cold atomic gases, various models of condensed matter can be studied in a highly controllable environment. Weakly repulsive fermions in an optical lattice could undergo d-wave pairing at low temperatures, a possible mechanism for high temperature superconductivity in the copper oxides. The lattice potential could also strongly increase the critical temperature for s-wave superfluidity. Recent experimental advances in bulk atomic gases include the observation of fermion-pair condensates and high-temperature superfluidity. Experiments with fermions and bosonic bound pairs in optical lattices have been reported but have not yet addressed superfluid behaviour. Here we report the observation of distinct interference peaks when a condensate of fermionic atom pairs is released from an optical lattice, implying long-range order (a property of a superfluid). Conceptually, this means that s-wave pairing and coherence of fermion pairs have now been established in a lattice potential, in which the transport of atoms occurs by quantum mechanical tunnelling and not by simple propagation. These observations were made for interactions on both sides of a Feshbach resonance. For larger lattice depths, the coherence was lost in a reversible manner, possibly as a result of a transition from superfluid to insulator. Such strongly interacting fermions in an optical lattice can be used to study a new class of hamiltonians with interband and atom-molecule couplings.
Self-assembled devices composed of periodic arrays of 10-nanometer-diameter cobalt nanocrystals display spin-dependent electron transport. Current-voltage characteristics are well described by single-electron tunneling in a uniform array. At temperatures below 20 kelvin, device magnetoresistance ratios are on the order of 10%, approaching the maximum predicted for ensembles of cobalt islands with randomly oriented preferred magnetic axes. Low-energy spin-flip scattering suppresses magnetoresistance with increasing temperature and bias-voltage.
The Coulomb drag in a system of two parallel layers is the result of electron-electron interaction between the layers. We have observed reproducible fluctuations of the drag, both as a function of magnetic field and electron concentration, which are a manifestation of quantum interference of electrons in the layers. At low temperatures the fluctuations exceed the average drag, giving rise to random changes of the sign of the drag. The fluctuations are found to be much larger than previously expected, and we propose a model that explains their enhancement by considering fluctuations of local electron properties.
The origin of the differences in oxygen binding energy in various haemoglobins and myoglobins has long been debated. Perutz proposed that the haem-coordinated histidine (proximal histidine) strains the haem iron in low affinity globins but relaxes it in high affinity globins. The existence of such tension in T-structure deoxyhaemoglobin (deoxyHb) was recently confirmed by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), resonance Raman and NRM spectroscopy. Although its contribution to the free energy of cooperativity is insignificant in the deoxy state, the tension at the haem is considered to be approximately 1 kcal mol-1 for the ligated form in which the haem iron moves into the porphyrin plane. The remaining free energy is probably stored in other parts of the molecule. Therefore, a study of the stabilization mechanisms of the oxygenated form became increasingly important. A hydrogen bond between the bound oxygen and the distal histidine has been proposed by Pauling; this would be expected to stabilize the oxy form of the protein and could contribute to the regulation of the oxygen affinity through the oxygen dissociation rate. A series of EPR and functional studies on various cobalt-substituted monomeric haemoglobins and myoglobins suggested the presence of such hydrogen bonding and it has recently been established in crystals of oxy iron myoglobin (oxyFeMb) and in oxyhaemoglobin. Here we present resonance Raman spectra of the oxy forms of cobalt--porphyrin-substituted myoglobin and haemoglobin (CoMb and CoHb) recorded in buffered H2O and D2O solutions at 406.7 nm excitation. Only the Raman lines corresponding to the O-O stretching mode of the bound oxygen, appearing near 1,130 cm-1, are shifted (2-5 cm-1) replacement of H2O by D2O; no other vibrations, including the Co--O2 stretching mode, exhibit any frequency shifts. This indicated that the bound oxygen in oxyCoMb and in both subunits of oxyCoHb interacts with the adjacent exchangeable proton, and confirms the formation of a hydrogen bond between the bound oxygen and the distal histidine.
Very complicated inorganic solids can be self-assembled from structurally simple precursors as illustrated by the hydrothermal synthesis of the vanadium phosphate, [(CH(3))(2)NH(2)]K(4)[V(10)O(10)(H(2)O)(2)(OH)(4)(PO(4))(7)].4H(2)O, 1, which contains chiral double helices formed from interpenetrating spirals of vanadium oxo pentamers bonded together by P(5+). These double helices are in turn intertwined with each other in a manner that generates unusual tunnels and cavities that are filled with (CH(3))(2)NH(2)(+) and K(+) cations, respectively. The unit cell contents of dark blue phosphate 1, which crystallizes in the enantiomorphic space group P4(3) with lattice constants a = 12.130 and c = 30.555 angstroms, are chiral; only one enantiomorph is present in a given crystal. Magnetization measurements show that 1 is paramagnetic with ten unpaired electrons per formula unit at higher temperatures and that antiferromagnetic interactions develop at lower temperatures.
Solution-processed electronic and optoelectronic devices offer low cost, large device area, physical flexibility and convenient materials integration compared to conventional epitaxially grown, lattice-matched, crystalline semiconductor devices. Although the electronic or optoelectronic performance of these solution-processed devices is typically inferior to that of those fabricated by conventional routes, this can be tolerated for some applications in view of the other benefits. Here we report the fabrication of solution-processed infrared photodetectors that are superior in their normalized detectivity (D*, the figure of merit for detector sensitivity) to the best epitaxially grown devices operating at room temperature. We produced the devices in a single solution-processing step, overcoating a prefabricated planar electrode array with an unpatterned layer of PbS colloidal quantum dot nanocrystals. The devices showed large photoconductive gains with responsivities greater than 10(3) A W(-1). The best devices exhibited a normalized detectivity D* of 1.8 x 10(13) jones (1 jones = 1 cm Hz(1/2) W(-1)) at 1.3 microm at room temperature: today's highest performance infrared photodetectors are photovoltaic devices made from epitaxially grown InGaAs that exhibit peak D* in the 10(12) jones range at room temperature, whereas the previous record for D* from a photoconductive detector lies at 10(11) jones. The tailored selection of absorption onset energy through the quantum size effect, combined with deliberate engineering of the sequence of nanoparticle fusing and surface trap functionalization, underlie the superior performance achieved in this readily fabricated family of devices.
The origin of the X-ray emission for the central region of our Galaxy has remained a mystery. In particular, the relative spectral contributions of the diffuse emission and discrete sources, which are critical to understanding the high-energy phenomena in this environment, have been unclear because of the lack of sufficient spatial resolution. Here we report the results of a large-scale imaging survey of the Galactic Centre that resolves these components. We find that the Kalpha emission from iron that has been highly ionized (so that it has only two electrons left), which has previously been attributed to the diffuse component, actually arises mainly from discrete sources. This suggests that the presence of a large amount of hot gas (T approximately 108 K) is no longer required to explain the iron line emission. The spectra of the discrete sources indicate the presence of numerous accreting white dwarfs, neutron stars, and/or black holes in the region. The diffuse emission dominates over the contribution from the faint point sources, and is shown to be associated globally with interstellar features that have been observed at radio and mid-infrared wavelengths, suggesting that it is the product of recent massive star formation.
We present two quantum calculations of the infrared spectrum of protonated methane (CH5+) using full-dimensional, ab initio-based potential energy and dipole moment surfaces. The calculated spectra compare well with a low-resolution experimental spectrum except below 1000 cm(-1), where the experimental spectrum shows no absorption. The present calculations find substantial absorption features below 1000 cm(-1), in qualitative agreement with earlier classical calculations of the spectrum. The major spectral bands are analyzed in terms of the molecular motions. Of particular interest is an intense feature at 200 cm(-1), which is due to an isomerization mode that connects two equivalent minima. Very recent high-resolution jet-cooled spectra in the CH stretch region (2825 to 3050 cm(-1)) are also reported, and assignments of the band origins are made, based on the present quantum calculations.
An empirical model of variations in the total solar irradiance caused by observed changes in photospheric magnetic activity between 1874 and 1988 is presented. The model provides a remarkably good representation of the irradiance variations observed by satellite-borne radiometers between 1980 and 1988. It suggests that the mean total irradiance has been rising steadily since about 1945, with the largest peak so far at about 1980 and another large peak expected during the current solar cycle 22. But it is doubtful whether even this rise can contribute significantly to global warming, unless the temperature increase of about 0.02 degrees C that it produces in current energy balance models seriously underestimates the sensitivity of climate to solar irradiance changes.
Coherent light sources have been widely used in control schemes that exploit quantum interference effects to direct the outcome of photochemical processes. The adaptive shaping of laser pulses is a particularly powerful tool in this context: experimental output as feedback in an iterative learning loop refines the applied laser field to render it best suited to constraints set by the experimenter. This approach has been experimentally implemented to control a variety of processes, but the extent to which coherent excitation can also be used to direct the dynamics of complex molecular systems in a condensed-phase environment remains unclear. Here we report feedback-optimized coherent control over the energy-flow pathways in the light-harvesting antenna complex LH2 from Rhodopseudomonas acidophila, a photosynthetic purple bacterium. We show that phases imprinted by the light field mediate the branching ratio of energy transfer between intra- and intermolecular channels in the complex's donor acceptor system. This result illustrates that molecular complexity need not prevent coherent control, which can thus be extended to probe and affect biological functions.
Three- and four-dimensional heteronuclear nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy offers dramatic improvements in spectral resolution by spreading through-bond and through-space correlations in three and four orthogonal frequency axes. Simultaneously, large heteronuclear couplings are exploited to circumvent problems due to the larger linewidths that are associated with increasing molecular weight. These novel experiments have been designed to extend the application of NMR as a method for determining three-dimensional structures of proteins in solution beyond the limits of conventional two-dimensional NMR (approximately 100 residues) to molecules in the 150- to 300-residue range. This potential has recently been confirmed with the determination of the high-resolution NMR structure of a protein greater than 150 residues, namely, interleukin-1 beta.
Experiments in coherent magnetic resonance, microwave, and optical spectroscopy control quantum-mechanical ensembles by guiding them from initial states toward target states by unitary transformation. Often, the coherences detected as signals are represented by a non-Hermitian operator. Hence, spectroscopic experiments, such as those used in nuclear magnetic resonance, correspond to unitary transformations between operators that in general are not Hermitian. A gradient-based systematic procedure for optimizing these transformations is described that finds the largest projection of a transformed initial operator onto the target operator and, thus, the maximum spectroscopic signal. This method can also be used in applied mathematics and control theory.
Rapid coherent control of electron spin states is required for implementation of a spin-based quantum processor. We demonstrated coherent control of electronic spin states in a double quantum dot by sweeping an initially prepared spin-singlet state through a singlet-triplet anticrossing in the energy-level spectrum. The anticrossing serves as a beam splitter for the incoming spin-singlet state. When performed within the spin-dephasing time, consecutive crossings through the beam splitter result in coherent quantum oscillations between the singlet state and a triplet state. The all-electrical method for quantum control relies on electron-nuclear spin coupling and drives single-electron spin rotations on nanosecond time scales.
Solutes have been added to strengthen elemental metals, generating usable materials for millennia; in the 1960s, solutes were found to also soften metals. Despite the empirical correlation between the "electron number" of the solute and the change in strength of the material to which it is added, the mechanism responsible for softening is poorly understood. Using state-of-the-art quantum-mechanical methods, we studied the direct interaction of transition-metal solutes with dislocations in molybdenum. The interaction increases dramatically with increasing electron number and strongly influences the mechanisms responsible for plasticity in these materials. Our quantitative model explains solution softening of metals by using changes in energy and stress scales of plasticity from solutes.
Because of the long Fermi wavelength of itinerant electrons, the quantum limit of elemental bismuth (unlike most metals) can be attained with a moderate magnetic field. The quantized orbits of electrons shrink with increasing magnetic field. Beyond the quantum limit, the circumference of these orbits becomes shorter than the Fermi wavelength. We studied transport coefficients of a single crystal of bismuth up to 33 tesla, which is deep in this ultraquantum limit. The Nernst coefficient presents three unexpected maxima that are concomitant with quasi-plateaus in the Hall coefficient. The results suggest that this bulk element may host an exotic quantum fluid reminiscent of the one associated with the fractional quantum Hall effect and raise the issue of electron fractionalization in a three-dimensional metal.
It is well known that a dielectric medium can be used to manipulate properties of light pulses. However, optical absorption limits the extent of possible control: this is especially important for weak light pulses. Absorption in an opaque medium can be eliminated via quantum mechanical interference, an effect known as electromagnetically induced transparency. Theoretical and experimental work has demonstrated that this phenomenon can be used to slow down light pulses dramatically, or even bring them to a complete halt. Interactions between photons in such an atomic medium can be many orders of magnitude stronger than in conventional optical materials.
Can we decipher speech content ("what" is being said) and speaker identity ("who" is saying it) from observations of brain activity of a listener? Here, we combine functional magnetic resonance imaging with a data-mining algorithm and retrieve what and whom a person is listening to from the neural fingerprints that speech and voice signals elicit in the listener's auditory cortex. These cortical fingerprints are spatially distributed and insensitive to acoustic variations of the input so as to permit the brain-based recognition of learned speech from unknown speakers and of learned voices from previously unheard utterances. Our findings unravel the detailed cortical layout and computational properties of the neural populations at the basis of human speech recognition and speaker identification.
The single-particle energy spectra of graphene and its bilayer counterpart exhibit multiple degeneracies that arise through inherent symmetries. Interactions among charge carriers should spontaneously break these symmetries and lead to ordered states that exhibit energy gaps. In the quantum Hall regime, these states are predicted to be ferromagnetic in nature, whereby the system becomes spin polarized, layer polarized, or both. The parabolic dispersion of bilayer graphene makes it susceptible to interaction-induced symmetry breaking even at zero magnetic field. We investigated the underlying order of the various broken-symmetry states in bilayer graphene suspended between top and bottom gate electrodes. We deduced the order parameter of the various quantum Hall ferromagnetic states by controllably breaking the spin and sublattice symmetries. At small carrier density, we identified three distinct broken-symmetry states, one of which is consistent with either spontaneously broken time-reversal symmetry or spontaneously broken rotational symmetry.
Adaptive shaping of the phase and amplitude of femtosecond laser pulses has been developed into an efficient tool for the directed manipulation of interference phenomena, thus providing coherent control over various quantum-mechanical systems. Temporal resolution in the femtosecond or even attosecond range has been demonstrated, but spatial resolution is limited by diffraction to approximately half the wavelength of the light field (that is, several hundred nanometres). Theory has indicated that the spatial limitation to coherent control can be overcome with the illumination of nanostructures: the spatial near-field distribution was shown to depend on the linear chirp of an irradiating laser pulse. An extension of this idea to adaptive control, combining multiparameter pulse shaping with a learning algorithm, demonstrated the generation of user-specified optical near-field distributions in an optimal and flexible fashion. Shaping of the polarization of the laser pulse provides a particularly efficient and versatile nano-optical manipulation method. Here we demonstrate the feasibility of this concept experimentally, by tailoring the optical near field in the vicinity of silver nanostructures through adaptive polarization shaping of femtosecond laser pulses and then probing the lateral field distribution by two-photon photoemission electron microscopy. In this combination of adaptive control and nano-optics, we achieve subwavelength dynamic localization of electromagnetic intensity on the nanometre scale and thus overcome the spatial restrictions of conventional optics. This experimental realization of theoretical suggestions opens a number of perspectives in coherent control, nano-optics, nonlinear spectroscopy, and other research fields in which optical investigations are carried out with spatial or temporal resolution.
The ability to confine and store optical energy in small volumes has implications in fields ranging from cavity quantum electrodynamics to photonics. Of all cavity geometries, micrometre-sized dielectric spherical resonators are the best in terms of their ability to store energy for long periods of time within small volumes. In the sphere, light orbits near the surface, where long confinement times (high Q) effectively wrap a large interaction distance into a tiny volume. This characteristic makes such resonators uniquely suited for studies of nonlinear coupling of light with matter. Early work recognized these attributes through Raman excitation in microdroplets-but microdroplets have not been used in practical applications. Here we demonstrate a micrometre-scale, nonlinear Raman source that has a highly efficient pump-signal conversion (higher than 35%) and pump thresholds nearly 1,000 times lower than shown before. This represents a route to compact, ultralow-threshold sources for numerous wavelength bands that are usually difficult to access. Equally important, this system can provide a compact and simple building block for studying nonlinear optical effects and the quantum aspects of light.
We used angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy applied to deeply underdoped cuprate superconductors Bi2Sr2Ca(1-x)YxCu2O8 (Bi2212) to reveal the presence of two distinct energy gaps exhibiting different doping dependence. One gap, associated with the antinodal region where no coherent peak is observed, increased with underdoping, a behavior known for more than a decade and considered as the general gap behavior in the underdoped regime. The other gap, associated with the near-nodal regime where a coherent peak in the spectrum can be observed, did not increase with less doping, a behavior not previously observed in the single particle spectra. We propose a two-gap scenario in momentum space that is consistent with other experiments and may contain important information on the mechanism of high-transition temperature superconductivity.
Recent improvements in instrumentation and technique now permit the observation of high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of many nuclei in inorganic solids. The application of nuclear magnetic resonance to the study of the structures of materials of interest in chemistry, earth science, and materials science are discussed together with a prognosis for future work.
The observation of vanishing electrical resistance in condensed matter has led to the discovery of new phenomena such as, for example, superconductivity, where a zero-resistance state can be detected in a metal below a transition temperature T(c) (ref. 1). More recently, quantum Hall effects were discovered from investigations of zero-resistance states at low temperatures and high magnetic fields in two-dimensional electron systems (2DESs). In quantum Hall systems and superconductors, zero-resistance states often coincide with the appearance of a gap in the energy spectrum. Here we report the observation of zero-resistance states and energy gaps in a surprising setting: ultrahigh-mobility GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures that contain a 2DES exhibit vanishing diagonal resistance without Hall resistance quantization at low temperatures and low magnetic fields when the specimen is subjected to electromagnetic wave excitation. Zero-resistance-states occur about magnetic fields B = 4/5 Bf and B = 4/9 Bf, where Bf = 2pifm*/e,m* is the electron mass, e is the electron charge, and f is the electromagnetic-wave frequency. Activated transport measurements on the resistance minima also indicate an energy gap at the Fermi level. The results suggest an unexpected radiation-induced, electronic-state-transition in the GaAs/AlGaAs 2DES.
Galaxy clusters form through a sequence of mergers of smaller galaxy clusters and groups. Models of diffusive shock acceleration suggest that in shocks that occur during cluster mergers, particles are accelerated to relativistic energies, similar to conditions within supernova remnants. In the presence of magnetic fields, these particles emit synchrotron radiation and may form so-called radio relics. We detected a radio relic that displays highly aligned magnetic fields, a strong spectral index gradient, and a narrow relic width, giving a measure of the magnetic field in an unexplored site of the universe. Our observations show that diffusive shock acceleration also operates on scales much larger than in supernova remnants and that shocks in galaxy clusters are capable of producing extremely energetic cosmic rays.
Quantum gases in optical lattices offer an opportunity to experimentally realize and explore condensed matter models in a clean, tunable system. We used single atom-single lattice site imaging to investigate the Bose-Hubbard model on a microscopic level. Our technique enables space- and time-resolved characterization of the number statistics across the superfluid-Mott insulator quantum phase transition. Site-resolved probing of fluctuations provides us with a sensitive local thermometer, allows us to identify microscopic heterostructures of low-entropy Mott domains, and enables us to measure local quantum dynamics, revealing surprisingly fast transition time scales. Our results may serve as a benchmark for theoretical studies of quantum dynamics, and may guide the engineering of low-entropy phases in a lattice.
Quantum metrology uses tools from quantum information science to improve measurement signal-to-noise ratios. The challenge is to increase sensitivity while reducing susceptibility to noise, tasks that are often in conflict. Lock-in measurement is a detection scheme designed to overcome this difficulty by spectrally separating signal from noise. Here we report on the implementation of a quantum analogue to the classical lock-in amplifier. All the lock-in operations--modulation, detection and mixing--are performed through the application of non-commuting quantum operators to the electronic spin state of a single, trapped Sr(+) ion. We significantly increase its sensitivity to external fields while extending phase coherence by three orders of magnitude, to more than one second. Using this technique, we measure frequency shifts with a sensitivity of 0.42 Hz Hz(-1/2) (corresponding to a magnetic field measurement sensitivity of 15 pT Hz(-1/2)), obtaining an uncertainty of less than 10 mHz (350 fT) after 3,720 seconds of averaging. These sensitivities are limited by quantum projection noise and improve on other single-spin probe technologies by two orders of magnitude. Our reported sensitivity is sufficient for the measurement of parity non-conservation, as well as the detection of the magnetic field of a single electronic spin one micrometre from an ion detector with nanometre resolution. As a first application, we perform light shift spectroscopy of a narrow optical quadrupole transition. Finally, we emphasize that the quantum lock-in technique is generic and can potentially enhance the sensitivity of any quantum sensor.
Reactivity of the excited spin-orbit state of Cl with H2 to yield ground-state HCl products is forbidden by the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approximation. We used new ab initio potential energy surfaces and exact quantum scattering calculations to explore the extent of electronic nonadiabaticity in this reaction. In direct contrast to recent experiments, we predict that the BO-allowed reaction of the ground spin-orbit state will be much more efficient than the BO-forbidden reaction of the excited spin-orbit state. Also, Coriolis coupling opens up an electronically nonadiabatic inelastic channel, which competes substantially with reaction.
Quantum computation remains an enormously appealing but elusive goal. It is appealing because of its potential to perform superfast algorithms, such as finding prime factors in polynomial time, but also elusive because of the difficulty of simultaneously manipulating quantum degrees of freedom while preventing environmentally induced decoherence. A new approach to quantum computing is introduced based on the use of multiple-pulse resonance techniques to manipulate the small deviation from equilibrium of the density matrix of a macroscopic ensemble so that it appears to be the density matrix of a much lower dimensional pure state. A complete prescription for quantum computing is given for such a system.
In a time of growing need for catalysts, perovskites have been rediscovered as a family of catalysts of such great diversity that a broad spectrum of scientific disciplines have been brought to bear in their study and application. Because of the wide range of ions and valences which this simple structure can accommodate, the perovskites lend themselves to chemical tailoring. It is relatively simple to synthesize perovskites because of the flexibility of the structure to diverse chemistry. Many of the techniques of ceramic powder preparation are applicable to perovskite catalysts. In their own right, they are therefore of interest as a model system for the correlation of solid-state parameters and catalytic mechanisms. Such correlations [See figure in the PDF file] have recently been found between the rate and selectivity of oxidation-reduction reactions and the thermodynamic and electronic parameters of the solid. For commercial processes such as those mentioned in the introduction, perovskite catalysts have not yet proven to be practical. Much of the initial interest in these catalysts related to their use in automobile exhaust control. Current interest in this field centers on noble metalsubstituted perovskites resistant to S poisoning for single-bed, dual-bed, and three-way catalyst configurations. The formulations commercially tested to date have shown considerable promise, but long-term stability has not yet been achieved. A very large fraction of the elements that make up presently used commercial catalysts can be incorporated in the structure of perovskite oxides. Conversely, it is anticipated that perovskite oxides, appropriately formulated, will show catalytic activity for a large variety of chemical conversions. Even though this expectation is by no means a prediction of commercial success in the face of competition by existing catalyst systems, it makes these oxides attractive models in the study of catalytic chemical conversion. By appropriate formulation many desirable properties can be tailored, including the valence state of transition metal ions, the binding energy and diffusion of O in the lattice, the distance between active sites, and the magnetic and conductive properties of the solid. Only a very small fraction of possible perovskite formulations have been explored as catalysts. It is expected that further investigation will greatly expand the scope of perovskite catalysis, extend the understanding of solid-state parameters in catalysis, and contribute to the development of practical catalytic processes.
The equilibrium proton distribution and tunneling rate in the N-H. . . N hydrogen bond of the guanine-cytosine base pair have been calculated quantum mechanically for the ground state, a charge-transfer excited state, and positive and negative ionic states. These results are consistent with the idea that tautomeric rearrangement can be a cause of radiation induced mutation or carcinogenesis.
Chlorophylls are essential for light-harvesting and energy transduction in photosynthesis. Four chemically distinct varieties have been known for the past 60 years. Here we report isolation of a fifth, which we designate chlorophyll f. Its in vitro absorption (706 nanometers) and fluorescence (722 nanometers) maxima are red-shifted compared to all other chlorophylls from oxygenic phototrophs. On the basis of the optical, mass, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra, we propose that chlorophyll f is [2-formyl]-chlorophyll a (C55H70O6N4Mg). This finding suggests that oxygenic photosynthesis can be extended further into the infrared region and may open associated bioenergy applications.
A flame retardant used in children's sleepwear, tris-(1,3-dichloro-2-propyl)phosphate (Fyrol FR2) is a mutagen in the Salmonella-mammalian tissue homogenate test after it has been activated by mouse or rat liver homogenate. The expected enzymatic hydrolysis product, 1,3-dichloro-2-propanol, is similarly a mutagen after activation by liver homogenate. A proposed metabolite of the flame retardant, 1,3-dichloro-2-propanone, is a potent mutagen in the absence of such activation. A flame retardant with similar structure, tris-(2,3-dibromopropyl)phosphate (tris-BP), was shown previously to be a mutagen, to cause sterility in animals, to be a carcinogen, and to be absorbed through human skin. These and other flame retardants have characteristic nuclear magnetic resonance spectra that can be used to determine which flame retardant is present in commercially purchased sleepwear. Sleepwear treated with tris-BP, Fyrol FR2, and other chemical additives was being sold in late 1977.
The far-infrared region (wavelengths in the range 10 microm-1 mm) is one of the richest areas of spectroscopic research, encompassing the rotational spectra of molecules and vibrational spectra of solids, liquids and gases. But studies in this spectral region are hampered by the absence of sensitive detectors--despite recent efforts to improve superconducting bolometers, attainable sensitivities are currently far below the level of single-photon detection. This is in marked contrast to the visible and near-infrared regions (wavelengths shorter than about 1.5 microm), in which single-photon counting is possible using photomultiplier tubes. Here we report the detection of single far-infrared photons in the wavelength range 175-210 microm (6.0-7.1 meV), using a single-electron transistor consisting of a semiconductor quantum dot in high magnetic field. We detect, with a time resolution of a millisecond, an incident flux of 0.1 photons per second on an effective detector area of 0.1 mm2--a sensitivity that exceeds previously reported values by a factor of more than 10(4). The sensitivity is a consequence of the unconventional detection mechanism, in which one absorbed photon leads to a current of 10(6)-10(12) electrons through the quantum dot. By contrast, mechanisms of conventional detectors or photon assisted tunnelling in single-electron transistors produce only a few electrons per incident photon.
Detection of weak magnetic fields with nanoscale spatial resolution is an outstanding problem in the biological and physical sciences. For example, at a distance of 10 nm, the spin of a single electron produces a magnetic field of about 1 muT, and the corresponding field from a single proton is a few nanoteslas. A sensor able to detect such magnetic fields with nanometre spatial resolution would enable powerful applications, ranging from the detection of magnetic resonance signals from individual electron or nuclear spins in complex biological molecules to readout of classical or quantum bits of information encoded in an electron or nuclear spin memory. Here we experimentally demonstrate an approach to such nanoscale magnetic sensing, using coherent manipulation of an individual electronic spin qubit associated with a nitrogen-vacancy impurity in diamond at room temperature. Using an ultra-pure diamond sample, we achieve detection of 3 nT magnetic fields at kilohertz frequencies after 100 s of averaging. In addition, we demonstrate a sensitivity of 0.5 muT Hz(-1/2) for a diamond nanocrystal with a diameter of 30 nm.
Exposure of the head to pulse-modulated microwaves induces the perception of a sound. It has been hypothesized that the electromagnetic energy is converted to acoustic energy in the skull and then conducted through the bone. Dynamic time-averaged interferometric holography showed that the predicted motion of head tissue did not occur. An alternative locus for this hearing effect is suggested.
Quantum computers have the potential to perform certain computational tasks more efficiently than their classical counterparts. The Cirac-Zoller proposal for a scalable quantum computer is based on a string of trapped ions whose electronic states represent the quantum bits of information (or qubits). In this scheme, quantum logical gates involving any subset of ions are realized by coupling the ions through their collective quantized motion. The main experimental step towards realizing the scheme is to implement the controlled-NOT (CNOT) gate operation between two individual ions. The CNOT quantum logical gate corresponds to the XOR gate operation of classical logic that flips the state of a target bit conditioned on the state of a control bit. Here we implement a CNOT quantum gate according to the Cirac-Zoller proposal. In our experiment, two 40Ca+ ions are held in a linear Paul trap and are individually addressed using focused laser beams; the qubits are represented by superpositions of two long-lived electronic states. Our work relies on recently developed precise control of atomic phases and the application of composite pulse sequences adapted from nuclear magnetic resonance techniques.
The Kondo effect--a many-body phenomenon in condensed-matter physics involving the interaction between a localized spin and free electrons--was discovered in metals containing small amounts of magnetic impurities, although it is now recognized to be of fundamental importance in a wide class of correlated electron systems. In fabricated structures, the control of single, localized spins is of technological relevance for nanoscale electronics. Experiments have already demonstrated artificial realizations of isolated magnetic impurities at metallic surfaces, nanoscale magnets, controlled transitions between two-electron singlet and triplet states, and a tunable Kondo effect in semiconductor quantum dots. Here we report an unexpected Kondo effect in a few-electron quantum dot containing singlet and triplet spin states, whose energy difference can be tuned with a magnetic field. We observe the effect for an even number of electrons, when the singlet and triplet states are degenerate. The characteristic energy scale is much larger than in the ordinary spin-1/2 case.
Many interesting but practically intractable problems can be reduced to that of finding the ground state of a system of interacting spins; however, finding such a ground state remains computationally difficult. It is believed that the ground state of some naturally occurring spin systems can be effectively attained through a process called quantum annealing. If it could be harnessed, quantum annealing might improve on known methods for solving certain types of problem. However, physical investigation of quantum annealing has been largely confined to microscopic spins in condensed-matter systems. Here we use quantum annealing to find the ground state of an artificial Ising spin system comprising an array of eight superconducting flux quantum bits with programmable spin-spin couplings. We observe a clear signature of quantum annealing, distinguishable from classical thermal annealing through the temperature dependence of the time at which the system dynamics freezes. Our implementation can be configured in situ to realize a wide variety of different spin networks, each of which can be monitored as it moves towards a low-energy configuration. This programmable artificial spin network bridges the gap between the theoretical study of ideal isolated spin networks and the experimental investigation of bulk magnetic samples. Moreover, with an increased number of spins, such a system may provide a practical physical means to implement a quantum algorithm, possibly allowing more-effective approaches to solving certain classes of hard combinatorial optimization problems.
The cooperativity between binding of cell wall precursor analogs (ligands) to and antibiotic dimerization of the clinically important vancomycin group antibiotics was investigated by nuclear magnetic resonance. When dimerization was weak in the absence of a ligand, the increase in the dimerization constant in the presence of a ligand derived largely from changes associated with tightening of the dimer interface. When dimerization was strong in the absence of a ligand, the increase in the dimerization constant in the presence of a ligand derived largely from changes associated with tightening of the ligand-antibiotic interface. These results illustrate how, when a protein has a loose structure, the binding energy of another molecule to the protein can derive in part from changes occurring within the protein.
The properties of an interacting electron system depend on the electron correlations and the effective dimensionality. For example, Coulomb repulsion between electrons may inhibit, or completely block, conduction by intersite electron hopping, thereby determining whether a material is a metal or an insulator. Furthermore, correlation effects increase as the number of effective dimensions decreases; in three-dimensional systems, the low-energy electronic states behave as quasiparticles, whereas in one-dimensional systems, even weak interactions break the quasiparticles into collective excitations. Dimensionality is particularly important for exotic low-dimensional materials where one- or two-dimensional building blocks are loosely connected into a three-dimensional whole. Here we examine two such layered metallic systems with angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and electronic transport measurements, and we find a crossover in the number of effective dimensions from two to three with decreasing temperature. This is apparent from the observation that, in the direction perpendicular to the layers, the materials have an insulating character at high temperatures but become metal-like at low temperatures, whereas transport within the layers remains metallic over the whole temperature range. We propose that this change in effective dimensionality correlates with the presence of coherent quasiparticles within the layers.
Among the numerous types of architecture being explored for quantum computers are systems utilizing ion traps, in which quantum bits (qubits) are formed from the electronic states of trapped ions and coupled through the Coulomb interaction. Although the elementary requirements for quantum computation have been demonstrated in this system, there exist theoretical and technical obstacles to scaling up the approach to large numbers of qubits. Therefore, recent efforts have been concentrated on using quantum communication to link a number of small ion-trap quantum systems. Developing the array-based approach, we show how to achieve massively parallel gate operation in a large-scale quantum computer, based on techniques already demonstrated for manipulating small quantum registers. The use of decoherence-free subspaces significantly reduces decoherence during ion transport, and removes the requirement of clock synchronization between the interaction regions.
Although 248-nanometer radiation falls 0.12 electron volt short of the energy needed to dissociate O(2) large densities of ozone (O(3)) can be produced from unfocused 248-nanometer KrF excimer laser irradiation of pure O(2). The process is initiated in some undefined manner, possibly through weak two-photon O(2) dissociation, which results in a small amount of O(3) being generated. As soon as any O(3) is present, it strongly absorbs the 248-nanometer radiation and dissociates to vibrationally excited ground state O(2) (among other products), with a quantum yield of 0.1 to 0.15. During the laser pulse, a portion of these molecules absorb a photon and dissociate, which results in the production of three oxygen atoms for one O(3) molecule destroyed. Recombination then converts these atoms to O(3), and thus O(3) production in the system is autocatalytic. A deficiency exists in current models of O(3) photochemistry in the upper stratosphere and mesosphere, in that more O(3) iS found than can be explained. A detailed analysis of the system as it applies to the upper atmosphere is not yet possible, but with reasonable assumptions about O(2) vibrational distributions resulting from O(3) photodissociation and about relaxation rates of vibrationally excited O(2) a case can be made for the importance of incuding this mechanism in the models.
A magnetic field penetrates a superconductor through an array of 'vortices', each of which carries one quantum of flux that is surrounded by a circulating supercurrent. In this vortex state, the resistivity is determined by the dynamical properties of the vortex 'matter'. For the high-temperature copper oxide superconductors (see ref.1 for a theoretical review), the vortex phase can be a 'solid', in which the vortices are pinned, but the solid can 'melt' into a 'liquid' phase, in which their mobility gives rise to a finite resistance. (This melting phenomenon is also believed to occur in conventional superconductors, but in an experimentally inaccessible part of the phase diagram.) For the case of YBa2Cu3O7, there are indications of the existence of a critical point, at which the character of the melting changes. But neither the thermodynamic nature of the melting, nor the phase diagram in the vicinity of the critical point, has been well established. Here we report measurements of specific heat and magnetization that determine the phase diagram in this material to 26 T, well above the critical point. Our results reveal the presence of a reversible second-order transition above the critical point. An unusual feature of this transition-namely, that the high-temperature phase is the less symmetric in the sense of the Landau theory-is in accord with theoretical predictions of a transition to a second vortex-liquid phase.
Studies of chemisorption phenomena, the cornerstone of heterogeneous catalysis, have become the central part of contemporary surface science. As a result of the great variety of the available experimental techniques, a backlog of information, some of which conflicts with current theoretical constructs, has accumulated. New models that combine analytical and computational facets have now begun to appear, revealing intrinsic relations among seemingly disparate chemisorption phenomena. Among the major findings are (i) the crucial role of antibonding adsorbate orbitals in bond activation and in the heat of chemisorption, (ii) adsorbate-induced surface polarization leading to a decrease of the metal work function and to an increase of the surface core binding energy, and (iii) important differences between atomic and molecular adsorbate modes of bonding and surface migration.
Single spins in solid-state systems are often considered prime candidates for the storage of quantum information, and their interaction with the environment the main limiting factor for the realization of such schemes. The lifetime of an excited spin state is a sensitive measure of this interaction, but extending the spatial resolution of spin relaxation measurements to the atomic scale has been a challenge. We show how a scanning tunneling microscope can measure electron spin relaxation times of individual atoms adsorbed on a surface using an all-electronic pump-probe measurement scheme. The spin relaxation times of individual Fe-Cu dimers were found to vary between 50 and 250 nanoseconds. Our method can in principle be generalized to monitor the temporal evolution of other dynamical systems.
Optical data are reported on a spectral weight transfer over a broad frequency range of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta, when this material became superconducting. Using spectroscopic ellipsometry, we observed the removal of a small amount of spectral weight in a broad frequency band from 10(4) cm(-1) to at least 2 x 10(4) cm(-1), due to the onset of superconductivity. We observed a blue shift of the ab-plane plasma frequency when the material became superconducting, indicating that the spectral weight was transferred to the infrared range. Our observations are in agreement with models in which superconductivity is accompanied by an increased charge carrier spectral weight. The measured spectral weight transfer is large enough to account for the condensation energy in these compounds.
Patterning matter on the nanometre scale is an important objective of current materials chemistry and physics. It is driven by both the need to further miniaturize electronic components and the fact that at the nanometre scale, materials properties are strongly size-dependent and thus can be tuned sensitively. In nanoscale crystals, quantum size effects and the large number of surface atoms influence the, chemical, electronic, magnetic and optical behaviour. 'Top-down' (for example, lithographic) methods for nanoscale manipulation reach only to the upper end of the nanometre regime; but whereas 'bottom-up' wet chemical techniques allow for the preparation of mono-disperse, defect-free crystallites just 1-10 nm in size, ways to control the structure of nanocrystal assemblies are scarce. Here we describe a strategy for the synthesis of 'nanocrystal molecules', in which discrete numbers of gold nanocrystals are organized into spatially defined structures based on Watson-Crick base-pairing interactions. We attach single-stranded DNA oligonucleotides of defined length and sequence to individual nanocrystals, and these assemble into dimers and trimers on addition of a complementary single-stranded DNA template. We anticipate that this approach should allow the construction of more complex two- and three-dimensional assemblies.
We used a hybrid vertical-lateral double-dot device, consisting of laterally coupled vertical quantum dots, to measure the interdot tunnel coupling. By using nonlinear transport measurements of "Coulomb diamonds," we showed that an inherent asymmetry in the capacitances of the component dots influences the diamond slopes, thereby allowing for the determination of the dot through which the electron has passed. We used this technique to prepare a delocalized one-electron state and Heitler-London (HL) two-electron state, and we showed that the interdot tunnel coupling, which determines whether HL is the ground state, is tunable. This implies that our device may be useful for implementing two-electron spin entanglement.
Individual quantum dots are often referred to as "artificial atoms." Two tunnel-coupled quantum dots can be considered an "artificial molecule." Low-temperature measurements were made on a series double quantum dot with adjustable interdot tunnel conductance that was fabricated in a gallium arsenide-aluminum gallium arsenide heterostructure. The Coulomb blockade was used to determine the ground-state charge configuration within the "molecule" as a function of the total charge on the double dot and the interdot polarization induced by electrostatic gates. As the tunnel conductance between the two dots is increased from near zero to 2e2/h (where e is the electron charge and h is Planck's constant), the measured conductance peaks of the double dot exhibit pronounced changes in agreement with many-body theory.
Magnetic reconnection in a current sheet converts magnetic energy into particle energy, a process that is important in many laboratory, space and astrophysical contexts. It is not known at present whether reconnection is fundamentally a process that can occur over an extended region in space or whether it is patchy and unpredictable in nature. Frequent reports of small-scale flux ropes and flow channels associated with reconnection in the Earth's magnetosphere raise the possibility that reconnection is intrinsically patchy, with each reconnection X-line (the line along which oppositely directed magnetic field lines reconnect) extending at most a few Earth radii (R(E)), even though the associated current sheets span many tens or hundreds of R(E). Here we report three-spacecraft observations of accelerated flow associated with reconnection in a current sheet embedded in the solar wind flow, where the reconnection X-line extended at least 390R(E) (or 2.5 x 10(6) km). Observations of this and 27 similar events imply that reconnection is fundamentally a large-scale process. Patchy reconnection observed in the Earth's magnetosphere is therefore likely to be a geophysical effect associated with fluctuating boundary conditions, rather than a fundamental property of reconnection. Our observations also reveal, surprisingly, that reconnection can operate in a quasi-steady-state manner even when undriven by the external flow.
The realization of high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) superconductivity confined to nanometre-sized interfaces has been a long-standing goal because of potential applications and the opportunity to study quantum phenomena in reduced dimensions. This has been, however, a challenging target: in conventional metals, the high electron density restricts interface effects (such as carrier depletion or accumulation) to a region much narrower than the coherence length, which is the scale necessary for superconductivity to occur. By contrast, in copper oxides the carrier density is low whereas T(c) is high and the coherence length very short, which provides an opportunity-but at a price: the interface must be atomically perfect. Here we report superconductivity in bilayers consisting of an insulator (La(2)CuO(4)) and a metal (La(1.55)Sr(0.45)CuO(4)), neither of which is superconducting in isolation. In these bilayers, T(c) is either approximately 15 K or approximately 30 K, depending on the layering sequence. This highly robust phenomenon is confined within 2-3 nm of the interface. If such a bilayer is exposed to ozone, T(c) exceeds 50 K, and this enhanced superconductivity is also shown to originate from an interface layer about 1-2 unit cells thick. Enhancement of T(c) in bilayer systems was observed previously but the essential role of the interface was not recognized at the time.
Activation of a visual pigment molecule to initiate phototransduction requires a minimum energy, Ea, that need not be wholly derived from a photon, but may be supplemented by heat. Theory predicts that absorbance at very long wavelengths declines with the fraction of molecules that have a sufficient complement of thermal energy, and that Ea is inversely related to the wavelength of maximum absorbance (lambda(max)) of the pigment. Consistent with the first of these predictions, warming increases relative visual sensitivity to long wavelengths. Here we measure this effect in amphibian photoreceptors with different pigments to estimate Ea (refs 2, 5-7) and test experimentally the predictions of an inverse relation between Ea and lambda(max). For rods and 'red' cones in the adult frog retina, we find no significant difference in Ea between the two pigments involved, although their lambda(max) values are very different. We also determined Ea for the rhodopsin in toad retinal rods--spectrally similar to frog rhodopsin but differing in amino-acid sequence--and found that it was significantly higher. In addition, we estimated Ea for two pigments whose lambda(max) difference was due only to a chromophore difference (A1 and A2 pigment, in adult and larval frog cones). Here Ea for A2 was lower than for A1. Our results refute the idea of a necessary relation between lambda(max) and Ea, but show that the A1 --> A2 chromophore substitution decreases Ea.
Self-amplified spontaneous emission in a free-electron laser has been proposed for the generation of very high brightness coherent x-rays. This process involves passing a high-energy, high-charge, short-pulse, low-energy-spread, and low-emittance electron beam through the periodic magnetic field of a long series of high-quality undulator magnets. The radiation produced grows exponentially in intensity until it reaches a saturation point. We report on the demonstration of self-amplified spontaneous emission gain, exponential growth, and saturation at visible (530 nanometers) and ultraviolet (385 nanometers) wavelengths. Good agreement between theory and simulation indicates that scaling to much shorter wavelengths may be possible. These results confirm the physics behind the self-amplified spontaneous emission process and forward the development of an operational x-ray free-electron laser.
We report the observation of magnetic superstructure in a magnetization plateau state of SrCu2(BO3)2, a frustrated quasi-two-dimensional quantum spin system. The Cu and B nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra at 35 millikelvin indicate an apparently discontinuous phase transition from uniform magnetization to a modulated superstructure near 27 tesla, above which a magnetization plateau at 1/8 of the full saturation has been observed. Comparison of the Cu NMR spectrum and the theoretical analysis of a Heisenberg spin model demonstrates the crystallization of itinerant triplets in the plateau phase within a large rhomboid unit cell (16 spins per layer) showing oscillations of the spin polarization. Thus, we are now in possession of an interesting model system to study a localization transition of strongly interacting quantum particles.
Rhodopsin has been selectively spin-labeled near the cytoplasmic termini of helices C and G. Photoactivation with a light flash induces an electron paramagnetic resonance spectral change in the millisecond time domain, coincident with the appearance of the active metarhodopsin II intermediate. The spectral change is consistent with a small movement near the cytoplasmic termination of the C helix and reverses upon formation of the MIII state. These results provide an important link between the optical changes associated with the retinal chromophore and protein conformational states.
Exchange-spring magnets are nanocomposites that are composed of magnetically hard and soft phases that interact by magnetic exchange coupling. Such systems are promising for advanced permanent magnetic applications, as they have a large energy product--the combination of permanent magnet field and magnetization--compared to traditional, single-phase materials. Conventional techniques, including melt-spinning, mechanical milling and sputtering, have been explored to prepare exchange-spring magnets. However, the requirement that both the hard and soft phases are controlled at the nanometre scale, to ensure efficient exchange coupling, has posed significant preparation challenges. Here we report the fabrication of exchange-coupled nanocomposites using nanoparticle self-assembly. In this approach, both FePt and Fe3O4 particles are incorporated as nanometre-scale building blocks into binary assemblies. Subsequent annealing converts the assembly into FePt-Fe3Pt nanocomposites, where FePt is a magnetically hard phase and Fe3Pt a soft phase. An optimum exchange coupling, and therefore an optimum energy product, can be obtained by independently tuning the size and composition of the individual building blocks. We have produced exchange-coupled isotropic FePt-Fe3Pt nanocomposites with an energy product of 20.1 MG Oe, which exceeds the theoretical limit of 13 MG Oe for non-exchange-coupled isotropic FePt by over 50 per cent.
Excitations in complex media are superpositions of eigenstates that are referred to as 'levels' for quantum systems and 'modes' for classical waves. Although the Hamiltonian of a complex system may not be known or solvable, Wigner conjectured that the statistics of energy level spacings would be the same as for the eigenvalues of large random matrices. This has explained key characteristics of neutron scattering spectra. Subsequently, Thouless and co-workers argued that the metal-insulator transition in disordered systems could be described by a single parameter, the ratio of the average width and spacing of electronic energy levels: when this dimensionless ratio falls below unity, conductivity is suppressed by Anderson localization of the electronic wavefunction. However, because of spectral congestion due to the overlap of modes, even for localized waves, a comprehensive modal description of wave propagation has not been realized. Here we show that the field speckle pattern of transmitted radiation--in this case, a microwave field transmitted through randomly packed alumina spheres--can be decomposed into a sum of the patterns of the individual modes of the medium and the central frequency and linewidth of each mode can be found. We find strong correlation between modal field speckle patterns, which leads to destructive interference between modes. This allows us to explain complexities of steady state and pulsed transmission of localized waves and to harmonize wave and particle descriptions of diffusion.
Supernovae connected with long-duration gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are hyper-energetic explosions resulting from the collapse of very massive stars ( approximately 40 M\circ, where M\circ is the mass of the Sun) stripped of their outer hydrogen and helium envelopes. A very massive progenitor, collapsing to a black hole, was thought to be a requirement for the launch of a GRB. Here we report the results of modelling the spectra and light curve of SN 2006aj (ref. 9), which demonstrate that the supernova had a much smaller explosion energy and ejected much less mass than the other GRB-supernovae, suggesting that it was produced by a star whose initial mass was only approximately 20 M\circ. A star of this mass is expected to form a neutron star rather than a black hole when its core collapses. The smaller explosion energy of SN 2006aj is matched by the weakness and softness of GRB 060218 (an X-ray flash), and the weakness of the radio flux of the supernova. Our results indicate that the supernova-GRB connection extends to a much broader range of stellar masses than previously thought, possibly involving different physical mechanisms: a 'collapsar' (ref. 8) for the more massive stars collapsing to a black hole, and magnetic activity of the nascent neutron star for the less massive stars.
The recently discovered superconductor magnesium diboride, MgB2, has a transition temperature, Tc, approaching 40 K, placing it intermediate between the families of low- and high-temperature superconductors. In practical applications, superconductors are permeated by quantized vortices of magnetic flux. When a supercurrent flows, there is dissipation of energy unless these vortices are 'pinned' in some way, and so inhibited from moving under the influence of the Lorentz force. Such vortex motion ultimately determines the critical current density, Jc, which the superconductor can support. Vortex behaviour has proved to be more complicated in high-temperature superconductors than in low-temperature superconductors and, although this has stimulated extensive theoretical and experimental research, it has also impeded applications. Here we describe the vortex behaviour in MgB2, as reflected in Jc and in the vortex creep rate, S, the latter being a measure of how fast the 'persistent' supercurrents decay. Our results show that naturally occurring grain boundaries are highly transparent to supercurrents, a desirable property which contrasts with the behaviour of the high-temperature superconductors. On the other hand, we observe a steep, practically deleterious decline in Jc with increasing magnetic field, which is likely to reflect the high degree of crystalline perfection in our samples, and hence a low vortex pinning energy.
Artificial ferritin has been synthesized with control of both the magnetic state (antiferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic) and the particle size over an ofer of magnitude in the number of iron atoms. The magnetic properties of the artificial ferritin were compared with those of natural horse spleen ferritin in a range of temperatures (20 millikelvin to 300 kelvin) and fields (1 nanotesla to 27 tesla). In the classical regime, the blocking temperature was found to correlate with the average particle size. A correlation was also observed in the quantum regime between the resonance frequency of macroscopic quantum tunneling of the Neel vector and the particle size. At high magnetic fields (to 27 tesla), a spin flop transition with a strong dependence on orientation was seen in the natural ferritin, providing evidence of antiferromagnetism in this system.
Degenerate exciton systems have been produced in quasi-two-dimensional confined areas in semiconductor coupled quantum well structures. We observed contractions of clouds containing tens of thousands of excitons within areas as small as (10 micron)2 near 10 kelvin. The spatial and energy distributions of optically active excitons were determined by measuring photoluminescence as a function of temperature and laser excitation and were used as thermodynamic quantities to construct the phase diagram of the exciton system, which demonstrates the existence of distinct phases. Understanding the formation mechanisms of these degenerate exciton systems can open new opportunities for the realization of Bose-Einstein condensation in the solid state.
High-resolution electron microscopy and lithium-7 nuclear magnetic resonance measurements were carried out for a disordered carbon material, prepared by heat treatment of polyphenylene, in which lithium was stored electrochemically. The nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum suggests the existence of Li(2) covalent molecules in the carbon material. This extra covalent site of lithium storage promises extraordinarily high energy density for secondary batteries.
Fermi-liquid theory (the standard model of metals) has been challenged by the discovery of anomalous properties in an increasingly large number of metals. The anomalies often occur near a quantum critical point--a continuous phase transition in the limit of absolute zero, typically between magnetically ordered and paramagnetic phases. Although not understood in detail, unusual behaviour in the vicinity of such quantum critical points was anticipated nearly three decades ago by theories going beyond the standard model. Here we report electrical resistivity measurements of the 3d metal MnSi, indicating an unexpected breakdown of the Fermi-liquid model--not in a narrow crossover region close to a quantum critical point where it is normally expected to fail, but over a wide region of the phase diagram near a first-order magnetic transition. In this regime, corrections to the Fermi-liquid model are expected to be small. The range in pressure, temperature and applied magnetic field over which we observe an anomalous temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity in MnSi is not consistent with the crossover behaviour widely seen in quantum critical systems. This may suggest the emergence of a well defined but enigmatic quantum phase of matter.
The study of chemical reactions on the molecular (femtosecond) timescale typically uses pump laser pulses to excite molecules and subsequent probe pulses to interrogate them. The ultrashort pump pulse can excite only a small fraction of molecules, and the probe wavelength must be carefully chosen to discriminate between excited and unexcited molecules. The past decade has seen the emergence of new methods that are also aimed at imaging chemical reactions as they occur, based on X-ray diffraction, electron diffraction or laser-induced recollision--with spectral selection not available for any of these new methods. Here we show that in the case of high-harmonic spectroscopy based on recollision, this apparent limitation becomes a major advantage owing to the coherent nature of the attosecond high-harmonic pulse generation. The coherence allows the unexcited molecules to act as local oscillators against which the dynamics are observed, so a transient grating technique can be used to reconstruct the amplitude and phase of emission from the excited molecules. We then extract structural information from the amplitude, which encodes the internuclear separation, by quantum interference at short times and by scattering of the recollision electron at longer times. The phase records the attosecond dynamics of the electrons, giving access to the evolving ionization potentials and the electronic structure of the transient molecule. In our experiment, we are able to document a temporal shift of the high-harmonic field of less than an attosecond (1 as = 10(-18) s) between the stretched and compressed geometry of weakly vibrationally excited Br(2) in the electronic ground state. The ability to probe structural and electronic features, combined with high time resolution, make high-harmonic spectroscopy ideally suited to measuring coupled electronic and nuclear dynamics occurring in photochemical reactions and to characterizing the electronic structure of transition states.
The low-energy charged particle instrument on Voyager 2 measured low-energy electrons and ions (energies greater, similar 22 and greater, similar 28 kiloelectron volts, respectively) in Saturn's magnetosphere. The magnetosphere structure and particle population were modified from those observed during the Voyager 1 encounter in November 1980 but in a manner consistent with the same global morphology. Major results include the following. (i) A region containing an extremely hot ( approximately 30 to 50 kiloelectron volts) plasma was identified and extends from the orbit of Tethys outward past the orbit of Rhea. (ii) The low-energy ion mantle found by Voyager 1 to extend approximately 7 Saturn radii inside the dayside magnetosphere was again observed on Voyager 2, but it was considerably hotter ( approximately 30 kiloelectron volts), and there was an indication of a cooler ( < 20 kiloelectron volts) ion mantle on the nightside. (iii) At energies greater, similar 200 kiloelectron volts per nucleon, H(1), H(2), and H(3) (molecular hydrogen), helium, carbon, and oxygen are important constituents in the Saturnian magnetosphere. The presence of both H(2) and H(3) suggests that the Saturnian ionosphere feeds plasma into the magnetosphere, but relative abundances of the energetic helium, carbon, and oxygen ions are consistent with a solar wind origin. (iv) Low-energy ( approximately 22 to approximately 60 kiloelectron volts) electron flux enhancements observed between the L shells of Rhea and Tethys by Voyager 2 on the dayside were absent during the Voyager 1 encounter. (v) Persistent asymmetric pitch-angle distributions of electrons of 60 to 200 kiloelectron volts occur in the outer magnetosphere in conjunction with the hot ion plasma torus. (vi) The spacecraft passed within approximately 1.1 degrees in longitude of the Tethys flux tube outbound and observed it to be empty of energetic ions and electrons; the microsignature of Enceladus inbound was also observed. (vii) There are large fluxes of electrons of approximately 1.5 million electron volts and smaller fluxes of electrons of approximately 10 million electron volts and of protons greater, similar 54 million electron volts inside the orbits of Enceladus and Mimas; all were sharply peaked perpendicular to the local magnetic field. (viii) In general, observed satellite absorption signatures were not located at positions predicted on the basis of dipole magnetic field models.
Helical Dirac fermions-charge carriers that behave as massless relativistic particles with an intrinsic angular momentum (spin) locked to its translational momentum-are proposed to be the key to realizing fundamentally new phenomena in condensed matter physics. Prominent examples include the anomalous quantization of magneto-electric coupling, half-fermion states that are their own antiparticle, and charge fractionalization in a Bose-Einstein condensate, all of which are not possible with conventional Dirac fermions of the graphene variety. Helical Dirac fermions have so far remained elusive owing to the lack of necessary spin-sensitive measurements and because such fermions are forbidden to exist in conventional materials harbouring relativistic electrons, such as graphene or bismuth. It has recently been proposed that helical Dirac fermions may exist at the edges of certain types of topologically ordered insulators-materials with a bulk insulating gap of spin-orbit origin and surface states protected against scattering by time-reversal symmetry-and that their peculiar properties may be accessed provided the insulator is tuned into the so-called topological transport regime. However, helical Dirac fermions have not been observed in existing topological insulators. Here we report the realization and characterization of a tunable topological insulator in a bismuth-based class of material by combining spin-imaging and momentum-resolved spectroscopies, bulk charge compensation, Hall transport measurements and surface quantum control. Our results reveal a spin-momentum locked Dirac cone carrying a non-trivial Berry's phase that is nearly 100 per cent spin-polarized, which exhibits a tunable topological fermion density in the vicinity of the Kramers point and can be driven to the long-sought topological spin transport regime. The observed topological nodal state is shown to be protected even up to 300 K. Our demonstration of room-temperature topological order and non-trivial spin-texture in stoichiometric Bi(2)Se(3).M(x) (M(x) indicates surface doping or gating control) paves the way for future graphene-like studies of topological insulators, and applications of the observed spin-polarized edge channels in spintronic and computing technologies possibly at room temperature.
Although it is generally accepted that superconductivity is unconventional in the high-transition-temperature copper oxides, the relative importance of phenomena such as spin and charge (stripe) order, superconductivity fluctuations, proximity to a Mott insulator, a pseudogap phase and quantum criticality are still a matter of debate. In electron-doped copper oxides, the absence of an anomalous pseudogap phase in the underdoped region of the phase diagram and weaker electron correlations suggest that Mott physics and other unidentified competing orders are less relevant and that antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations are the dominant feature. Here we report a study of magnetotransport in thin films of the electron-doped copper oxide La(2 - x)Ce(x)CuO(4). We show that a scattering rate that is linearly dependent on temperature--a key feature of the anomalous normal state properties of the copper oxides--is correlated with the electron pairing. We also show that an envelope of such scattering surrounds the superconducting phase, surviving to zero temperature when superconductivity is suppressed by magnetic fields. Comparison with similar behaviour found in organic superconductors strongly suggests that the linear dependence on temperature of the resistivity in the electron-doped copper oxides is caused by spin-fluctuation scattering.
The cyclotron frequency of a charged particle in a uniform magnetic field B is related to its mass m and charge q by the relationship omega(c) = qB/m. This simple relationship forms the basis for sensitive mass comparisons using ion cyclotron resonance mass spectroscopy, with applications ranging from the identification of biomolecules and the study of chemical reaction rates to determinations of the fine structure constant of atomic spectra. Here we report the observation of a deviation from the cyclotron frequency relationship for polarizable particles: in high-accuracy measurements of a single CO+ ion, a dipole induced in the orbiting ion shifts the measured cyclotron frequency. We use this cyclotron frequency shift to measure non-destructively the quantum state of the CO+ ion. The effect also provides a means to determine to a few per cent the body-frame dipole moment of CO+, thus establishing a method for measuring dipole moments of molecular ions for which few comparably accurate measurements exist. The general perturbation that we describe here affects the most precise mass comparisons attainable today, with applications including direct tests of Einstein's mass-energy relationship and charge-parity-time reversal symmetry, and possibly the weighing of chemical bonds.
A semiconductor injection laser that differs in a fundamental way from diode lasers has been demonstrated. It is built out of quantum semiconductor structures that were grown by molecular beam epitaxy and designed by band structure engineering. Electrons streaming down a potential staircase sequentially emit photons at the steps. The steps consist of coupled quantum wells in which population inversion between discrete conduction band excited states is achieved by control of tunneling. A strong narrowing of the emission spectrum, above threshold, provides direct evidence of laser action at a wavelength of 4.2 micrometers with peak powers in excess of 8 milliwatts in pulsed operation. In quantum cascade lasers, the wavelength, entirely determined by quantum confinement, can be tailored from the mid-infrared to the submillimeter wave region in the same heterostructure material.
Reversible electrochemical injection of discrete numbers of electrons into sterically stabilized silicon nanocrystals (NCs) (approximately 2 to 4 nanometers in diameter) was observed by differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) in N,N'-dimethylformamide and acetonitrile. The electrochemical gap between the onset of electron injection and hole injection-related to the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals-grew with decreasing nanocrystal size, and the DPV peak potentials above the onset for electron injection roughly correspond to expected Coulomb blockade or quantized double-layer charging energies. Electron transfer reactions between positively and negatively charged nanocrystals (or between charged nanocrystals and molecular redox-active coreactants) occurred that led to electron and hole annihilation, producing visible light. The electrogenerated chemiluminescence spectra exhibited a peak maximum at 640 nanometers, a significant red shift from the photoluminescence maximum (420 nanometers) of the same silicon NC solution. These results demonstrate that the chemical stability of silicon NCs could enable their use as redox-active macromolecular species with the combined optical and charging properties of semiconductor quantum dots.
The electronic spectra of carbon nanotubes and other nanoscale systems are quantized because of their small radii. Similar quantization in the phonon spectra has been difficult to observe because of the far smaller energy scale. We probed this regime by measuring the temperature-dependent specific heat of purified single-wall nanotubes. The data show direct evidence of one-dimensional quantized phonon subbands. Above 4 kelvin, they are in excellent agreement with model calculations of individual nanotubes and differ markedly from the specific heat of two-dimensional graphene or three-dimensional graphite. Detailed modeling yields an energy of 4.3 millielectron volts for the lowest quantized phonon subband and a tube-tube (or "lattice") Debye energy of 1.1 millielectron volts, implying a small intertube coupling in bundles.
The Earth's radiation belts--also known as the Van Allen belts--contain high-energy electrons trapped on magnetic field lines. The centre of the outer belt is usually 20,000-25,000 km from Earth. The region between the belts is normally devoid of particles, and is accordingly favoured as a location for spacecraft operation because of the benign environment. Here we report that the outer Van Allen belt was compressed dramatically by a solar storm known as the 'Hallowe'en storm' of 2003. From 1 to 10 November, the outer belt had its centre only approximately 10,000 km from Earth's equatorial surface, and the plasmasphere was similarly displaced inwards. The region between the belts became the location of high particle radiation intensity. This remarkable deformation of the entire magnetosphere implies surprisingly powerful acceleration and loss processes deep within the magnetosphere.
The beryllium dimer is a deceptively simple molecule that, in spite of having only eight electrons, poses difficult challenges for ab initio quantum chemical methods. More than 100 theoretical investigations of the beryllium dimer have been published, reporting a wide range of bond lengths and dissociation energies. In contrast, there have been only a handful of experimental studies that provide data against which these models could be tested. Ultimately, the uncertain extrapolation behavior associated with the available data has prevented quantitative comparisons with theory. In our experiment, we resolve this issue by recording and analyzing spectra that sample all the bound vibrational levels of the beryllium dimer molecule's electronic ground state. After more than 70 years of research on this problem, the experimental data and theoretical models for the dimer are finally reconciled.
Nanoparticulate metals and semiconductors that have atomic arrangements at the interface of molecular clusters and "infinite" solid-state arrays of atoms have distinctive properties determined by the extent of confinement of highly delocalized valence electrons. At this interface, the total number of atoms and the geometrical disposition of each atom can be used to significantly modify the electronic and photonic response of the medium. In addition to teh novel inherent physical properties of the quantum-confined moieties, their "packaging" into nanocomposite bulk materials can be used to define the confinement surface states and environment, intercluster interactions, the quantum-confinement geometry, and the effective charge-carrier density of the bulk. Current approaches for generating nanostructures of conducting materials are briefly reviewed, especially the use of three-dimensional crystalline superlattices as hosts for quantum-confined semiconductor atom arrays (such as quantum wires and dots) with controlled inter-quantum-structure tunneling.
In the recent literature on nucleoside phosphorothioate anions the structural formulas show a double bond between phosphorus and sulfur and a single bond between phosphorus and oxygen with a negative charge localized on oxygen. However, a review of physical data on these compounds shows the reverse to be the case; that is, in phosphorothioate anions the P-S bond is a single bond with a negative charge localized on sulfur, while the P-O bond order for exocyclic and nonbridging oxygens is greater than 1, approaching 2 in O-alkyl phosphorothioate monoanions and O,O-dialkyl phosphorothioates. The P-O bond orders in phosphorothioate dianions and trianions approach 1 1/2 and 1 1/3, respectively, owing to delocalization of negative charge among two or three oxygens. These conclusions are based on bond lengths obtained from x-ray crystallographic data and electron diffraction, the magnitudes of the effects of 18O on the 31P-nuclear magnetic resonance chemical shifts of phosphorus in nucleoside [18O]phosphorothioates, the pH-dependence of 17O-NMR chemical shifts in [17O]phosphate and [17O]thiophosphate, the vibrational spectra of thiophosphate di- and trianions, and the pKa (dissociation constant) values for phosphoric and thiophosphoric acids.
A magnetic domain wall (DW) is a spatially localized change of magnetization configuration in a magnet. This topological object has been predicted to behave at low energy as a composite particle with finite mass. This particle will couple directly with electric currents as well as magnetic fields, and its manipulation using electric currents is of particular interest with regard to the development of high-density magnetic memories. The DW mass sets the ultimate operation speed of these devices, but has yet to be determined experimentally. Here we report the direct observation of the dynamics of a single DW in a ferromagnetic nanowire, which demonstrates that such a topological particle has a very small but finite mass of 6.6 x 10(-23) kg. This measurement was realized by preparing a tunable DW potential in the nanowire, and detecting the resonance motion of the DW induced by an oscillating current. The resonance also allows low-current operation, which is crucial in device applications; a DW displacement of 10 microm was induced by a current density of 10(10) A m(-2).
We describe preparation and magnetic properties of an organic pi-conjugated polymer with very large magnetic moment and magnetic order at low temperatures. The polymer is designed with a large density of cross-links and alternating connectivity of radical modules with unequal spin quantum numbers (S), macrocyclic S = 2 and, cross-linking S = (1/2) modules, which permits large net S values for either ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic exchange couplings between the modules. In the highly cross-linked polymer, an effective magnetic moment corresponding to an average S of about 5000 and slow reorientation of the magnetization by a small magnetic field (less than or equal to 1 oersted) below a temperature of about 10 kelvin are found. Qualitatively, this magnetic behavior is comparable to that of insulating spin glasses and blocked superparamagnets.
Regular mesoporous oxide materials have been widely studied and have a range of potential applications, such as catalysis, absorption and separation. They are not generally considered for their optical and electronic properties. Elemental semiconductors with nanopores running through them represent a different form of framework material with physical characteristics contrasting with those of the more conventional bulk, thin film and nanocrystalline forms. Here we describe cubic mesostructured germanium, MSU-Ge-1, with gyroidal channels containing surfactant molecules, separated by amorphous walls that lie on the gyroid (G) minimal surface as in the mesoporous silica MCM-48 (ref. 2). Although Ge is a high-melting, covalent semiconductor that is difficult to prepare from solution polymerization, we succeeded in assembling a continuous Ge network using a suitable precursor for Ge(4-) atoms. Our results indicate that elemental semiconductors from group 14 of the periodic table can be made to adopt mesostructured forms such as MSU-Ge-1, which features two three-dimensional labyrinthine tunnels obeying Ia3d space group symmetry and separated by a continuous germanium minimal surface that is otherwise amorphous. A consequence of this new structure for germanium, which has walls only one nanometre thick, is a wider electronic energy bandgap (1.4 eV versus 0.66 eV) than has crystalline or amorphous Ge. Controlled oxidation of MSU-Ge-1 creates a range of germanium suboxides with continuously varying Ge:O ratio and a smoothly increasing energy gap.
Destructive interference may lead to complete cancellation when light waves travelling in different directions cross, and in three-dimensional space this occurs along lines that are vortices of electromagnetic energy flow. Here we confirm theoretical predictions by experimentally creating combinations of optical laser beams in which these dark threads form stable loops that are linked and knotted.
Vortex beams (also known as beams with a phase singularity) consist of spiralling wavefronts that give rise to angular momentum around the propagation direction. Vortex photon beams are widely used in applications such as optical tweezers to manipulate micrometre-sized particles and in micro-motors to provide angular momentum, improving channel capacity in optical and radio-wave information transfer, astrophysics and so on. Very recently, an experimental realization of vortex beams formed of electrons was demonstrated. Here we describe the creation of vortex electron beams, making use of a versatile holographic reconstruction technique in a transmission electron microscope. This technique is a reproducible method of creating vortex electron beams in a conventional electron microscope. We demonstrate how they may be used in electron energy-loss spectroscopy to detect the magnetic state of materials and describe their properties. Our results show that electron vortex beams hold promise for new applications, in particular for analysing and manipulating nanomaterials, and can be easily produced.
Doped Mott insulators have a strong propensity to form patterns of holes and spins often referred to as stripes. In copper oxides, doping also gives rise to the pseudogap state, which can be transformed into a high-temperature superconducting state with sufficient doping or by reducing the temperature. A long-standing issue has been the interplay between the pseudogap, which is generic to all hole-doped copper oxide superconductors, and stripes, whose static form occurs in only one family of copper oxides over a narrow range of the phase diagram. Here we report observations of the spatial reorganization of electronic states with the onset of the pseudogap state in the high-temperature superconductor Bi(2)Sr(2)CaCu(2)O(8+x), using spectroscopic mapping with a scanning tunnelling microscope. We find that the onset of the pseudogap phase coincides with the appearance of electronic patterns that have the predicted characteristics of fluctuating stripes. As expected, the stripe patterns are strongest when the hole concentration in the CuO(2) planes is close to 1/8 (per copper atom). Although they demonstrate that the fluctuating stripes emerge with the onset of the pseudogap state and occur over a large part of the phase diagram, our experiments indicate that the stripes are a consequence of pseudogap behaviour rather than its cause.
Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy is a useful technique for the study of vibrational modes of molecules adsorbed on the surface of oxide layers in a metal-insulator-metal tunnel junction. The technique involves studying the effects of adsorbed molecules on the tunneling spectrum of such junctions. The data give useful information about the structure, bonding, and orientation of adsorbed molecules. One of the major advantages of inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy is its sensitivity. It is capable of detecting on the order of 10(10) molecules (a fraction of a monolayer) on a 1-square-millimeter junction. It has been successfully used in studies of catalysis, biology, trace impurity detection, and electronic excitations. Because of its high sensitivity, this technique shows great promise in the area of solid-state electronic chemical sensing.
The Toffoli gate is a three-quantum-bit (three-qubit) operation that inverts the state of a target qubit conditioned on the state of two control qubits. It makes universal reversible classical computation possible and, together with a Hadamard gate, forms a universal set of gates in quantum computation. It is also a key element in quantum error correction schemes. The Toffoli gate has been implemented in nuclear magnetic resonance, linear optics and ion trap systems. Experiments with superconducting qubits have also shown significant progress recently: two-qubit algorithms and two-qubit process tomography have been implemented, three-qubit entangled states have been prepared, first steps towards quantum teleportation have been taken and work on quantum computing architectures has been done. Implementation of the Toffoli gate with only single- and two-qubit gates requires six controlled-NOT gates and ten single-qubit operations, and has not been realized in any system owing to current limits on coherence. Here we implement a Toffoli gate with three superconducting transmon qubits coupled to a microwave resonator. By exploiting the third energy level of the transmon qubits, we have significantly reduced the number of elementary gates needed for the implementation of the Toffoli gate, relative to that required in theoretical proposals using only two-level systems. Using full process tomography and Monte Carlo process certification, we completely characterize the Toffoli gate acting on three independent qubits, measuring a fidelity of 68.5 +- 0.5 per cent. A similar approach to realizing characteristic features of a Toffoli-class gate has been demonstrated with two qubits and a resonator and achieved a limited characterization considering only the phase fidelity. Our results reinforce the potential of macroscopic superconducting qubits for the implementation of complex quantum operations with the possibility of quantum error correction.
The low-energy charged particle instrument on Voyager was designed to measure the hot plasma (electron and ion energies greater, similar 15 and greater, similar 30 kiloelectron volts, respectively) component of the Jovian magnetosphere. Protons, heavier ions, and electrons at these energies were detected nearly a third of an astronomical unit before encounter with the planet. The hot plasma near the magnetosphere boundary is predominantly composed of protons, oxygen, and sulfur in comparable proportions and a nonthermal power-law tail; its temperature is about 3 x 10(8) K, density about 5 x 10(-3) per cubic centimeter, and energy density comparable to that of the magnetic field. The plasma appears to be corotating throughout the magnetosphere; no hot plasma outflow, as suggested by planetary wind theories, is observed. The main constituents of the energetic particle population ( greater, similar200 kiloelectron volts per nucleon) are protons, helium, oxygen, sulfur, and some sodium observed throughout the outer magnetosphere; it is probable that the sulfur, sodium, and possibly oxygen originate at 1o. Fluxes in the outbound trajectory appear to be enhancedfrom approximately 90 degrees to approximately 130 degrees longitude (System III). Consistent low-energy particle flux periodicities were not observed on the inbound trajectory; both 5-and 10-hour periodicities were observed on the outbound trajectory. Partial absorption of > 10 million electron volts electrons is observed in the vicinity of the Io flux tube.
More than 100 years ago, Hertz succeeded in transmitting signals over a few metres to a receiving antenna using an electromagnetic oscillator, thus proving the electromagnetic theory developed by Maxwell. Since this seminal work, technology has developed, and various oscillators are now available at the quantum mechanical level. For quantized electromagnetic oscillations, atoms in cavities can be used to couple electric fields. However, a quantum mechanical link between two mechanical oscillators (such as cantilevers or the vibrational modes of trapped atoms or ions) has been rarely demonstrated and has been achieved only indirectly. Examples include the mechanical transport of atoms carrying quantum information or the use of spontaneously emitted photons. Here we achieve direct coupling between the motional dipoles of separately trapped ions over a distance of 54 micrometres, using the dipole-dipole interaction as a quantum mechanical transmission line. This interaction is small between single trapped ions, but the coupling is amplified by using additional trapped ions as antennae. With three ions in each well, the interaction is increased by a factor of seven compared to the single-ion case. This enhancement facilitates bridging of larger distances and relaxes the constraints on the miniaturization of trap electrodes. The system provides a building block for quantum computers and opportunities for coupling different types of quantum systems.
It is proposed that earthquake waves energize the geomagnetic dynamo. Fluid motions generated by earthquakes may have enough energy to be in equipartition with fields as large as 100 gauss. Seismic waves from meteoritic impacts with energies sufficient to reverse the field occur every 170,000 years.
The interplay of superconductivity and disorder has intrigued scientists for several decades. Disorder is expected to enhance the electrical resistance of a system, whereas superconductivity is associated with a zero-resistance state. Although superconductivity has been predicted to persist even in the presence of disorder, experiments performed on thin films have demonstrated a transition from a superconducting to an insulating state with increasing disorder or magnetic field. The nature of this transition is still under debate, and the subject has become even more relevant with the realization that high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) superconductors are intrinsically disordered. Here we present numerical simulations of the superconductor-insulator transition in two-dimensional disordered superconductors, starting from a microscopic description that includes thermal phase fluctuations. We demonstrate explicitly that disorder leads to the formation of islands where the superconducting order is high. For weak disorder, or high electron density, increasing the magnetic field results in the eventual vanishing of the amplitude of the superconducting order parameter, thereby forming an insulating state. On the other hand, at lower electron densities or higher disorder, increasing the magnetic field suppresses the correlations between the phases of the superconducting order parameter in different islands, giving rise to a different type of superconductor-insulator transition. One of the important predictions of this work is that in the regime of high disorder, there are still superconducting islands in the sample, even on the insulating side of the transition. This result, which is consistent with experiments, explains the recently observed huge magneto-resistance peak in disordered thin films and may be relevant to the observation of 'the pseudogap phenomenon' in underdoped high-T(c) superconductors.
The Kondo effect arises from the quantum mechanical interplay between the electrons of a host metal and a magnetic impurity and is predicted to result in local charge and spin variations around the magnetic impurity. A cryogenic scanning tunneling microscope was used to spatially resolve the electronic properties of individual magnetic atoms displaying the Kondo effect. Spectroscopic measurements performed on individual cobalt atoms on the surface of gold show an energetically narrow feature that is identified as the Kondo resonance-the predicted response of a Kondo impurity. Unexpected structure in the Kondo resonance is shown to arise from quantum mechanical interference between the d orbital and conduction electron channels for an electron tunneling into a magnetic atom in a metallic host.
Pairing of electrons in conventional superconductors occurs at the superconducting transition temperature T(c), creating an energy gap Delta in the electronic density of states (DOS). In the high-T(c) superconductors, a partial gap in the DOS exists for a range of temperatures above T(c) (ref. 2). A key question is whether the gap in the DOS above T(c) is associated with pairing, and what determines the temperature at which incoherent pairs form. Here we report the first spatially resolved measurements of gap formation in a high-T(c) superconductor, measured on Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta samples with different T(c) values (hole concentration of 0.12 to 0.22) using scanning tunnelling microscopy. Over a wide range of doping from 0.16 to 0.22 we find that pairing gaps nucleate in nanoscale regions above T(c). These regions proliferate as the temperature is lowered, resulting in a spatial distribution of gap sizes in the superconducting state. Despite the inhomogeneity, we find that every pairing gap develops locally at a temperature T(p), following the relation 2Delta/k(B)T(p) = 7.9 +/- 0.5. At very low doping (< or =0.14), systematic changes in the DOS indicate the presence of another phenomenon, which is unrelated and perhaps competes with electron pairing. Our observation of nanometre-sized pairing regions provides the missing microscopic basis for understanding recent reports of fluctuating superconducting response above T(c) in hole-doped high-T(c) copper oxide superconductors.
Quantum dots or rings are artificial nanometre-sized clusters that confine electrons in all three directions. They can be fabricated in a semiconductor system by embedding an island of low-bandgap material in a sea of material with a higher bandgap. Quantum dots are often referred to as artificial atoms because, when filled sequentially with electrons, the charging energies are pronounced for particular electron numbers; this is analogous to Hund's rules in atomic physics. But semiconductors also have a valence band with strong optical transitions to the conduction band. These transitions are the basis for the application of quantum dots as laser emitters, storage devices and fluorescence markers. Here we report how the optical emission (photoluminescence) of a single quantum ring changes as electrons are added one-by-one. We find that the emission energy changes abruptly whenever an electron is added to the artificial atom, and that the sizes of the jumps reveal a shell structure.
It is generally accepted that magnetic order in an insulator requires the cation to have partially filled shells of d or f electrons. Here we show that thin films of hafnium dioxide (HfO2), an insulating oxide better known as a dielectric layer for nanoscale electronic devices, can be ferromagnetic even without doping. This discovery challenges our understanding of magnetism in insulators, because neither Hf4+ nor O2- are magnetic ions and the d and f shells of the Hf4+ ion are either empty or full.
Long viewed as a topic in classical physics, ferroelectricity can be described by a quantum mechanical ab initio theory. Thin-film nanoscale device structures integrated onto Si chips have made inroads into the semiconductor industry. Recent prototype applications include ultrafast switching, cheap room-temperature magnetic-field detectors, piezoelectric nanotubes for microfluidic systems, electrocaloric coolers for computers, phased-array radar, and three-dimensional trenched capacitors for dynamic random access memories. Terabit-per-square-inch ferroelectric arrays of lead zirconate titanate have been reported on Pt nanowire interconnects and nanorings with 5-nanometer diameters. Finally, electron emission from ferroelectrics yields cheap, high-power microwave devices and miniature x-ray and neutron sources.
Electrides are ionic compounds that have alkali metal cations complexed by a crown ether or cryptand, with trapped electrons as counterions. The crystal structures and properties of two electrides illustrate the diversity that is encountered. One Cs(+) (18-crown-6)(z)e(-), has relatively isolated, trapped electrons apparently centered at each anionic site. It has a low conductivity consistent with electron localization, with an activation energy for conductivity of at least 0.45 electron volt. The other, K(+) (cryptand[2.2.2])e(-), has electron pairs trapped in an elongated cavity in a singlet ground state, but there is also a thermally accessible paramagnetic state available. This electride is much more conducting, with an activation energy of only 0.02 electron volt.
The energy-based refinement of low-resolution protein structure models to atomic-level accuracy is a major challenge for computational structural biology. Here we describe a new approach to refining protein structure models that focuses sampling in regions most likely to contain errors while allowing the whole structure to relax in a physically realistic all-atom force field. In applications to models produced using nuclear magnetic resonance data and to comparative models based on distant structural homologues, the method can significantly improve the accuracy of the structures in terms of both the backbone conformations and the placement of core side chains. Furthermore, the resulting models satisfy a particularly stringent test: they provide significantly better solutions to the X-ray crystallographic phase problem in molecular replacement trials. Finally, we show that all-atom refinement can produce de novo protein structure predictions that reach the high accuracy required for molecular replacement without any experimental phase information and in the absence of templates suitable for molecular replacement from the Protein Data Bank. These results suggest that the combination of high-resolution structure prediction with state-of-the-art phasing tools may be unexpectedly powerful in phasing crystallographic data for which molecular replacement is hindered by the absence of sufficiently accurate previous models.
Ferroelectric ferromagnets are exceedingly rare, fundamentally interesting multiferroic materials that could give rise to new technologies in which the low power and high speed of field-effect electronics are combined with the permanence and routability of voltage-controlled ferromagnetism. Furthermore, the properties of the few compounds that simultaneously exhibit these phenomena are insignificant in comparison with those of useful ferroelectrics or ferromagnets: their spontaneous polarizations or magnetizations are smaller by a factor of 1,000 or more. The same holds for magnetic- or electric-field-induced multiferroics. Owing to the weak properties of single-phase multiferroics, composite and multilayer approaches involving strain-coupled piezoelectric and magnetostrictive components are the closest to application today. Recently, however, a new route to ferroelectric ferromagnets was proposed by which magnetically ordered insulators that are neither ferroelectric nor ferromagnetic are transformed into ferroelectric ferromagnets using a single control parameter, strain. The system targeted, EuTiO(3), was predicted to exhibit strong ferromagnetism (spontaneous magnetization, approximately 7 Bohr magnetons per Eu) and strong ferroelectricity (spontaneous polarization, approximately 10 microC cm(-2)) simultaneously under large biaxial compressive strain. These values are orders of magnitude higher than those of any known ferroelectric ferromagnet and rival the best materials that are solely ferroelectric or ferromagnetic. Hindered by the absence of an appropriate substrate to provide the desired compression we turned to tensile strain. Here we show both experimentally and theoretically the emergence of a multiferroic state under biaxial tension with the unexpected benefit that even lower strains are required, thereby allowing thicker high-quality crystalline films. This realization of a strong ferromagnetic ferroelectric points the way to high-temperature manifestations of this spin-lattice coupling mechanism. Our work demonstrates that a single experimental parameter, strain, simultaneously controls multiple order parameters and is a viable alternative tuning parameter to composition for creating multiferroics.
Electronic states in disordered conductors on the verge of localization are predicted to exhibit critical spatial characteristics indicative of the proximity to a metal-insulator phase transition. We used scanning tunneling microscopy to visualize electronic states in Ga(1-x)Mn(x)As samples close to this transition. Our measurements show that doping-induced disorder produces strong spatial variations in the local tunneling conductance across a wide range of energies. Near the Fermi energy, where spectroscopic signatures of electron-electron interaction are the most prominent, the electronic states exhibit a diverging spatial correlation length. Power-law decay of the spatial correlations is accompanied by log-normal distributions of the local density of states and multifractal spatial characteristics.
In addition to a bulk energy gap, topological insulators accommodate a conducting, linearly dispersed Dirac surface state. This state is predicted to become massive if time reversal symmetry is broken, and to become insulating if the Fermi energy is positioned inside both the surface and bulk gaps. We introduced magnetic dopants into the three-dimensional topological insulator dibismuth triselenide (Bi2Se3) to break the time reversal symmetry and further position the Fermi energy inside the gaps by simultaneous magnetic and charge doping. The resulting insulating massive Dirac fermion state, which we observed by angle-resolved photoemission, paves the way for studying a range of topological phenomena relevant to both condensed matter and particle physics.
A remarkable feature of layered transition--metal oxides-most famously, the high-temperature superconductors--is that they can display hugely anisotropic electrical and optical properties (for example, seeming to be insulating perpendicular to the layers and metallic within them), even when prepared as bulk three-dimensional single crystals. This is the phenomenon of 'confinement', a concept at odds with the conventional theory of solids, and recognized as due to magnetic and electron-lattice interactions within the layers that must be overcome at a substantial energy cost if electrons are to be transferred between layers. The associated energy gap, or 'pseudogap', is particularly obvious in experiments where charge is moved perpendicular to the planes, most notably scanning tunnelling microscopy and polarized infrared spectroscopy. Here, using the same experimental tools, we show that there is a second family of transition-metal oxides--the layered manganites La(2-2x)Sr(1+2x)Mn2O7--with even more extreme confinement and pseudogap effects. The data demonstrate quantitatively that because the charge carriers are attached to polarons (lattice- and spin-textures within the planes), it is as difficult to remove them from the planes through vacuum-tunnelling into a conventional metallic tip, as it is for them to move between Mn-rich layers within the material itself.
For the development of future magnetic data storage technologies, the ultrafast generation of local magnetic fields is essential. Subnanosecond excitation of the magnetic state has so far been achieved by launching current pulses into micro-coils and micro-striplines and by using high-energy electron beams. Local injection of a spin-polarized current through an all-metal junction has been proposed as an efficient method of switching magnetic elements, and experiments seem to confirm this. Spin injection has also been observed in hybrid ferromagnetic-semiconductor structures. Here we introduce a different scheme for the ultrafast generation of local magnetic fields in such a hybrid structure. The basis of our approach is to optically pump a Schottky diode with a focused, approximately 150-fs laser pulse. The laser pulse generates a current across the semiconductor-metal junction, which in turn gives rise to an in-plane magnetic field. This scheme combines the localization of current injection techniques with the speed of current generation at a Schottky barrier. Specific advantages include the ability to rapidly create local fields along any in-plane direction anywhere on the sample, the ability to scan the field over many magnetic elements and the ability to tune the magnitude of the field with the diode bias voltage.
Fermi liquid theory explains the thermodynamic and transport properties of most metals. The so-called non-Fermi liquids deviate from these expectations and include exotic systems such as the strange metal phase of cuprate superconductors and heavy fermion materials near a quantum phase transition. We used the anti-de-Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence to identify a class of non-Fermi liquids; their low-energy behavior is found to be governed by a nontrivial infrared fixed point, which exhibits nonanalytic scaling behavior only in the time direction. For some representatives of this class, the resistivity has a linear temperature dependence, as is the case for strange metals.
The crystal structure of a solid controls the interactions between the electronically active units and thus its electronic properties. In the high-temperature superconducting copper oxides, only one spatial arrangement of the electronically active Cu(2+) units-a two-dimensional square lattice-is available to study the competition between the cooperative electronic states of magnetic order and superconductivity. Crystals of the spherical molecular C(60)(3-) anion support both superconductivity and magnetism but can consist of fundamentally distinct three-dimensional arrangements of the anions. Superconductivity in the A(3)C(60) (A = alkali metal) fullerides has been exclusively associated with face-centred cubic (f.c.c.) packing of C(60)(3-) (refs 2, 3), but recently the most expanded (and thus having the highest superconducting transition temperature, T(c); ref. 4) composition Cs(3)C(60) has been isolated as a body-centred cubic (b.c.c.) packing, which supports both superconductivity and magnetic order. Here we isolate the f.c.c. polymorph of Cs(3)C(60) to show how the spatial arrangement of the electronically active units controls the competing superconducting and magnetic electronic ground states. Unlike all the other f.c.c. A(3)C(60) fullerides, f.c.c. Cs(3)C(60) is not a superconductor but a magnetic insulator at ambient pressure, and becomes superconducting under pressure. The magnetic ordering occurs at an order of magnitude lower temperature in the geometrically frustrated f.c.c. polymorph (Neel temperature T(N) = 2.2 K) than in the b.c.c.-based packing (T(N) = 46 K). The different lattice packings of C(60)(3-) change T(c) from 38 K in b.c.c. Cs(3)C(60) to 35 K in f.c.c. Cs(3)C(60) (the highest found in the f.c.c. A(3)C(60) family). The existence of two superconducting packings of the same electronically active unit reveals that T(c) scales universally in a structure-independent dome-like relationship with proximity to the Mott metal-insulator transition, which is governed by the role of electron correlations characteristic of high-temperature superconducting materials other than fullerides.
Electrons moving in two dimensions under the influence of strong magnetic fields effectively lose their kinetic energy and display exotic behaviour dominated by Coulomb forces. When the ratio of electrons to magnetic flux quanta in the system (n) is near 5/2, the electrons are predicted to condense into a correlated phase with fractionally charged quasiparticles and a ground-state degeneracy that grows exponentially as these quasiparticles are introduced. The only way for electrons to transform between the many ground states would be to braid the fractional excitations around each other. This property has been proposed as the basis of a fault-tolerant quantum computer. Here we present observations of localized quasiparticles at n = 5/2, confined to puddles by disorder. Using a local electrometer to compare how quasiparticles at n = 5/2 and n = 7/3 charge these puddles, we were able to extract the ratio of local charges for these states. Averaged over several disorder configurations and samples, we found the ratio to be 4/3, suggesting that the local charges are = e/3 and = e/4, where e is the charge of an electron. This is in agreement with theoretical predictions for a paired state at n = 5/2. Confirming the existence of localized e/4 quasiparticles shows that proposed interferometry experiments to test statistics and computational ability of the state at n = 5/2 would be possible.
The fundamental mechanism that gives rise to high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) superconductivity in the copper oxide materials has been debated since the discovery of the phenomenon. Recent work has focused on a sharp 'kink' in the kinetic energy spectra of the electrons as a possible signature of the force that creates the superconducting state. The kink has been related to a magnetic resonance and also to phonons. Here we report that infrared spectra of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta (Bi-2212), shows that this sharp feature can be separated from a broad background and, interestingly, weakens with doping before disappearing completely at a critical doping level of 0.23 holes per copper atom. Superconductivity is still strong in terms of the transition temperature at this doping (T(c) approximately 55 K), so our results rule out both the magnetic resonance peak and phonons as the principal cause of high-T(c) superconductivity. The broad background, on the other hand, is a universal property of the copper-oxygen plane and provides a good candidate signature of the 'glue' that binds the electrons.
Non-classical states of light, such as entangled photon pairs and number states, are essential for fundamental tests of quantum mechanics and optical quantum technologies. The most widespread technique for creating these quantum resources is spontaneous parametric down-conversion of laser light into photon pairs. Conservation of energy and momentum in this process, known as phase-matching, gives rise to strong correlations that are used to produce two-photon entanglement in various degrees of freedom. It has been a longstanding goal in quantum optics to realize a source that can produce analogous correlations in photon triplets, but of the many approaches considered, none has been technically feasible. Here we report the observation of photon triplets generated by cascaded down-conversion. Each triplet originates from a single pump photon, and therefore quantum correlations will extend over all three photons in a way not achievable with independently created photon pairs. Our photon-triplet source will allow experimental interrogation of novel quantum correlations, the generation of tripartite entanglement without post-selection and the generation of heralded entangled photon pairs suitable for linear optical quantum computing. Two of the triplet photons have a wavelength matched for optimal transmission in optical fibres, suitable for three-party quantum communication. Furthermore, our results open interesting regimes of non-linear optics, as we observe spontaneous down-conversion pumped by single photons, an interaction also highly relevant to optical quantum computing.
Ordering at short-length scales is a universal feature of the glassy state. Experiments on boron oxide and other materials indicate that ordering on mesoscopic-length scales may also be universal. The high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements of oxygen in boron oxide glass presented here provide evidence for structural units responsible for ordering on short- and intermediate-length scales. At the molecular level, planar BO(3/2) units accounted for the local ordering. Oxygen-17 NMR spectra resolved detailed features of the inclusion of these units in boroxol rings, oxygen bridging two rings, and oxygen shared between two nonring BO(3/2) units. On the basis of these and corroborative boron-11 NMR and scattering results, boron oxide glass consists of domains that are rich or poor in boroxol rings; these domains are proposed to be the structural basis of intermediate-range order in glassy boron oxide.
Singlet carbenes exhibit a divalent carbon atom whose valence shell contains only six electrons, four involved in bonding to two other atoms and the remaining two forming a non-bonding electron pair. These features render singlet carbenes so reactive that they were long considered too short-lived for isolation and direct characterization. This view changed when it was found that attaching the divalent carbon atom to substituents that are bulky and/or able to donate electrons produces carbenes that can be isolated and stored. N-heterocyclic carbenes are such compounds now in wide use, for example as ligands in metathesis catalysis. In contrast, oxygen-donor-substituted carbenes are inherently less stable and have been less studied. The pre-eminent case is hydroxymethylene, H-C-OH; although it is the key intermediate in the high-energy chemistry of its tautomer formaldehyde, has been implicated since 1921 in the photocatalytic formation of carbohydrates, and is the parent of alkoxycarbenes that lie at the heart of transition-metal carbene chemistry, all attempts to observe this species or other alkoxycarbenes have failed. However, theoretical considerations indicate that hydroxymethylene should be isolatable. Here we report the synthesis of hydroxymethylene and its capture by matrix isolation. We unexpectedly find that H-C-OH rearranges to formaldehyde with a half-life of only 2 h at 11 K by pure hydrogen tunnelling through a large energy barrier in excess of 30 kcal mol(-1).
Adiabatically rocked electron ratchets, defined by quantum confinement in semiconductor heterostructures, were experimentally studied in a regime where tunneling contributed to the particle flow. The rocking-induced electron flow reverses direction as a function of temperature. This result confirms a recent prediction of fundamentally different behavior of classical versus quantum ratchets. A wave-mechanical model reproduced the temperature-induced current reversal and provides an intuitive explanation.
Surface science is an important and well-established branch of materials science involving the study of changes in material properties near a surface or interface. A fundamental issue has been atomic reconstruction: how the surface lattice symmetry differs from the bulk. 'Correlated-electron compounds' are materials in which strong electron-electron and electron-lattice interactions produce new electronic phases, including interaction-induced (Mott) insulators, many forms of spin, charge and orbital ordering, and (presumably) high-transition-temperature superconductivity. Here we propose that the fundamental issue for the new field of correlated-electron surface/interface science is 'electronic reconstruction': how does the surface/interface electronic phase differ from that in the bulk? As a step towards a general understanding of such phenomena, we present a theoretical study of an interface between a strongly correlated Mott insulator and a band insulator. We find dramatic interface-induced electronic reconstructions: in wide parameter ranges, the near-interface region is metallic and ferromagnetic, whereas the bulk phase on either side is insulating and antiferromagnetic. Extending the analysis to a wider range of interfaces and surfaces is a fundamental scientific challenge and may lead to new applications for correlated electron materials.
High-resolution phosphorous (31P)-NMR spectra of biological molecules provide detailed information about the metabolism of living systems. Although the NMR method is non-destructive, all studies so far, with two exceptions, have been carried out on excised, perfused organs and tissues or have required some form of surgery for in situ measurements. The use of 'surface' radiofrequency coils does not require surgery, but is best suited for tissues close to the surface of the animals. We describe here 'topical magnetic resonance'--a new, non-surgical method for acquiring 31P-NMR spectra from a selected, localized place deep within an animal by modifying the main magnetic field, B0, using only static-field gradients. The method is conceptually similar to one spin-imaging method but primarily provides biochemical rather than spatial information. This new technique can be used in fundamental investigations into living systems, clinical diagnosis and the estimation of the efficacy of drug therapy.
Portable single-sided nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) magnets used for nondestructive studies of large samples are believed to generate inherently inhomogeneous magnetic fields. We demonstrated experimentally that the field of an open magnet can be shimmed to high homogeneity in a large volume external to the sensor. This technique allowed us to measure localized high-resolution proton spectra outside a portable open magnet with a spectral resolution of 0.25 part per million. The generation of these experimental conditions also simplifies the implementation of such powerful methodologies as multidimensional NMR spectroscopy and imaging.
Three-dimensional particle simulations of magnetic reconnection reveal the development of turbulence driven by intense electron beams that form near the magnetic x-line and separatrices. The turbulence collapses into localized three-dimensional nonlinear structures in which the electron density is depleted. The predicted structure of these electron holes compares favorably with satellite observations at Earth's magnetopause. The birth and death of these electron holes and their associated intense electric fields lead to strong electron scattering and energization, whose understanding is critical to explaining why magnetic explosions in space release energy so quickly and produce such a large number of energetic electrons.
The d-wave pairing symmetry in high-critical temperature superconductors makes it possible to realize superconducting rings with built-in pi phase shifts. Such rings have a twofold degenerate ground state that is characterized by the spontaneous generation of fractional magnetic flux quanta with either up or down polarity. We have incorporated pi phase-biased superconducting rings in a logic circuit, a flip-flop, in which the fractional flux polarity is controllably toggled by applying single flux quantum pulses at the input channel. The integration of p rings into conventional rapid single flux quantum logic as natural two-state devices should alleviate the need for bias current lines, improve device symmetry, and enhance the operation margins.
Double-slit electron interferometers fabricated in high mobility two-dimensional electron gases are powerful tools for studying coherent wave-like phenomena in mesoscopic systems. However, they suffer from low visibility of the interference patterns due to the many channels present in each slit, and from poor sensitivity to small currents due to their open geometry. Moreover, these interferometers do not function in high magnetic fields--such as those required to enter the quantum Hall effect regime--as the field destroys the symmetry between left and right slits. Here we report the fabrication and operation of a single-channel, two-path electron interferometer that functions in a high magnetic field. This device is the first electronic analogue of the optical Mach-Zehnder interferometer, and opens the way to measuring interference of quasiparticles with fractional charges. On the basis of measurements of single edge state and closed geometry transport in the quantum Hall effect regime, we find that the interferometer is highly sensitive and exhibits very high visibility (62%). However, the interference pattern decays precipitously with increasing electron temperature or energy. Although the origin of this dephasing is unclear, we show, via shot-noise measurements, that it is not a decoherence process that results from inelastic scattering events.
A material is said to exhibit dichroism if its photon absorption spectrum depends on the polarization of the incident radiation. In the case of X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD), the absorption cross-section of a ferromagnet or a paramagnet in a magnetic field changes when the helicity of a circularly polarized photon is reversed relative to the magnetization direction. Although similarities between X-ray absorption and electron energy-loss spectroscopy in a transmission electron microscope (TEM) have long been recognized, it has been assumed that extending such equivalence to circular dichroism would require the electron beam in the TEM to be spin-polarized. Recently, it was argued on theoretical grounds that this assumption is probably wrong. Here we report the direct experimental detection of magnetic circular dichroism in a TEM. We compare our measurements of electron energy-loss magnetic chiral dichroism (EMCD) with XMCD spectra obtained from the same specimen that, together with theoretical calculations, show that chiral atomic transitions in a specimen are accessible with inelastic electron scattering under particular scattering conditions. This finding could have important consequences for the study of magnetism on the nanometre and subnanometre scales, as EMCD offers the potential for such spatial resolution down to the nanometre scale while providing depth information--in contrast to X-ray methods, which are mainly surface-sensitive.
The trillionfold concentration of sound energy by a trapped gas bubble, so as to emit picosecond flashes of ultraviolet light, is found to be extremely sensitive to doping with a noble gas. Increasing the noble gas content of a nitrogen bubble to about 1% dramatically stabilizes the bubble motion and increases the light emission by over an order of magnitude to a value that exceeds the sonoluminescence of either gas alone. The spectrum also strongly depends on the nature of the gas inside the bubble: Xenon yields a spectral peak at about 300 nanometers, whereas the helium spectrum is so strongly ultraviolet that its peak is obscured by the cutoff of water.
In principle, a complex assembly of strongly interacting electrons can self-organize into a wide variety of collective states, but relatively few such states have been identified in practice. We report that, in the close vicinity of a metamagnetic quantum critical point, high-purity strontium ruthenate Sr3Ru2O7 possesses a large magnetoresistive anisotropy, consistent with the existence of an electronic nematic fluid. We discuss a striking phenomenological similarity between our observations and those made in high-purity two-dimensional electron fluids in gallium arsenide devices.
The electronic properties of insulators such as diamond are of interest not only for their passive dielectric capabilities for use in electronic devices, but also for their strong electron confinement on atomic scales. However, the inherent lack of electrical conductivity in insulators usually prevents the investigation of their surfaces by atomic-scale characterization techniques such as scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). And although atomic force microscopy could in principle be used, imaging diamond surfaces has not yet been possible. Here, we demonstrate that STM can be used in an unconventional resonant electron injection mode to image insulating diamond surfaces and to probe their electronic properties at the atomic scale. Our results reveal striking electronic features in high-purity diamond single crystals, such as the existence of one-dimensional fully delocalized electronic states and a very long diffusion length for conduction-band electrons. We expect that our method can be applied to investigate the electronic properties of other insulating materials and so help in the design of atomic-scale electronic devices.
A ferroelectric crystal exhibits a stable and switchable electrical polarization that is manifested in the form of cooperative atomic displacements. A ferromagnetic crystal exhibits a stable and switchable magnetization that arises through the quantum mechanical phenomenon of exchange. There are very few 'multiferroic' materials that exhibit both of these properties, but the 'magnetoelectric' coupling of magnetic and electrical properties is a more general and widespread phenomenon. Although work in this area can be traced back to pioneering research in the 1950s and 1960s, there has been a recent resurgence of interest driven by long-term technological aspirations.
One of the most striking phenomena in condensed-matter physics is the quantum Hall effect, which arises in two-dimensional electron systems subject to a large magnetic field applied perpendicular to the plane in which the electrons reside. In such circumstances, current is carried by electrons along the edges of the system, in so-called chiral edge states (CESs). These are states that, as a consequence of nontrivial topological properties of the bulk electronic band structure, have a unique directionality and are robust against scattering from disorder. Recently, it was theoretically predicted that electromagnetic analogues of such electronic edge states could be observed in photonic crystals, which are materials having refractive-index variations with a periodicity comparable to the wavelength of the light passing through them. Here we report the experimental realization and observation of such electromagnetic CESs in a magneto-optical photonic crystal fabricated in the microwave regime. We demonstrate that, like their electronic counterparts, electromagnetic CESs can travel in only one direction and are very robust against scattering from disorder; we find that even large metallic scatterers placed in the path of the propagating edge modes do not induce reflections. These modes may enable the production of new classes of electromagnetic device and experiments that would be impossible using conventional reciprocal photonic states alone. Furthermore, our experimental demonstration and study of photonic CESs provides strong support for the generalization and application of topological band theories to classical and bosonic systems, and may lead to the realization and observation of topological phenomena in a generally much more controlled and customizable fashion than is typically possible with electronic systems.
Time-of-flight mass spectrometry-most notably matrix-assisted laser-desorption-ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) spectrometry-is an important class of techniques for the study of proteins and other biomolecules. Although these techniques provide excellent performance for masses up to about 20,000 daltons, there has been limited success in achieving good mass resolution at higher masses. This is because the sensitivity of the microchannel plate (MCP) detectors used in most systems decreases rapidly with increasing particle mass, limiting the utility of MCP detectors for very large masses. It has recently been proposed that cryogenic particle detectors may provide a solution to these difficulties. Cryogenic detectors measure the thermal energy deposited by the particle impact, and thus have a sensitivity that is largely independent of particle mass. Recent experiments have demonstrated the sensitivity of cryogenic particle detectors to single biomolecules, a quantum efficiency several orders of magnitude larger than the MCP detectors, and sensitivity to masses as large as 750,000 daltons. Here we present results demonstrating an order of magnitude better energy resolution than previous measurements, allowing direct determination of particle charge state during acceleration. Although application of these detectors to practical mass spectrometry will require further development of the detectors and cryogenics, these detectors can be used to elucidate the performance-limiting processes that occur in such systems.
Objective-prism and objective-grating spectrograms were obtained in six star fields during the Gemini 11 mission. The grating spectra show absorption lines in the 2000 to 3000 angstrom wavelength region of Canopus and Sirius and provide ultraviolet-energy distribution data for approximately 50 stars. Many prism spectra show the Balmer discontinuity due to hydrogen and two absorption features probably due to ultraviolet iron multiplets.
Soft gamma-ray repeaters (SGRs) are 'magnetars', a small class of slowly spinning neutron stars with extreme surface magnetic fields, B approximately 10(15) gauss (refs 1 , 2 -3). On 27 December 2004, a giant flare was detected from the magnetar SGR 1806-20 (ref. 2), only the third such event recorded. This burst of energy was detected by a variety of instruments and even caused an ionospheric disturbance in the Earth's upper atmosphere that was recorded around the globe. Here we report the detection of a fading radio afterglow produced by this outburst, with a luminosity 500 times larger than the only other detection of a similar source. From day 6 to day 19 after the flare from SGR 1806-20, a resolved, linearly polarized, radio nebula was seen, expanding at approximately a quarter of the speed of light. To create this nebula, at least 4 x 10(43) ergs of energy must have been emitted by the giant flare in the form of magnetic fields and relativistic particles.
Quantum mechanical experiments in ring geometries have long fascinated physicists. Open rings connected to leads, for example, allow the observation of the Aharonov-Bohm effect, one of the best examples of quantum mechanical phase coherence. The phase coherence of electrons travelling through a quantum dot embedded in one arm of an open ring has also been demonstrated. The energy spectra of closed rings have only recently been studied by optical spectroscopy. The prediction that they allow persistent current has been explored in various experiments. Here we report magnetotransport experiments on closed rings in the Coulomb blockade regime. Our experiments show that a microscopic understanding of energy levels, so far limited to few-electron quantum dots, can be extended to a many-electron system. A semiclassical interpretation of our results indicates that electron motion in the rings is governed by regular rather than chaotic motion, an unexplored regime in many-electron quantum dots. This opens a way to experiments where even more complex structures can be investigated at a quantum mechanical level.
Frequency-wave number spectra of microseisms were obtained by use of a set of short-period and long-period seismometers at LASA (Large Aperture Seismic Array, Montana). At times of relatively high microseismic activity short-period (shorter than 5 seconds) microseisms consist of both body waves and higher-mode surface waves. From the phase velocity and direction of body waves, source areas were determined, coinciding with low-pressure regions on the weather map. At longer periods, microseisms consist of fundamental- mode Rayleigh and Love waves, the former being dominant. Most microseismic energy arrives at LASA from the northeast and the west.
The Fano effect is ubiquitous in the spectroscopy of, for instance, atoms, bulk solids and semiconductor heterostructures. It arises when quantum interference takes place between two competing optical pathways, one connecting the energy ground state and an excited discrete state, the other connecting the ground state with a continuum of energy states. The nature of the interference changes rapidly as a function of energy, giving rise to characteristically asymmetric lineshapes. The Fano effect is particularly important in the interpretation of electronic transport and optical spectra in semiconductors. Whereas Fano's original theory applies to the linear regime at low power, at higher power a laser field strongly admixes the states and the physics becomes rich, leading, for example, to a remarkable interplay of coherent nonlinear transitions. Despite the general importance of Fano physics, this nonlinear regime has received very little attention experimentally, presumably because the classic autoionization processes, the original test-bed of Fano's ideas, occur in an inconvenient spectral region, the deep ultraviolet. Here we report experiments that access the nonlinear Fano regime by using semiconductor quantum dots, which allow both the continuum states to be engineered and the energies to be rescaled to the near infrared. We measure the absorption cross-section of a single quantum dot and discover clear Fano resonances that we can tune with the device design or even in situ with a voltage bias. In parallel, we develop a nonlinear theory applicable to solid-state systems with fast relaxation of carriers. In the nonlinear regime, the visibility of the Fano quantum interferences increases dramatically, affording a sensitive probe of continuum coupling. This could be a unique method to detect weak couplings of a two-level quantum system (qubits), which should ideally be decoupled from all other states.
Universal logic gates for two quantum bits (qubits) form an essential ingredient of quantum computation. Dynamical gates have been proposed in the context of trapped ions; however, geometric phase gates (which change only the phase of the physical qubits) offer potential practical advantages because they have higher intrinsic resistance to certain small errors and might enable faster gate implementation. Here we demonstrate a universal geometric pi-phase gate between two beryllium ion-qubits, based on coherent displacements induced by an optical dipole force. The displacements depend on the internal atomic states; the motional state of the ions is unimportant provided that they remain in the regime in which the force can be considered constant over the extent of each ion's wave packet. By combining the gate with single-qubit rotations, we have prepared ions in an entangled Bell state with 97% fidelity-about six times better than in a previous experiment demonstrating a universal gate between two ion-qubits. The particular properties of the gate make it attractive for a multiplexed trap architecture that would enable scaling to large numbers of ion-qubits.
For some time now, there has been considerable experimental and theoretical effort to understand the role of the normal-state "pseudogap" phase in underdoped high-temperature cuprate superconductors. Recent debate has centered on the question of whether the pseudogap is independent of superconductivity. We provide evidence from zero-field muon spin relaxation measurements in YBa2Cu3O6+x for the presence of small spontaneous static magnetic fields of electronic origin intimately related to the pseudogap transition. Our most significant finding is that, for optimal doping, these weak static magnetic fields appear well below the superconducting transition temperature. The two compositions measured suggest the existence of a quantum critical point somewhat above optimal doping.
Even in small molecules, the influence of electronic state on rotational and vibrational product energies is not well understood. Here, we use experiments and theory to address this issue in photodissociation of formaldehyde, H2CO, to the radical products H + HCO. These products result from dissociation from the singlet ground electronic state or the first excited triplet state (T1) of H2CO. Fluorescence spectra reveal a sudden decrease in the HCO rotational energy with increasing photolysis energy accompanied by substantial HCO vibrational excitation. Calculations of the rotational distribution using an ab initio potential energy surface for the T1 state are in very good agreement with experiment and strongly support dominance of the T1 state in the dynamics at the higher photolysis energies.
Pulsars are born with subsecond spin periods and slow by electromagnetic braking for several tens of millions of years, when detectable radiation ceases. A second life can occur for neutron stars in binary systems. They can acquire mass and angular momentum from their companions, to be spun up to millisecond periods and begin radiating again. We searched Fermi Large Area Telescope data for pulsations from all known millisecond pulsars (MSPs) outside of globular clusters, using rotation parameters from radio telescopes. Strong gamma-ray pulsations were detected for eight MSPs. The gamma-ray pulse profiles and spectral properties resemble those of young gamma-ray pulsars. The basic emission mechanism seems to be the same for MSPs and young pulsars, with the emission originating in regions far from the neutron star surface.
To understand the origin of superconductivity, it is crucial to ascertain the nature and origin of the primary carriers available to participate in pairing. Recent quantum oscillation experiments on high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) copper oxide superconductors have revealed the existence of a Fermi surface akin to that in normal metals, comprising fermionic carriers that undergo orbital quantization. The unexpectedly small size of the observed carrier pocket, however, leaves open a variety of possibilities for the existence or form of any underlying magnetic order, and its relation to d-wave superconductivity. Here we report experiments on quantum oscillations in the magnetization (the de Haas-van Alphen effect) in superconducting YBa(2)Cu(3)O(6.51) that reveal more than one carrier pocket. In particular, we find evidence for the existence of a much larger pocket of heavier mass carriers playing a thermodynamically dominant role in this hole-doped superconductor. Importantly, characteristics of the multiple pockets within this more complete Fermi surface impose constraints on the wavevector of any underlying order and the location of the carriers in momentum space. These constraints enable us to construct a possible density-wave model with spiral or related modulated magnetic order, consistent with experimental observations.
In Arthur L. Robinson's Research News article "Electron microscope inventors share Nobel physics prize" (14 Nov., p. 821), the quantum mechanical wavelength of an electron with an energy of 100 kiloelectron volts is incorrectly stated to be about 0.1 angstrom (p. 821, column 2). The correct value is 0.037 angstrom. Also, the electron column of the first electron microscope was vertical, not horizontal.
Phase-slips control dissipation in many bosonic systems, determining the critical velocity of superfluid helium and the generation of resistance in thin superconducting wires. Technological interest has been largely motivated by applications involving nanoscale superconducting circuit elements, such as standards based on quantum phase-slip junctions. Although phase slips caused by thermal fluctuations at high temperatures are well understood, controversy remains over the role of phase slips in small-scale superconductors--in solids, problems such as uncontrolled noise sources and disorder complicate their study and application. Here we show that phase slips can lead to dissipation in a clean and well-characterized Bose-Hubbard system, by experimentally studying the transport of ultracold atoms trapped in an optical lattice. In contrast to previous work, we explore a low-velocity regime described by the three-dimensional Bose-Hubbard model that is unaffected by instabilities, and we measure the effect of temperature on the dissipation strength. The damping rate of atomic motion (the analogue of electrical resistance in a solid) in the confining parabolic potential is well fitted by a model that includes finite damping at zero temperature. The low-temperature behaviour is consistent with the theory of quantum tunnelling of phase slips, whereas at higher temperatures a crossover consistent with a transition to thermal activation of phase slips is evident. Motion-induced features reminiscent of vortices and vortex rings associated with phase slips are also observed in time-of-flight imaging. These results clarify the role of phase slips in superfluid systems. They may also be of relevance in understanding the source of metallic phases observed in thin films, or serve as a test bed for theories of bosonic dissipation based upon variants of the Bose-Hubbard model.
We demonstrate how molecular quantum states of coupled semiconductor quantum dots are coherently probed and manipulated in transport experiments. The applied method probes quantum states by the virtual cotunneling of two electrons and hence resolves the sequences of molecular states simultaneously. This result is achieved by weakly probing the quantum system through parallel contacts to its constituting quantum dots. The overlap of the dots' wave functions and, in turn, the splitting of molecular states are adjusted by the direct influence of coupling electrodes.
Large-scale, electric currents flowing along magnetic field lines into the polar regions of Earth are thought to be the main contributors of the energy that powers the ionospheric aurora. However, we have found evidence for global contributions from electromagnetic waves (Alfven waves). Data that were collected from the Polar spacecraft over the course of 1 year show that the flow of wave electromagnetic energy at altitudes of 25,000 to 38,000 kilometers delineates the statistical auroral oval. The Poynting flux of individual events distributed along the auroral oval was larger than 5 ergs per square centimeter per second, which is sufficient to power auroral acceleration processes. This evidence suggests that in addition to magnetic field-aligned currents, the dayside and nightside aurora is globally powered by the energy flow of these high-altitude Alfven waves.
Recently, a series of unusual earthquake phenomena have been discovered, including deep episodic tremor, low-frequency earthquakes, very-low-frequency earthquakes, slow slip events and silent earthquakes. Each of these has been demonstrated to arise from shear slip, just as do regular earthquakes, but with longer characteristic durations and radiating much less seismic energy. Here we show that these slow events follow a simple, unified scaling relationship that clearly differentiates their behaviour from that of regular earthquakes. We find that their seismic moment is proportional to the characteristic duration and their moment rate function is constant, with a spectral high-frequency decay of f(-1). This scaling and spectral behaviour demonstrates that they can be thought of as different manifestations of the same phenomena and that they comprise a new earthquake category. The observed scale dependence of rupture velocity for these events can be explained by either a constant low-stress drop model or a diffusional constant-slip model. This new scaling law unifies a diverse class of slow seismic events and may lead to a better understanding of the plate subduction process and large earthquake generation.
Temperature (T)- and frequency (omega)-dependent conductivity measurements are reported here in amorphous niobium-silicon alloys with compositions (x) near the zero-temperature metal-insulator transition. There is a one-to-one correspondence between the frequency- and temperature-dependent conductivity on both sides of the critical concentration, thus establishing the quantum-critical nature of the transition. The analysis of the conductivity leads to a universal scaling function and establishes the critical exponents. This scaling can be described by an x-, T-, and omega-dependent characteristic length, the form of which is derived by experiment.
The term 'molecular magnet' generally refers to a molecular entity containing several magnetic ions whose coupled spins generate a collective spin, S (ref. 1). Such complex multi-spin systems provide attractive targets for the study of quantum effects at the mesoscopic scale. In these molecules, the large energy barriers between collective spin states can be crossed by thermal activation or quantum tunnelling, depending on the temperature or an applied magnetic field. There is the hope that these mesoscopic spin states can be harnessed for the realization of quantum bits--'qubits', the basic building blocks of a quantum computer--based on molecular magnets. But strong decoherence must be overcome if the envisaged applications are to become practical. Here we report the observation and analysis of Rabi oscillations (quantum oscillations resulting from the coherent absorption and emission of photons driven by an electromagnetic wave) of a molecular magnet in a hybrid system, in which discrete and well-separated magnetic clusters are embedded in a self-organized non-magnetic environment. Each cluster contains 15 antiferromagnetically coupled S = 1/2 spins, leading to an S = 1/2 collective ground state. When this system is placed into a resonant cavity, the microwave field induces oscillatory transitions between the ground and excited collective spin states, indicative of long-lived quantum coherence. The present observation of quantum oscillations suggests that low-dimension self-organized qubit networks having coherence times of the order of 100 micros (at liquid helium temperatures) are a realistic prospect.
Carbon monoxide molecules were arranged in atomically precise configurations, which we call "molecule cascades," where the motion of one molecule causes the subsequent motion of another, and so on in a cascade of motion similar to a row of toppling dominoes. Isotopically pure cascades were assembled on a copper (111) surface with a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope. The hopping rate of carbon monoxide molecules in cascades was found to be independent of temperature below 6 kelvin and to exhibit a pronounced isotope effect, hallmarks of a quantum tunneling process. At higher temperatures, we observed a thermally activated hopping rate with an anomalously low Arrhenius prefactor that we interpret as tunneling from excited vibrational states. We present a cascade-based computation scheme that has all of the devices and interconnects required for the one-time computation of an arbitrary logic function. Logic gates and other devices were implemented by engineered arrangements of molecules at the intersections of cascades. We demonstrate a three-input sorter that uses several AND gates and OR gates, as well as the crossover and fan-out units needed to connect them.
The motion of continents relative to the Earth's spin axis may be due either to rotation of the entire Earth relative to its spin axis--true polar wander--or to the motion of individual plates. In order to distinguish between these over the past 320 Myr (since the formation of the Pangaea supercontinent), we present here computations of the global average of continental motion and rotation through time in a palaeomagnetic reference frame. Two components are identified: a steady northward motion and, during certain time intervals, clockwise and anticlockwise rotations, interpreted as evidence for true polar wander. We find approximately 18 degrees anticlockwise rotation about 250-220 Myr ago and the same amount of clockwise rotation about 195-145 Myr ago. In both cases the rotation axis is located at about 10-20 degrees W, 0 degrees N, near the site that became the North American-South American-African triple junction at the break-up of Pangaea. This was followed by approximately 10 degrees clockwise rotation about 145-135 Myr ago, followed again by the same amount of anticlockwise rotation about 110-100 Myr ago, with a rotation axis in both cases approximately 25-50 degrees E in the reconstructed area of North Africa and Arabia. These rotation axes mark the maxima of the degree-two non-hydrostatic geoid during those time intervals, and the fact that the overall net rotation since 320 Myr ago is nearly zero is an indication of long-term stability of the degree-two geoid and related mantle structure. We propose a new reference frame, based on palaeomagnetism, but corrected for the true polar wander identified in this study, appropriate for relating surface to deep mantle processes from 320 Myr ago until hotspot tracks can be used (about 130 Myr ago).
The protonated water dimer is a prototypical system for the study of proton transfer in aqueous solution. We report infrared photodissociation spectra of cooled H+(H2O)2 [and D+(D2O2] ions, measured between 620 and 1900 wave numbers (cm-1). The experiment directly probes the shared proton region of the potential energy surface and reveals three strong bands below 1600 cm-1 and one at 1740 cm-1 (for H5O2+). From a comparison to multidimensional quantum calculations, the three lower energy bands were assigned to stretching and bending fundamentals involving the O...H+...O moiety, and the highest energy band was assigned to a terminal water bend. These results highlight the importance of intermode coupling in shared proton systems.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments are usually carried out in homogeneous magnetic fields. In many cases, however, high-resolution spectra are virtually impossible to obtain because of the inherent heterogeneity of the samples or living organisms under investigation, as well as the poor homogeneity of the magnets (particularly when bulky samples must be placed outside their bores). Unstable power supplies and vibrations arising from cooling can lead to field fluctuations in time as well as space. We show how high-resolution NMR spectra can be obtained in inhomogeneous fields with unknown spatiotemporal variations. Our method, based on coherence transfer between spins, can accommodate spatial inhomogeneities of at least 11 gauss per centimeter and temporal fluctuations slower than 2 hertz.
When atoms in a gas are cooled to extremely low temperatures, they will-under the appropriate conditions-condense into a single quantum-mechanical state known as a Bose-Einstein condensate. In such systems, quantum-mechanical behaviour is evident on a macroscopic scale. Here we explore the dynamics of how a Bose-Einstein condensate collapses and subsequently explodes when the balance of forces governing its size and shape is suddenly altered. A condensate's equilibrium size and shape is strongly affected by the interatomic interactions. Our ability to induce a collapse by switching the interactions from repulsive to attractive by tuning an externally applied magnetic field yields detailed information on the violent collapse process. We observe anisotropic atom bursts that explode from the condensate, atoms leaving the condensate in undetected forms, spikes appearing in the condensate wavefunction and oscillating remnant condensates that survive the collapse. All these processes have curious dependences on time, on the strength of the interaction and on the number of condensate atoms. Although the system would seem to be simple and well characterized, our measurements reveal many phenomena that challenge theoretical models.
Quantum teleportation is central to quantum communication, and plays an important role in a number of quantum computation protocols. Most information-processing applications of quantum teleportation include the subsequent manipulation of the qubit (the teleported photon), so it is highly desirable to have a teleportation procedure resulting in high-quality, freely flying qubits. In our previous teleportation experiment, the teleported qubit had to be detected (and thus destroyed) to verify the success of the procedure. Here we report a teleportation experiment that results in freely propagating individual qubits. The basic idea is to suppress unwanted coincidence detection events by providing the photon to be teleported much less frequently than the auxiliary entangled pair. Therefore, a case of successful teleportation can be identified with high probability without the need actually to detect the teleported photon. The experimental fidelity of our procedure surpasses the theoretical limit required for the implementation of quantum repeaters.
It is commonly believed that there are no detectable intermediates in the kinetic unfolding reactions of small proteins. If such intermediates could be found, they would give important information about the nature of the transition state for unfolding, which is thought to occur close to the native state. We report here that one-dimensional proton magnetic resonance spectra recorded during the unfolding of ribonuclease A provide direct evidence for at least one unfolding intermediate in which side chains are free to rotate. This intermediate appears to be a 'dry molten globule' of the kind hypothesized by Shakhnovich and Finkelstein.
Wind energy is a pollution free and renewable resource widely distributed over China. Aimed at protecting the environment and enlarging application of wind energy, a new approach to application of wind energy by using compressed air power to some extent instead of electricity put forward. This includes: explaining the working principles and characteristics of the wind energy-compressed air power system; discussing the compatibility of wind energy and compressor capacity; presenting the theoretical model and computational simulation of the system. The obtained compressor capacity vs wind power relationship in certain wind velocity range can be helpful in the designing of the wind power-compressed air system. Results of investigations on the application of high-pressure compressed air for pressure reduction led to conclusion that pressure reduction with expander is better than the throttle regulator in energy saving.
Diffraction techniques have shown that the crystal structure of naphthalene has a unit cell with Ci symmetry. These studies were unable, however, to resolve any departure of the molecular structure from the D2h symmetry observed in the gaseous state. We found recently that the solid-state 13C-nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) chemical shifts for naphthalene exhibit the Ci symmetry of the unit cell. If these chemical-shift data reflect structural distortions of the molecule, rather than simply intermolecular effects on the shifts owing to the Ci symmetry of the environment of each molecule, one could assert that the NMR data are able to reveal structural information beyond the limits of the diffraction methods. Here we show that this is the case by performing ab initio quantum-mechanical calculations of the 13C chemical shifts for naphthalene, and their derivatives, with respect to structural parameters. We find that intermolecular shift terms (which of necessity exhibit Ci symmetry) can account for only about 30% of the maximum deviations from D2h symmetry; the remainder must therefore result from structural distorations of the molecules below D2h symmetry. This sensitivity of NMR chemical shifts to very small changes in molecular structure opens up the possibility of using solid-state NMR along with quantum-chemical methods to refine structural parameters obtained from diffraction methods.
The fundamental mechanism behind laser action leads in general only to narrowband, single-wavelength emission. Several approaches for achieving spectrally broadband laser action have been put forward, such as enhancing the optical feedback in the wings of the gain spectrum, multi-peaked gain spectra, and the most favoured technique at present, ultrashort pulse excitation. Each of these approaches has drawbacks, such as a complex external laser cavity configuration, a non-flat optical gain envelope function, or an inability to operate in continuous mode, respectively. Here we present a monolithic, mid-infrared 'supercontinuum' semiconductor laser that has none of these drawbacks. We adopt a quantum cascade configuration, where a number of dissimilar intersubband optical transitions are made to cooperate in order to provide broadband optical gain from 5 to 8 microm wavelength. Laser action with a Fabry-Perot spectrum covering all wavelengths from 6 to 8 microm simultaneously is demonstrated with this approach. Lasers that emit light over such an extremely wide wavelength range are of interest for applications as varied as terabit optical data communications or ultra-precision metrology and spectroscopy.
Carbon nanotubes provide a unique system for studying one-dimensional quantization phenomena. Scanning tunneling microscopy was used to observe the electronic wave functions that correspond to quantized energy levels in short metallic carbon nanotubes. Discrete electron waves were apparent from periodic oscillations in the differential conductance as a function of the position along the tube axis, with a period that differed from that of the atomic lattice. Wave functions could be observed for several electron states at adjacent discrete energies. The measured wavelengths are in good agreement with the calculated Fermi wavelength for armchair nanotubes.
The magnetic properties of (3)He in its various phases originate from the interactions among the nuclear spins. The spin-polarized 'ferromagnetic' superfluid (3)He A(1) phase (which forms below 3 mK between two transition temperatures, T(c1) and T(c2), in an external magnetic field) serves as a material in which theories of fundamental magnetic processes and macroscopic quantum spin phenomena may be tested. Conventionally, the superfluid component of the A(1) phase is understood to contain only the majority spin condensate, having energetically favoured paired spins directed along the external field and no minority spin condensate having paired spins in the opposite direction. Because of difficulties in satisfying both the ultralow temperature and high magnetic field required to produce a substantial phase space, there exist few studies of spin dynamics phenomena that could be used to test the conventional view of the A(1) phase. Here we develop a mechanical spin density detector that operates in the required regime, enabling us to perform measurements of spin relaxation in the A(1) phase as a function of temperature, pressure and magnetic field. Our mechanical spin detector is based in principle on the magnetic fountain effect; spin-polarized superfluid motion can be induced both magnetically and mechanically, and we demonstrate the feasibility of increasing spin polarization by a mechanical spin filtering process. In the high temperature range of the A(1) phase near T(c1), the measured spin relaxation time is long, as expected. Unexpectedly, the spin relaxation rate increases rapidly as the temperature is decreased towards T(c2). Our measurements, together with Leggett-Takagi theory, demonstrate that a minute presence of minority spin pairs is responsible for this unexpected spin relaxation behaviour. Thus, the long-held conventional view that the A(1) phase contains only the majority spin condensate is inadequate.
Using spontaneous parametric down-conversion, we produce polarization-entangled states of two photons and characterize them using two-photon tomography to measure the density matrix. A controllable decoherence is imposed on the states by passing the photons through thick, adjustable birefringent elements. When the system is subject to collective decoherence, one particular entangled state is seen to be decoherence-free, as predicted by theory. Such decoherence-free systems may have an important role for the future of quantum computation and information processing.
Magnetic fields change the way that electrons move through solids. The nature of these changes reveals information about the electronic structure of a material and, in auspicious circumstances, can be harnessed for applications. The silver chalcogenides, Ag2Se and Ag2Te, are non-magnetic materials, but their electrical resistance can be made very sensitive to magnetic field by adding small amounts--just 1 part in 10,000--of excess silver. Here we show that the resistance of Ag2Se displays a large, nearly linear increase with applied magnetic field without saturation to the highest fields available, 600,000 gauss, more than a million times the Earth's magnetic field. These characteristics of large (thousands of per cent) and near-linear response over a large field range make the silver chalcogenides attractive as magnetic-field sensors, especially in physically tiny megagauss (10(6) G) pulsed magnets where large fields have been produced but accurate calibration has proved elusive. High-field studies at low temperatures reveal both oscillations in the magnetoresistance and a universal scaling form that point to a quantum origin for this material's unprecedented behaviour.
Structural maturation of fiber tracts in the human brain, including an increase in the diameter and myelination of axons, may play a role in cognitive development during childhood and adolescence. A computational analysis of structural magnetic resonance images obtained in 111 children and adolescents revealed age-related increases in white matter density in fiber tracts constituting putative corticospinal and frontotemporal pathways. The maturation of the corticospinal tract was bilateral, whereas that of the frontotemporal pathway was found predominantly in the left (speech-dominant) hemisphere. These findings provide evidence for a gradual maturation, during late childhood and adolescence, of fiber pathways presumably supporting motor and speech functions.
Thin film nanoscale elements with a curling magnetic structure (vortex) are a promising candidate for future nonvolatile data storage devices. Their properties are strongly influenced by the spin structure in the vortex core. We have used spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy on nanoscale iron islands to probe for the first time the internal spin structure of magnetic vortex cores. Using tips coated with a layer of antiferromagnetic chromium, we obtained images of the curling in-plane magnetization around and of the out-of-plane magnetization inside the core region. The experimental data are compared with micromagnetic simulations. The results confirm theoretical predictions that the size and the shape of the vortex core as well as its magnetic field dependence are governed by only two material parameters, the exchange stiffness and the saturation magnetization that determines the stray field energy.
Semiconductor nanostructures based on two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs) could form the basis of future devices for sensing, information processing and quantum computation. Although electron transport in 2DEG nanostructures has been well studied, and many remarkable phenomena have already been discovered (for example, weak localization, quantum chaos, universal conductance fluctuations), fundamental aspects of the electron flow through these structures have so far not been clarified. However, it has recently become possible to image current directly through 2DEG devices using scanning probe microscope techniques. Here, we use such a technique to observe electron flow through a narrow constriction in a 2DEG-a quantum point contact. The images show that the electron flow from the point contact forms narrow, branching strands instead of smoothly spreading fans. Our theoretical study of this flow indicates that this branching of current flux is due to focusing of the electron paths by ripples in the background potential. The strands are decorated by interference fringes separated by half the Fermi wavelength, indicating the persistence of quantum mechanical phase coherence in the electron flow. These findings may have important implications for a better understanding of electron transport in 2DEGs and for the design of future nanostructure devices.
Tunnelling of material particles through a classically impenetrable barrier constitutes one of the hallmark effects of quantum physics. When interactions between the particles compete with their mobility through a tunnel junction, intriguing dynamical behaviour can arise because the particles do not tunnel independently. In single-electron or Bloch transistors, for example, the tunnelling of an electron or Cooper pair can be enabled or suppressed by the presence of a second charge carrier due to Coulomb blockade. Here we report direct, time-resolved observations of the correlated tunnelling of two interacting ultracold atoms through a barrier in a double-well potential. For the regime in which the interactions between the atoms are weak and tunnel coupling dominates, individual atoms can tunnel independently, similar to the case of a normal Josephson junction. However, when strong repulsive interactions are present, two atoms located on one side of the barrier cannot separate, but are observed to tunnel together as a pair in a second-order co-tunnelling process. By recording both the atom position and phase coherence over time, we fully characterize the tunnelling process for a single atom as well as the correlated dynamics of a pair of atoms for weak and strong interactions. In addition, we identify a conditional tunnelling regime in which a single atom can only tunnel in the presence of a second particle, acting as a single atom switch. Such second-order tunnelling events, which are the dominating dynamical effect in the strongly interacting regime, have not been previously observed with ultracold atoms. Similar second-order processes form the basis of superexchange interactions between atoms on neighbouring lattice sites of a periodic potential, a central component of proposals for realizing quantum magnetism.
Direct observations over the past four centuries show that the number of sunspots observed on the Sun's surface varies periodically, going through successive maxima and minima. Following sunspot cycle 23, the Sun went into a prolonged minimum characterized by a very weak polar magnetic field and an unusually large number of days without sunspots. Sunspots are strongly magnetized regions generated by a dynamo mechanism that recreates the solar polar field mediated through plasma flows. Here we report results from kinematic dynamo simulations which demonstrate that a fast meridional flow in the first half of a cycle, followed by a slower flow in the second half, reproduces both characteristics of the minimum of sunspot cycle 23. Our model predicts that, in general, very deep minima are associated with weak polar fields. Sunspots govern the solar radiative energy and radio flux, and, in conjunction with the polar field, modulate the solar wind, the heliospheric open flux and, consequently, the cosmic ray flux at Earth.
The quantum-confined Stark effect in single cadmium selenide (CdSe) nanocrystallite quantum dots was studied. The electric field dependence of the single-dot spectrum is characterized by a highly polarizable excited state ( approximately 10(5) cubic angstroms, compared to typical molecular values of order 10 to 100 cubic angstroms), in the presence of randomly oriented local electric fields that change over time. These local fields result in spontaneous spectral diffusion and contribute to ensemble inhomogeneous broadening. Stark shifts of the lowest excited state more than two orders of magnitude larger than the linewidth were observed, suggesting the potential use of these dots in electro-optic modulation devices.
Glasses are amorphous solids, in the sense that they display elastic behaviour. In crystalline solids, elasticity is associated with phonons, which are quantized vibrational excitations. Phonon-like excitations also exist in glasses at very high (terahertz; 10(12) Hz) frequencies; surprisingly, these persist in the supercooled liquids. A universal feature of such amorphous systems is the boson peak: the vibrational density of states has an excess compared to the Debye squared-frequency law. Here we investigate the origin of this feature by studying the spectra of inherent structures (local minima of the potential energy) in a realistic glass model. We claim that the peak is the signature of a phase transition in the space of the stationary points of the energy, from a minima-dominated phase (with phonons) at low energy to a saddle-point-dominated phase (without phonons). The boson peak moves to lower frequencies on approaching the phonon-saddle transition, and its height diverges at the critical point. Our numerical results agree with the predictions of euclidean random matrix theory on the existence of a sharp phase transition between an amorphous elastic phase and a phonon-free one.
Certain insulators have exotic metallic states on their surfaces. These states are formed by topological effects that also render the electrons travelling on such surfaces insensitive to scattering by impurities. Such topological insulators may provide new routes to generating novel phases and particles, possibly finding uses in technological applications in spintronics and quantum computing.
Action spectra of the Emerson effect in Chlorella and Navicula reveal peaks at 670 mut, in addition to those at 650 mu (Chlorella) and 630 mmicro (Navicula) attributable to chlorophylls b and c. Thus, excitation of chlorophyll a form "chlorophyll a 670" can supplement, in these algae, the excitation of the form "chlorophyll a 680-700." The effect of the auxiliary pigments in these algae may be mediated by energy transfer to "chlorophyll a 670."
Using long-duration, three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic simulation, we found that the magnetic dipole field generated by a dynamo action in a rotating spherical shell repeatedly reverses its polarity at irregular intervals (that is, punctuated reversal). Although the total convection energy and magnetic energy alternate between a high-energy state and a low-energy state, the dipole polarity can reverse only at high-energy states where the north-south symmetry of the convection pattern is broken and the columnar vortex structure becomes vulnerable. Another attractive finding is that the quadrupole mode grows, exceeding the dipole mode before the reversal; this may help to explain how Earth's magnetic field reverses.
High-sensitivity x-ray measurements with the recently launched Einstein Observatory are having a major impact on wide areas of astronomical research. The x-ray luminosity of young O, B, and A stars and late K and M stars is found to be several orders of magnitude greater than predicted by current theories of coronal heating. Detailed x-ray images and spectra of supernova remnants are providing new information on the temperature, composition, and distribution of material ejected in supernova explosions as well as of the material comprising the interstellar medium. Observations of galaxies are yielding insights on the formation and evolution of stellar systems and galaxies over a wide range of variables. X-ray time variations are being used to probe the underlying energy source in quasars and active galactic nuclei. The distribution of mass in clusters of galaxies is being traced through detailed x-ray images, and the data are being used to classify clusters and trace their formation and evolution. Substantial progress is being made in several areas of cosmological research, particularly in the study of the diffuse x-ray background.
The selective excitation of molecular vibrations provides a means to directly influence the speed and outcome of chemical reactions. Such mode-selective chemistry has traditionally used laser pulses to prepare reactants in specific vibrational states to enhance reactivity or modify the distribution of product species. Inelastic tunnelling electrons may also excite molecular vibrations and have been used to that effect on adsorbed molecules, to cleave individual chemical bonds and induce molecular motion or dissociation. Here we demonstrate that inelastic tunnelling electrons can be tuned to induce selectively either the translation or desorption of individual ammonia molecules on a Cu(100) surface. We are able to select a particular reaction pathway by adjusting the electronic tunnelling current and energy during the reaction induction such that we activate either the stretching vibration of ammonia or the inversion of its pyramidal structure. Our results illustrate the ability of the scanning tunnelling microscope to probe single-molecule events in the limit of very low yield and very low power irradiation, which should allow the investigation of reaction pathways not readily amenable to study by more conventional approaches.
The ordering of neighbouring atomic magnetic moments (spins) leads to important collective phenomena such as ferromagnetism and antiferromagnetism. A full understanding of magnetism on the nanometre scale therefore calls for information on the arrangement of spins in real space and with atomic resolution. Spin-polarized scanning tunnelling microscopy accomplishes this but can probe only conducting materials. Force microscopy can be used on any sample independent of its conductivity. In particular, magnetic force microscopy is well suited to exploring ferromagnetic domain structures. However, atomic resolution cannot be achieved because data acquisition involves the sensing of long-range magnetostatic forces between tip and sample. Magnetic exchange force microscopy has been proposed for overcoming this limitation: by using an atomic force microscope with a magnetic tip, it should be possible to detect the short-range magnetic exchange force between tip and sample spins. Here we show for a prototypical antiferromagnetic insulator, the (001) surface of nickel oxide, that magnetic exchange force microscopy can indeed reveal the arrangement of both surface atoms and their spins simultaneously. In contrast with previous attempts to implement this method, we use an external magnetic field to align the magnetic polarization at the tip apex so as to optimize the interaction between tip and sample spins. This allows us to observe the direct magnetic exchange coupling between the spins of the tip atom and sample atom that are closest to each other, and thereby demonstrate the potential of magnetic exchange force microscopy for investigations of inter-spin interactions at the atomic level.
We report on measurements of quantum many-body modes in ballistic wires and their dependence on Coulomb interactions, obtained by tunneling between two parallel wires in an GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure while varying electron density. We observed two spin modes and one charge mode of the coupled wires and mapped the dispersion velocities of the modes down to a critical density, at which spontaneous localization was observed. Theoretical calculations of the charge velocity agree well with the data, although they also predict an additional charge mode that was not observed. The measured spin velocity was smaller than theoretically predicted.
In theory, the decay of any unstable quantum state can be inhibited by sufficiently frequent measurements--the quantum Zeno effect. Although this prediction has been tested only for transitions between two coupled, essentially stable states, the quantum Zeno effect is thought to be a general feature of quantum mechanics, applicable to radioactive or radiative decay processes. This generality arises from the assumption that, in principle, successive observations can be made at time intervals too short for the system to change appreciably. Here we show not only that the quantum Zeno effect is fundamentally unattainable in radiative or radioactive decay (because the required measurement rates would cause the system to disintegrate), but also that these processes may be accelerated by frequent measurements. We find that the modification of the decay process is determined by the energy spread incurred by the measurements (as a result of the time-energy uncertainty relation), and the distribution of states to which the decaying state is coupled. Whereas the inhibitory quantum Zeno effect may be feasible in a limited class of systems, the opposite effect--accelerated decay--appears to be much more ubiquitous.
Spin liquids are magnetically frustrated systems, in which spins are prevented from ordering or freezing, owing to quantum or thermal fluctuations among degenerate states induced by the frustration. Chiral spin liquids are a hypothetical class of spin liquids in which the time-reversal symmetry is macroscopically broken in the absence of an applied magnetic field or any magnetic dipole long-range order. Even though such chiral spin-liquid states were proposed more than two decades ago, an experimental realization and observation of such states has remained a challenge. One of the characteristic order parameters in such systems is a macroscopic average of the scalar spin chirality, a solid angle subtended by three nearby spins. In previous experimental reports, however, the spin chirality was only parasitic to the non-coplanar spin structure associated with a magnetic dipole long-range order or induced by the applied magnetic field, and thus the chiral spin-liquid state has never been found. Here, we report empirical evidence that the time-reversal symmetry can be broken spontaneously on a macroscopic scale in the absence of magnetic dipole long-range order. In particular, we employ the anomalous Hall effect to directly probe the broken time-reversal symmetry for the metallic frustrated magnet Pr(2)Ir(2)O(7). An onset of the Hall effect is observed at zero field in the absence of uniform magnetization, within the experimental accuracy, suggesting an emergence of a chiral spin liquid. The origin of this spontaneous Hall effect is ascribed to chiral spin textures, which are inferred from the magnetic measurements indicating the spin ice-rule formation.
A quantum-cascade long-wavelength infrared laser based on superlattice active regions has been demonstrated. In this source, electrons injected by tunneling emit photons corresponding to the energy gap (minigap) between two superlattice conduction bands (minibands). A distinctive design feature is the high oscillator strength of the optical transition. Pulsed operation at a wavelength of about 8 micrometers with peak powers ranging from approximately 0.80 watt at 80 kelvin to 0.2 watt at 200 kelvin has been demonstrated in a superlattice with 1-nanometer-thick AlInAs barriers and 4.3-nanometer-thick GaInAs quantum wells grown by molecular beam epitaxy. These results demonstrate the potential of strongly coupled superlattices as infrared laser materials for high-power sources in which the wavelength can be tailored by design.
In humans, uracil appears in DNA at the rate of several hundred bases per cell each day as a result of misincorporation of deoxyuridine (dU) or deamination of cytosine. Four enzymes that catalyse the hydrolysis of the glycosylic bond of dU in DNA to yield an apyridiminic site as the first step in base excision repair have been identified in the human genome. The most efficient and well characterized of these uracil-DNA glycosylases is UDG (also known as UNG and present in almost all known organisms), which excises U from single- or double-stranded DNA and is associated with DNA replication forks. We used a hybrid quantum-mechanical/molecular-mechanical (QM/MM) approach to determine the mechanism of catalysis by UDG. In contrast to the concerted associative mechanism proposed initially, we show here that the reaction proceeds in a stepwise dissociative manner. Cleavage of the glycosylic bond yields an intermediate comprising an oxocarbenium cation and a uracilate anion. Subsequent attack by a water molecule and transfer of a proton to D145 result in the products. Surprisingly, the primary contribution to lowering the activation energy comes from the substrate, rather than from the enzyme. This 'autocatalysis' derives from the burial and positioning of four phosphate groups that stabilize the rate-determining transition state. The importance of these phosphates explains the residual activity observed for mutants that lack key residues. A corresponding catalytic mechanism could apply to the DNA glycosylases TDG and SMUG1, which belong to the same structural superfamily as UDG.
In classical computation, a 'bit' of information can be flipped (that is, changed in value from zero to one and vice versa) using a logical NOT gate; but the quantum analogue of this process is much more complicated. A quantum bit (qubit) can exist simultaneously in a superposition of two logical states with complex amplitudes, and it is impossible to find a universal transformation that would flip the original superposed state into a perpendicular state for all values of the amplitudes. But although perfect flipping of a qubit prepared in an arbitrary state (a universal NOT operation) is prohibited by the rules of quantum mechanics, there exists an optimal approximation to this procedure. Here we report the experimental realization of a universal quantum machine that performs the best possible approximation to the universal NOT transformation. The system adopted was an optical parametric amplifier of entangled photon states, which also enabled us to investigate universal quantum cloning.
Experimental visualization and verification of a single-molecule rotor operating within a supramolecular bearing is reported. Using a scanning tunneling microscope, single molecules were observed to exist in one of two spatially defined states laterally separated by 0.26 nanometers. One was identified as a rotating state and the other as an immobilized state. Calculations of the energy barrier for rotation of these two states show that it is below the thermal energy at room temperature for the rotating state and above it for the immobilized state.
The spin of a single electron subject to a static magnetic field provides a natural two-level system that is suitable for use as a quantum bit, the fundamental logical unit in a quantum computer. Semiconductor quantum dots fabricated by strain driven self-assembly are particularly attractive for the realization of spin quantum bits, as they can be controllably positioned, electronically coupled and embedded into active devices. It has been predicted that the atomic-like electronic structure of such quantum dots suppresses coupling of the spin to the solid-state quantum dot environment, thus protecting the 'spin' quantum information against decoherence. Here we demonstrate a single electron spin memory device in which the electron spin can be programmed by frequency selective optical excitation. We use the device to prepare single electron spins in semiconductor quantum dots with a well defined orientation, and directly measure the intrinsic spin flip time and its dependence on magnetic field. A very long spin lifetime is obtained, with a lower limit of about 20 milliseconds at a magnetic field of 4 tesla and at 1 kelvin.
Cold, macroscopic mechanical systems are expected to behave contrary to our usual classical understanding of reality; the most striking and counterintuitive predictions involve the existence of states in which the mechanical system is located in two places simultaneously. Various schemes have been proposed to generate and detect such states, and all require starting from mechanical states that are close to the lowest energy eigenstate, the mechanical ground state. Here we report the cooling of the motion of a radio-frequency nanomechanical resonator by parametric coupling to a driven, microwave-frequency superconducting resonator. Starting from a thermal occupation of 480 quanta, we have observed occupation factors as low as 3.8 +/- 1.3 and expect the mechanical resonator to be found with probability 0.21 in the quantum ground state of motion. Further cooling is limited by random excitation of the microwave resonator and heating of the dissipative mechanical bath. This level of cooling is expected to make possible a series of fundamental quantum mechanical observations including direct measurement of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and quantum entanglement with qubits.
Propelling single molecules in a controlled manner along an unmodified surface remains extremely challenging because it requires molecules that can use light, chemical or electrical energy to modulate their interaction with the surface in a way that generates motion. Nature's motor proteins have mastered the art of converting conformational changes into directed motion, and have inspired the design of artificial systems such as DNA walkers and light- and redox-driven molecular motors. But although controlled movement of single molecules along a surface has been reported, the molecules in these examples act as passive elements that either diffuse along a preferential direction with equal probability for forward and backward movement or are dragged by an STM tip. Here we present a molecule with four functional units--our previously reported rotary motors--that undergo continuous and defined conformational changes upon sequential electronic and vibrational excitation. Scanning tunnelling microscopy confirms that activation of the conformational changes of the rotors through inelastic electron tunnelling propels the molecule unidirectionally across a Cu(111) surface. The system can be adapted to follow either linear or random surface trajectories or to remain stationary, by tuning the chirality of the individual motor units. Our design provides a starting point for the exploration of more sophisticated molecular mechanical systems with directionally controlled motion.
The major feature of isospin in nuclei that I have discussed here is its application to all nuclei. The rebirth of this quantum number in nuclear physics occurred in the early 1960's and was initiated almost entirely by the important work of Anderson et al. (4) and Fox et al. (5). There is still great interest in the use of isospin in its fullest sense as predicted by Wigner (3), and indeed isospin concepts have been largely responsible for demonstrating that nuclei in the doubly "magic number" region of (208)Pb are remarkably in agreement with shell model theory. The early experiments have also initiated a whole new set of more sophisticated experiments (some of which I have briefly alluded to above) which promise to keep many physicists busy for a long time to come. A particularly interesting series of experiments are those being performed (15) at Duke University with high-resolution proton beams. This work shows the highly detailed nature of analogue resonances, that is, as coherent superpositions of many complicated compound states yielding a beautifully modulated wave train, the modulation being observed only in conventional experiments with poor-resolution proton beams. Similarly, nuclear theorists have been led to vastly improve their interpretation of, and computational techniques for, both nuclear reactions and nuclear structure in order to meet the more stringent tests provided by such experiments. Perhaps a lesson can be learned from the historical development of the isospin concept. In the past the belief that T . T would not significantly commute with the dynamical Hamiltonian so that isospin would not be conserved sufficiently well enough certainly delayed the nuclear travels of isospin into the realm of heavy nuclei. Hopefully the same mistake will not occur in the future for other approximate symmetries of nature.
The surface of Triton is very bright but shows subtle yellow to peach hues which probably arise from the production of colored organic compounds from CH4 + N2 and other simple species.  In order to investigate possible relationships between chemical processes and the observed surface distribution of chromophores, we classify the surface units according to color/albedo properties, estimate the rates of production of organic chromophores by the action of ultraviolet light and high-energy charged particles, and compare rates, spectral properties, and expected seasonal redistribution processes to suggest possible origins of the colors seen on Triton's surface.
It is of fundamental importance to establish whether there is a limit to how thin a superconducting wire can be, while retaining its superconducting character--and if there is a limit, to determine what sets it. This issue may also be of practical importance in defining the limit to miniaturization of superconducting electronic circuits. At high temperatures, the resistance of linear superconductors is caused by excitations called thermally activated phase slips. Quantum tunnelling of phase slips is another possible source of resistance that is still being debated. It has been theoretically predicted that such quantum phase slips can destroy superconductivity in very narrow wires. Here we report resistance measurements on ultrathin (< or = 10 nm) nanowires produced by coating carbon nanotubes with a superconducting Mo-Ge alloy. We find that nanowires can be superconducting or insulating depending on the ratio of their normal-state resistance (R(N)) to the quantum resistance for Cooper pairs (Rq). If R(N) < Rq, quantum tunnelling of phase slips is prohibited by strong damping, and so the wires stay superconducting. In contrast, we observe an insulating state for R(N) > Rq, which we explain in terms of proliferation of quantum phase slips and a corresponding localization of Cooper pairs.
Although techniques are available for the determination of the three-dimensional structure of biological specimens, for example scanning electron microscopy, they all have some serious drawback, such as low resolution, the requirement for crystals or for the sample to be analysed in a high vacuum. In an attempt to develop a technique for high-resolution three-dimensional structure analysis of non-crystalline biological material, we have tested the applicability of scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM), a method that has been used successfully in the analysis of metal and semiconductor surface structures. We report here that scanning tunnelling electron microscopy can be used to determine the surface topography of biological specimens at atmospheric pressure and room temperature, giving a vertical resolution of the order of 1 A. Our results show that quantum mechanical tunnelling of electrons through biological material is possible provided that the specimen is deposited on a conducting surface.
Isolated, atomically thin conducting membranes of graphite, called graphene, have recently been the subject of intense research with the hope that practical applications in fields ranging from electronics to energy science will emerge. The atomic thinness, stability and electrical sensitivity of graphene motivated us to investigate the potential use of graphene membranes and graphene nanopores to characterize single molecules of DNA in ionic solution. Here we show that when immersed in an ionic solution, a layer of graphene becomes a new electrochemical structure that we call a trans-electrode. The trans-electrode's unique properties are the consequence of the atomic-scale proximity of its two opposing liquid-solid interfaces together with graphene's well known in-plane conductivity. We show that several trans-electrode properties are revealed by ionic conductance measurements on a graphene membrane that separates two aqueous ionic solutions. Although our membranes are only one to two atomic layers thick, we find they are remarkable ionic insulators with a very small stable conductance that depends on the ion species in solution. Electrical measurements on graphene membranes in which a single nanopore has been drilled show that the membrane's effective insulating thickness is less than one nanometre. This small effective thickness makes graphene an ideal substrate for very high resolution, high throughput nanopore-based single-molecule detectors. The sensitivity of graphene's in-plane electronic conductivity to its immediate surface environment and trans-membrane solution potentials will offer new insights into atomic surface processes and sensor development opportunities.
A combination of classical Coulomb charging, electronic level spacings, spin, and vibrational modes determines the single-electron transfer reactions through nanoscale systems connected to external electrodes by tunnelling barriers. Coulomb charging effects have been shown to dominate such transport in semiconductor quantum dots, metallic and semiconducting nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes, and single molecules. Recently, transport has been shown to be also influenced by spin--through the Kondo effect--for both nanotubes and single molecules, as well as by vibrational fine structure. Here we describe a single-electron transistor where the electronic levels of a single pi-conjugated molecule in several distinct charged states control the transport properties. The molecular electronic levels extracted from the single-electron-transistor measurements are strongly perturbed compared to those of the molecule in solution, leading to a very significant reduction of the gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital. We suggest, and verify by simple model calculations, that this surprising effect could be caused by image charges generated in the source and drain electrodes resulting in a strong localization of the charges on the molecule.
The magnetic field pervading our Galaxy is a crucial constituent of the interstellar medium: it mediates the dynamics of interstellar clouds, the energy density of cosmic rays, and the formation of stars. The field associated with ionized interstellar gas has been determined through observations of pulsars in our Galaxy. Radio-frequency measurements of pulse dispersion and the rotation of the plane of linear polarization, that is, Faraday rotation, yield an average value for the magnetic field of B approximately 3 microG (ref. 2). The possible detection of Faraday rotation of linearly polarized photons emitted by high-redshift quasars suggests similar magnetic fields are present in foreground galaxies with redshifts z > 1. As Faraday rotation alone, however, determines neither the magnitude nor the redshift of the magnetic field, the strength of galactic magnetic fields at redshifts z > 0 remains uncertain. Here we report a measurement of a magnetic field of B approximately 84 microG in a galaxy at z = 0.692, using the same Zeeman-splitting technique that revealed an average value of B = 6 microG in the neutral interstellar gas of our Galaxy. This is unexpected, as the leading theory of magnetic field generation, the mean-field dynamo model, predicts large-scale magnetic fields to be weaker in the past rather than stronger.
Quantum mechanics demands that the act of measurement must affect the measured object. When a linear amplifier is used to continuously monitor the position of an object, the Heisenberg uncertainty relationship requires that the object be driven by force impulses, called back-action. Here we measure the back-action of a superconducting single-electron transistor (SSET) on a radio-frequency nanomechanical resonator. The conductance of the SSET, which is capacitively coupled to the resonator, provides a sensitive probe of the latter's position; back-action effects manifest themselves as an effective thermal bath, the properties of which depend sensitively on SSET bias conditions. Surprisingly, when the SSET is biased near a transport resonance, we observe cooling of the nanomechanical mode from 550 mK to 300 mK--an effect that is analogous to laser cooling in atomic physics. Our measurements have implications for nanomechanical readout of quantum information devices and the limits of ultrasensitive force microscopy (such as single-nuclear-spin magnetic resonance force microscopy). Furthermore, we anticipate the use of these back-action effects to prepare ultracold and quantum states of mechanical structures, which would not be accessible with existing technology.
Observations of distant supernovae indicate that the Universe is now in a phase of accelerated expansion the physical cause of which is a mystery. Formally, this requires the inclusion of a term acting as a negative pressure in the equations of cosmic expansion, accounting for about 75 per cent of the total energy density in the Universe. The simplest option for this 'dark energy' corresponds to a 'cosmological constant', perhaps related to the quantum vacuum energy. Physically viable alternatives invoke either the presence of a scalar field with an evolving equation of state, or extensions of general relativity involving higher-order curvature terms or extra dimensions. Although they produce similar expansion rates, different models predict measurable differences in the growth rate of large-scale structure with cosmic time. A fingerprint of this growth is provided by coherent galaxy motions, which introduce a radial anisotropy in the clustering pattern reconstructed by galaxy redshift surveys. Here we report a measurement of this effect at a redshift of 0.8. Using a new survey of more than 10,000 faint galaxies, we measure the anisotropy parameter beta = 0.70 +/- 0.26, which corresponds to a growth rate of structure at that time of f = 0.91 +/- 0.36. This is consistent with the standard cosmological-constant model with low matter density and flat geometry, although the error bars are still too large to distinguish among alternative origins for the accelerated expansion. The correct origin could be determined with a further factor-of-ten increase in the sampled volume at similar redshift.
The results of (13)C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements on alkali fullerides KxC(60) are reported. The NMR spectra demonstrate that material with 0 < x < 3 is in fact a two-phase system at equilibrium, with x = 0 and x = 3. NMR lineshapes indicate that C(3-)(60) ions rotate rapidly in the K(3)C(60) phase at 300 K, while C(6)-(60) ions in the insulating K(6)C(60) phase are static on the time scale of the lineshape measurement. The temperature dependence of the (13)C spin-lattice relaxation rate in the normal state of K(3)C(60) is found to be characteristic of a metal, indicating the important role of the C(3-)(60) ions in the conductivity. From the relaxation measurements, an estimate of the density of electronic states at the Fermi level is derived.
The dynamics of two-dimensional small-polaron formation at ultrathin alkane layers on a silver(111) surface have been studied with femtosecond time- and angle-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy. Optical excitation creates interfacial electrons in quasi-free states for motion parallel to the interface. These initially delocalized electrons self-trap as small polarons in a localized state within a few hundred femtoseconds. The localized electrons then decay back to the metal within picoseconds by tunneling through the adlayer potential barrier. The energy dependence of the self-trapping rate has been measured and modeled with a theory analogous to electron transfer theory. This analysis determines the inter- and intramolecular vibrational modes of the overlayer responsible for self-trapping as well as the relaxation energy of the overlayer molecular lattice. These results for a model interface contribute to the fundamental picture of electron behavior in weakly bonded solids and can lead to better understanding of carrier dynamics in many different systems, including organic light-emitting diodes.
Three notable new developments in magnetic alloys are highlighted. These include rare earth-cobalt permanent magnets with maximum energy products up to 240 kilojoules per cubic meter; chromium-cobalt-iron permanent magnets that have magnetic properties similar to those of the Alnicos, but contain only about half as much cobalt and are sufficiently ductile to be cold-formable; and high-induction grain-oriented silicon steels that exhibit 20 percent less core loss as transformer core materials than conventional oriented grades.
Many difficulties face the conventional interpretation of the red shift of quasars as a Hubble shift, with associated immense distances. These objects are not of galactic size or nature, and are not associated with galaxies or clusters of galaxies. The continuing energy source for such enormous powers for a period of 10(6) to 10(7) years has not been clearly revealed. The absence of the expected absorption for the Lyman-alpha spectral line of hydrogen is a new difficulty. Because of the relativistic limit on the diameter which can produce rapid fluctuations of light output, there may not be enough surface to radiate the required light.A similar and perhaps more serious difficulty exists for the fluctuating radio output. Calculations given here for synchrotron radiation self-absorption lead to a reasonably accurate formula for the angular diameter of a radio source. For the quasar 3C 273B these relations indicate a conflict with the usually assumed distance. However, the discrepancy may be explained in terms of strong variation of radio diameter with frequency. For CTA 102 the conflict is more serious, and could be explained -for cosmological distance-only by rejecting the data of Sholomitskii. These difficulties are removed by the hypothesis that the observed quasars were ejected from a gravitational collapse at the center of our own galaxy, which may have occurred roughly 5 million years ago. The resultant distances, of the order of a million lightyears, reduce the energy problem by a factor of 10(6) or 10(7). On this basis the optical diameter would be less than a light-hour, about the size of the earth's orbit. A rotating mass of a few thousand solar masses with this diameter would account for the unusual line width, could easily produce the required radiated energy, and could readily account for observed short fluctuation periods and variations in spectrum. It is suggested that the radio output may be produced by high-speed passage of the quasar through intergalactic gas. This would probably correspond to a radio size of a few light-years or less, in agreement with the fluctuations. Since the radio power would be considerably less than that of radio galaxies, it is suggested that radio galaxies may have ejected groups of quasars. This would explain the peculiarly distant locations of the radio sources for many such galaxies. The objections to this model that have been raised are apparently not fatal. In particular, the receding hydrogen cloud discovered by Koehler to be in the line of sight to 3C 273 is more plausibly interpreted as having been ejected from our own galaxy, in the manner observed for other galaxies, than as being associated with the Virgo cluster of galaxies. The latter interpretation, which would place 3C 273 further away, is in conflict with Lyman-alpha absorption data for 3C 9 and other quasars. Thus the local model seems to give a reasonable explanation not only of quasars but also of radio galaxies, bothv of which seem largely to defy explanation on other grounds. Whether or not this model is valid, it is clear that an understanding of quasars will radically change our understanding of the universe.
Photoelectric spectra have been obtained for a number of early-type stars in the 1100- to 2000-angstrom region with the Mariner 9 ultraviolet spectrometer. The resonance lines of H I, Si IV, and C IV are easily identified, as are features due to C II, C III, Si III, Fe II, N IV. The absolute energy distribution derived from the data lie about 20 percent below those of OAO-2 in the 1200- to 2000-angstrom region.
Cavity quantum electrodynamics (cavity QED) describes the coherent interaction between matter and an electromagnetic field confined within a resonator structure, and is providing a useful platform for developing concepts in quantum information processing. By using high-quality resonators, a strong coupling regime can be reached experimentally in which atoms coherently exchange a photon with a single light-field mode many times before dissipation sets in. This has led to fundamental studies with both microwave and optical resonators. To meet the challenges posed by quantum state engineering and quantum information processing, recent experiments have focused on laser cooling and trapping of atoms inside an optical cavity. However, the tremendous degree of control over atomic gases achieved with Bose-Einstein condensation has so far not been used for cavity QED. Here we achieve the strong coupling of a Bose-Einstein condensate to the quantized field of an ultrahigh-finesse optical cavity and present a measurement of its eigenenergy spectrum. This is a conceptually new regime of cavity QED, in which all atoms occupy a single mode of a matter-wave field and couple identically to the light field, sharing a single excitation. This opens possibilities ranging from quantum communication to a wealth of new phenomena that can be expected in the many-body physics of quantum gases with cavity-mediated interactions.
Computers are physical systems: the laws of physics dictate what they can and cannot do. In particular, the speed with which a physical device can process information is limited by its energy and the amount of information that it can process is limited by the number of degrees of freedom it possesses. Here I explore the physical limits of computation as determined by the speed of light c, the quantum scale h and the gravitational constant G. As an example, I put quantitative bounds to the computational power of an 'ultimate laptop' with a mass of one kilogram confined to a volume of one litre.
As information carriers in quantum computing, photonic qubits have the advantage of undergoing negligible decoherence. However, the absence of any significant photon-photon interaction is problematic for the realization of non-trivial two-qubit gates. One solution is to introduce an effective nonlinearity by measurements resulting in probabilistic gate operations. In one-way quantum computation, the random quantum measurement error can be overcome by applying a feed-forward technique, such that the future measurement basis depends on earlier measurement results. This technique is crucial for achieving deterministic quantum computation once a cluster state (the highly entangled multiparticle state on which one-way quantum computation is based) is prepared. Here we realize a concatenated scheme of measurement and active feed-forward in a one-way quantum computing experiment. We demonstrate that, for a perfect cluster state and no photon loss, our quantum computation scheme would operate with good fidelity and that our feed-forward components function with very high speed and low error for detected photons. With present technology, the individual computational step (in our case the individual feed-forward cycle) can be operated in less than 150 ns using electro-optical modulators. This is an important result for the future development of one-way quantum computers, whose large-scale implementation will depend on advances in the production and detection of the required highly entangled cluster states.
We achieved a pressure of 52.1 gigapascals with moissanite anvils, which have optical, thermal, electric, magnetic, and x-ray properties that rival those of diamond. The mode-softening of D(2)O toward the pressure-induced hydrogen bond symmetrization and the Raman shifts of diamond under hydrostatic and nonhydrostatic compressions were studied with moissanite anvils in the spectral regions normally obscured by diamond anvils. Moissanite anvil cells allow maximum sample volumes 1000 times larger than those allowed by diamond anvil cells and may enable the next level of advancement in high-pressure experiments.
Direct printing of functional electronic materials may provide a new route to low-cost fabrication of integrated circuits. However, to be useful it must allow continuous manufacturing of all circuit components by successive solution deposition and printing steps in the same environment. We demonstrate direct inkjet printing of complete transistor circuits, including via-hole interconnections based on solution-processed polymer conductors, insulators, and self-organizing semiconductors. We show that the use of substrate surface energy patterning to direct the flow of water-based conducting polymer inkjet droplets enables high-resolution definition of practical channel lengths of 5 micrometers. High mobilities of 0.02 square centimeters per volt second and on-off current switching ratios of 10(5) were achieved.
The phenomenon of extraordinary light transmission through metallic films perforated by nanohole arrays at optical frequencies was first observed a decade ago and initiated important further experimental and theoretical work. In view of potential applications of such structures--for example, subwavelength optics, optoelectronics devices, and chemical sensing--it is important to understand the underlying physical processes in detail. Here we derive a microscopic theory of the transmission through subwavelength hole arrays, by considering the elementary processes associated with scattering of surface-plasmon-polariton (SPP) modes by individual one-dimensional chains of subwavelength holes. Using a SPP coupled-mode model that coherently gathers these elementary processes, we derive analytical expressions for all the transmission spectrum characteristics--such as the resonance wavelength, the peak transmission and the anti-resonance. Further comparisons of the model predictions with fully vectorial computational results allow us quantitatively to check the model accuracy and to discuss the respective impacts of SPP modes and of other electromagnetic fields on producing the extraordinary transmission of light. The model greatly expands our understanding of the phenomenon and may affect further engineering of nanoplasmonic devices.
Elementary triatomic reactions offer a compelling test of our understanding of the extent of electron-nuclear coupling in chemical reactions, which is neglected in the widely applied Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approximation. The BO approximation predicts that in reactions between chlorine (Cl) atoms and molecular hydrogen, the excited spin-orbit state (Cl*) should not participate to a notable extent. We report molecular beam experiments, based on hydrogen-atom Rydberg tagging detection, that reveal only a minor role of Cl*. These results are in excellent agreement with fully quantum-reactive scattering calculations based on two sets of ab initio potential energy surfaces. This study resolves a previous disagreement between theory and experiment and confirms our ability to simulate accurately chemical reactions on multiple potential energy surfaces.
Optical spectra of high-transition-temperature superconductors in the mid-infrared display a gap of in-plane conductivity whose role for superconductivity remains unresolved. Femtosecond measurements of the mid-infrared reflectivity of YBa(2)Cu(3)O(7-delta) after nonequilibrium optical excitation are used to demonstrate the ultrafast fill-in of this gap and reveal two gap constituents: a picosecond recovery of the superconducting condensate in underdoped and optimally doped material and, in underdoped YBa(2)Cu(3)O(7-delta), an additional subpicosecond component related to pseudogap correlations. The temperature-dependent amplitudes of both contributions correlate with the antiferromagnetic 41-millielectronvolt peak in neutron scattering, supporting the coupling between charges and spin excitations.
Marcus theory has explained how thermal nuclear motions modulate the energy gap between donor and acceptor sites in protein electron transfer reactions. Thermal motions, however, may also modulate electron tunneling between these reactions. Here we identify a new mechanism of nuclear dynamics amplification that plays a central role when interference among the dominant tunneling pathway tubes is destructive. In these cases, tunneling takes place in protein conformations far from equilibrium that minimize destructive interference. As an example, we demonstrate how this dynamical amplification mechanism affects certain reaction rates in the photosynthetic reaction center and therefore may be critical for biological function.
We present the discovery by optical and near-infrared imaging of an extremely red, low-luminosity population of isolated objects in the young, nearby stellar cluster around the multiple, massive star final sigma Orionis. The proximity (352 parsecs), youth (1 million to 5 million years), and low internal extinction make this cluster an ideal site to explore the substellar domain from the hydrogen mass limit down to a few Jupiter masses. Optical and near-infrared low-resolution spectroscopy of three of these objects confirms the very cool spectral energy distribution (atmospheric effective temperatures of 1700 to 2200 kelvin) expected for cluster members with masses in the range 5 to 15 times that of Jupiter. Like the planets of the solar system, these objects are unable to sustain stable nuclear burning in their interiors, but in contrast they are not bound to stars. This new kind of isolated giant planet, which apparently forms on time scales of less than a few million years, offers a challenge to our understanding of the formation processes of planetary mass objects.
Proton and deuterium nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of striated frog gastrocnemius muscle exhibit angular dependence, indicating partial orientation of water in the muscle. Nonzero static dipolar and quadrupolar interactions resulting from the anisotropic motion of the water molecules modulate the spin echo decays, contributing to their nonxponential behavior.
Single-walled carbon nanotubes are ideal systems for investigating fundamental properties and applications of one-dimensional electronic systems. The interaction of magnetic impurities with electrons confined in one dimension has been studied by spatially resolving the local electronic density of states of small cobalt clusters on metallic single-walled nanotubes with a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope. Spectroscopic measurements performed on and near these clusters exhibit a narrow peak near the Fermi level that has been identified as a Kondo resonance. Using the scanning tunneling microscope to fabricate ultrasmall magnetic nanostructures consisting of small cobalt clusters on short nanotube pieces, spectroscopic studies of this quantum box structure exhibited features characteristic of the bulk Kondo resonance, but also new features due to finite size.
To exploit the quantum coherence of electron spins in solids in future technologies such as quantum computing, it is first vital to overcome the problem of spin decoherence due to their coupling to the noisy environment. Dynamical decoupling, which uses stroboscopic spin flips to give an average coupling to the environment that is effectively zero, is a particularly promising strategy for combating decoherence because it can be naturally integrated with other desired functionalities, such as quantum gates. Errors are inevitably introduced in each spin flip, so it is desirable to minimize the number of control pulses used to realize dynamical decoupling having a given level of precision. Such optimal dynamical decoupling sequences have recently been explored. The experimental realization of optimal dynamical decoupling in solid-state systems, however, remains elusive. Here we use pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance to demonstrate experimentally optimal dynamical decoupling for preserving electron spin coherence in irradiated malonic acid crystals at temperatures from 50 K to room temperature. Using a seven-pulse optimal dynamical decoupling sequence, we prolonged the spin coherence time to about 30 mus; it would otherwise be about 0.04 mus without control or 6.2 mus under one-pulse control. By comparing experiments with microscopic theories, we have identified the relevant electron spin decoherence mechanisms in the solid. Optimal dynamical decoupling may be applied to other solid-state systems, such as diamonds with nitrogen-vacancy centres, and so lay the foundation for quantum coherence control of spins in solids at room temperature.
High-intensity lasers are opening up a new realm of light-matter interactions. In his Perspective, Yamanouchi reviews recent progress in this field, focusing on two intensity regimes: the Coulombic regime, which mostly deforms molecular structures and causes tunneling ionization, and the relativistic regime, where high-intensity lasers produce x-rays and high-energy particles and may cause nuclear fusion reactions. Efforts are under way to increase laser intensity further for accessing the next frontier.
Application of a magnetic field to conductors causes the charge carriers to circulate in cyclotron orbits with quantized energies called Landau levels (LLs). These are equally spaced in normal metals and two-dimensional electron gases. In graphene, however, the charge carrier velocity is independent of their energy (like massless photons). Consequently, the LL energies are not equally spaced and include a characteristic zero-energy state (the n = 0 LL). With the use of scanning tunneling spectroscopy of graphene grown on silicon carbide, we directly observed the discrete, non-equally-spaced energy-level spectrum of LLs, including the hallmark zero-energy state of graphene. We also detected characteristic magneto-oscillations in the tunneling conductance and mapped the electrostatic potential of graphene by measuring spatial variations in the energy of the n = 0 LL.
A modern 1- to 2-billion-electron-volt synchrotron radiation facility (based on high-brightness electron beams and magnetic undulators) would generate coherent (laser-like) soft x-rays of wavelengths as short as 10 angstroms. The radiation would also be broadly tunable and subject to full polarization control. Radiation with these properties could be used for phase- and element-sensitive microprobing of biological assemblies and material interfaces as well as reserch on the production of electronic microstructures with features smaller than 1000 angstroms. These short wavelength capabilities, which extend to the K-absorption edges of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, are neither available nor projected for laboratory XUV lasers. Higher energy storage rings (5 to 6 billion electron volts) would generate significantly less coherent radiation and would be further compromised by additional x-ray thermal loading of optical components.
Anti-cancer agents that have been made selective for tumour cells by exploiting the known differences in the availability of oxygen between normal and transformed cells are a promising development in cancer chemotherapy. We have recently suggested a new type of bioreductive activity which would depend on a two-electron reduction. For rational design of such compounds, it is essential to be able to predict the redox potentials and the chemical modifications needed to produce the optimum redox value. Calculating redox potentials is a daunting task for the theoretician, however, as the effect of water solvation is clearly of major significance. Recent successful calculations of differences in the free energies of biologically important molecules in aqueous solution using the free-energy perturbation method prompted us to apply the technique to the computation of two-electron redox potentials. The results are accurate to within 20 mV, suggesting that we should be able to manipulate redox potentials by successfully predicting structures with the appropriate value.
An optical pumping technique was used to enhance and localize nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) signals from an n-doped GaAs/Al0.1Ga0.9As multiple quantum well structure, permitting direct radio-frequency measurements of gallium-71 NMR spectra and nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rates (1/T1) as functions of temperature (1.6 K < T < 4.2 K) and the Landau level filling factor (0.66 < v < 1.76). The measurements reveal effects of electron-electron interactions on the energy levels and spin states of the two-dimensional electron system confined in the GaAs wells. Minima in 1/T1 at v approximately 1 and v approximately 2/3 indicate energy gaps for electronic excitations in both integer and fractional quantum Hall states. Rapid, temperature-independent relaxation at intermediate v values indicates a manifold of low-lying electronic states with mixed spin polarizations.
Tunneling, one of the most striking manifestations of quantum mechanics, influences the electronic structure of many molecules and solids and is responsible for radioactive decay. Much of the interaction of intense light pulses with matter commences with electrons tunneling from atoms or molecules to the continuum. Until recently, this starting point was assumed to be the highest occupied orbital of a given system. We have now observed tunneling from a lower-lying state in hydrogen chloride (HCl). Analyzing two independent experimental observables allowed us to isolate (via fragment ions), identify (via molecular frame photoelectron angular distributions), and, with the help of ab initio simulations, quantify the contribution of lower-lying orbitals to the total and angle-dependent tunneling current of the molecule. Our results bolster the emerging tenet that the coherent interaction between different orbitals--which can amplify the impact of lower orbitals--must be considered in tunneling processes.
The scanning tunneling microscope is revolutionizing the study of surfaces. In ultra-high vacuum it is capable not only of imaging individual atoms but also of determining energy states on an atom-by-atom basis. It is now possible to operate this instrument in water. Aqueous optical microscopy is confined to a lateral resolution limit of about 2000 angstroms, and aqueous x-ray microscopy has yielded a lateral resolution of 75 angstroms. With a scanning tunneling microscope, an image of a graphite surface immersed in deionized water was obtained with features less than 3 angstroms apart clearly resolved. Further, an image measured in saline solution demonstrated that the instrument can be operated under conditions useful for many biological samples.
The discrete quantum properties of matter are manifest in a variety of phenomena. Any particle that is trapped in a sufficiently deep and wide potential well is settled in quantum bound states. For example, the existence of quantum states of electrons in an electromagnetic field is responsible for the structure of atoms, and quantum states of nucleons in a strong nuclear field give rise to the structure of atomic nuclei. In an analogous way, the gravitational field should lead to the formation of quantum states. But the gravitational force is extremely weak compared to the electromagnetic and nuclear force, so the observation of quantum states of matter in a gravitational field is extremely challenging. Because of their charge neutrality and long lifetime, neutrons are promising candidates with which to observe such an effect. Here we report experimental evidence for gravitational quantum bound states of neutrons. The particles are allowed to fall towards a horizontal mirror which, together with the Earth's gravitational field, provides the necessary confining potential well. Under such conditions, the falling neutrons do not move continuously along the vertical direction, but rather jump from one height to another, as predicted by quantum theory.
Condensed systems of strongly interacting electrons are ideal for the study of quantum complexity. It has become possible to promote the formation of new quantum phases by explicitly tuning systems toward special low-temperature quantum critical points. So far, the clearest examples have been appearances of superconductivity near pressure-tuned antiferromagnetic quantum critical points. We present experimental evidence for the formation of a nonsuperconducting phase in the vicinity of a magnetic field-tuned quantum critical point in ultrapure crystals of the ruthenate metal Sr3Ru2O7, and we discuss the possibility that the observed phase is due to a spin-dependent symmetry-breaking Fermi surface distortion.
Analyses of molecular spectra and compression data from crystals show that a single function successfully describes the dependence on interatomic separation of both the potential energy of diatomic molecules and the cohesive binding energy of condensed matter. The empirical finding that one function describes interatomic energies for such diverse forms of matter and over a wide range of conditions can be used to extend condensed-matter equations of state but warrants further theoretical study.
Entangled photon pairs are an important resource in quantum optics, and are essential for quantum information applications such as quantum key distribution and controlled quantum logic operations. The radiative decay of biexcitons-that is, states consisting of two bound electron-hole pairs-in a quantum dot has been proposed as a source of triggered polarization-entangled photon pairs. To date, however, experiments have indicated that a splitting of the intermediate exciton energy yields only classically correlated emission. Here we demonstrate triggered photon pair emission from single quantum dots suggestive of polarization entanglement. We achieve this by tuning the splitting to zero, through either application of an in-plane magnetic field or careful control of growth conditions. Entangled photon pairs generated 'on demand' have significant fundamental advantages over other schemes, which can suffer from multiple pair emission, or require post-selection techniques or the use of photon-number discriminating detectors. Furthermore, control over the pair generation time is essential for scaling many quantum information schemes beyond a few gates. Our results suggest that a triggered entangled photon pair source could be implemented by a simple semiconductor light-emitting diode.
The fractional quantum Hall effect, where plateaus in the Hall resistance at values of h/nue2 coexist with zeros in the longitudinal resistance, results from electron correlations in two dimensions under a strong magnetic field. (Here h is Planck's constant, nu the filling factor and e the electron charge.) Current flows along the sample edges and is carried by charged excitations (quasiparticles) whose charge is a fraction of the electron charge. Although earlier research concentrated on odd denominator fractional values of nu, the observation of the even denominator nu = 5/2 state sparked much interest. This state is conjectured to be characterized by quasiparticles of charge e/4, whose statistics are 'non-abelian'-in other words, interchanging two quasiparticles may modify the state of the system into a different one, rather than just adding a phase as is the case for fermions or bosons. As such, these quasiparticles may be useful for the construction of a topological quantum computer. Here we report data on shot noise generated by partitioning edge currents in the nu = 5/2 state, consistent with the charge of the quasiparticle being e/4, and inconsistent with other possible values, such as e/2 and e. Although this finding does not prove the non-abelian nature of the nu = 5/2 state, it is the first step towards a full understanding of these new fractional charges.
Human serum lipoproteins have been studied by Fourier transform nuclear magnetic resonance of carbon-13 in natural abundance. Spectra of highdensity, low-density, and very-low-density lipoproteins were recorded and partly assigned. The prominent features of these spectra reflect the qualitative and quantitative composition of the lipid moiety of these complexes. The results suggest that carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance will be a useful technique for studies of the structural and dynamic parameters of lipoproteins.
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy is a powerful and versatile technique that yields information related to molecular structure, interactions, and dynamics. Methods are currently being developed for real-time monitoring of metabolic processes in vivo and for noninvasive detection of disease and abnormality in living animals. Other nuclear magnetic resonance techniques are providing entirely new approaches for analyses of complex chemical systems. The increased power and popularity of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy today are due to many developments in instrumentation and methods that have occurred over the 35-year history of the technique. The most important single advance, particularly in recent years, has been increased sensitivity. Concurrent improvements in effective spectral resolving power and an array of new methods and applications have also contributed to elevating nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to its present position as one of the premier analytical techniques.
Traditionally, quantum entanglement has been central to foundational discussions of quantum mechanics. The measurement of correlations between entangled particles can have results at odds with classical behaviour. These discrepancies grow exponentially with the number of entangled particles. With the ample experimental confirmation of quantum mechanical predictions, entanglement has evolved from a philosophical conundrum into a key resource for technologies such as quantum communication and computation. Although entanglement in superconducting circuits has been limited so far to two qubits, the extension of entanglement to three, eight and ten qubits has been achieved among spins, ions and photons, respectively. A key question for solid-state quantum information processing is whether an engineered system could display the multi-qubit entanglement necessary for quantum error correction, which starts with tripartite entanglement. Here, using a circuit quantum electrodynamics architecture, we demonstrate deterministic production of three-qubit Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger (GHZ) states with fidelity of 88 per cent, measured with quantum state tomography. Several entanglement witnesses detect genuine three-qubit entanglement by violating biseparable bounds by 830 +- 80 per cent. We demonstrate the first step of basic quantum error correction, namely the encoding of a logical qubit into a manifold of GHZ-like states using a repetition code. The integration of this encoding with decoding and error-correcting steps in a feedback loop will be the next step for quantum computing with integrated circuits.
Electromagnetic signals are always composed of photons, although in the circuit domain those signals are carried as voltages and currents on wires, and the discreteness of the photon's energy is usually not evident. However, by coupling a superconducting quantum bit (qubit) to signals on a microwave transmission line, it is possible to construct an integrated circuit in which the presence or absence of even a single photon can have a dramatic effect. Such a system can be described by circuit quantum electrodynamics (QED)-the circuit equivalent of cavity QED, where photons interact with atoms or quantum dots. Previously, circuit QED devices were shown to reach the resonant strong coupling regime, where a single qubit could absorb and re-emit a single photon many times. Here we report a circuit QED experiment in the strong dispersive limit, a new regime where a single photon has a large effect on the qubit without ever being absorbed. The hallmark of this strong dispersive regime is that the qubit transition energy can be resolved into a separate spectral line for each photon number state of the microwave field. The strength of each line is a measure of the probability of finding the corresponding photon number in the cavity. This effect is used to distinguish between coherent and thermal fields, and could be used to create a photon statistics analyser. As no photons are absorbed by this process, it should be possible to generate non-classical states of light by measurement and perform qubit-photon conditional logic, the basis of a logic bus for a quantum computer.
We observed mixing between two-electron singlet and triplet states in a double quantum dot, caused by interactions with nuclear spins in the host semiconductor. This mixing was suppressed when we applied a small magnetic field or increased the interdot tunnel coupling and thereby the singlet-triplet splitting. Electron transport involving transitions between triplets and singlets in turn polarized the nuclei, resulting in marked bistabilities. We extract from the fluctuating nuclear field a limitation on the time-averaged spin coherence time T2* of 25 nanoseconds. Control of the electron-nuclear interaction will therefore be crucial for the coherent manipulation of individual electron spins.
The reliable detection of single quantum particles has revolutionized the field of quantum optics and quantum information processing. For several years, researchers have aspired to extend such detection possibilities to larger-scale, strongly correlated quantum systems in order to record in situ images of a quantum fluid in which each underlying quantum particle is detected. Here we report fluorescence imaging of strongly interacting bosonic Mott insulators in an optical lattice with single-atom and single-site resolution. From our images, we fully reconstruct the atom distribution on the lattice and identify individual excitations with high fidelity. A comparison of the radial density and variance distributions with theory provides a precise in situ temperature and entropy measurement from single images. We observe Mott-insulating plateaus with near-zero entropy and clearly resolve the high-entropy rings separating them, even though their width is of the order of just a single lattice site. Furthermore, we show how a Mott insulator melts with increasing temperature, owing to a proliferation of local defects. The ability to resolve individual lattice sites directly opens up new avenues for the manipulation, analysis and applications of strongly interacting quantum gases on a lattice. For example, one could introduce local perturbations or access regions of high entropy, a crucial requirement for the implementation of novel cooling schemes.
A significant development in computing has been the discovery that the computational power of quantum computers exceeds that of Turing machines. Central to the experimental realization of quantum information processing is the construction of fault-tolerant quantum logic gates. Their operation requires conditional quantum dynamics, in which one sub-system undergoes a coherent evolution that depends on the quantum state of another sub-system; in particular, the evolving sub-system may acquire a conditional phase shift. Although conventionally dynamic in origin, phase shifts can also be geometric. Conditional geometric (or 'Berry') phases depend only on the geometry of the path executed, and are therefore resilient to certain types of errors; this suggests the possibility of an intrinsically fault-tolerant way of performing quantum gate operations. Nuclear magnetic resonance techniques have already been used to demonstrate both simple quantum information processing and geometric phase shifts. Here we combine these ideas by performing a nuclear magnetic resonance experiment in which a conditional Berry phase is implemented, demonstrating a controlled phase shift gate.
Quantum decoherence is a central concept in physics. Applications such as quantum information processing depend on understanding it; there are even fundamental theories proposed that go beyond quantum mechanics, in which the breakdown of quantum theory would appear as an 'intrinsic' decoherence, mimicking the more familiar environmental decoherence processes. Such applications cannot be optimized, and such theories cannot be tested, until we have a firm handle on ordinary environmental decoherence processes. Here we show that the theory for insulating electronic spin systems can make accurate and testable predictions for environmental decoherence in molecular-based quantum magnets. Experiments on molecular magnets have successfully demonstrated quantum-coherent phenomena but the decoherence processes that ultimately limit such behaviour were not well constrained. For molecular magnets, theory predicts three principal contributions to environmental decoherence: from phonons, from nuclear spins and from intermolecular dipolar interactions. We use high magnetic fields on single crystals of Fe(8) molecular magnets (in which the Fe ions are surrounded by organic ligands) to suppress dipolar and nuclear-spin decoherence. In these high-field experiments, we find that the decoherence time varies strongly as a function of temperature and magnetic field. The theoretical predictions are fully verified experimentally, and there are no other visible decoherence sources. In these high fields, we obtain a maximum decoherence quality-factor of 1.49 x 10(6); our investigation suggests that the environmental decoherence time can be extended up to about 500 microseconds, with a decoherence quality factor of ~6 x 10(7), by optimizing the temperature, magnetic field and nuclear isotopic concentrations.
Fluorinated anesthetics were observed noninvasively in the brain of intact rabbits with fluorine-19 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. High-resolution fluorine-19 spectra of halothane, methoxyflurane, and isoflurane were obtained with a surface coil centered over the calvarium. Elimination of halothane from the brain was also monitored by this technique. Residual fluorine-19 signals from halothane (or a metabolite) could be detected as long as 98 hours after termination of anesthesia. These observations demonstrate the feasibility of using this technique to study the fate of fluorinated anesthetics in live mammals.
A central problem in quantum condensed matter physics is the critical theory governing the zero-temperature quantum phase transition between strongly renormalized Fermi liquids as found in heavy fermion intermetallics and possibly in high-critical temperature superconductors. We found that the mathematics of string theory is capable of describing such fermionic quantum critical states. Using the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence to relate fermionic quantum critical fields to a gravitational problem, we computed the spectral functions of fermions in the field theory. By increasing the fermion density away from the relativistic quantum critical point, a state emerges with all the features of the Fermi liquid.
Scanning tunneling microscopy is used to image the additional quasi-particle states generated by quantized vortices in the high critical temperature superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta. They exhibit a copper-oxygen bond-oriented "checkerboard" pattern, with four unit cell (4a0) periodicity and a approximately 30 angstrom decay length. These electronic modulations may be related to the magnetic field-induced, 8a0 periodic, spin density modulations with decay length of approximately 70 angstroms recently discovered in La1.84Sr0.16CuO4. The proposed explanation is a spin density wave localized surrounding each vortex core. General theoretical principles predict that, in the cuprates, a localized spin modulation of wavelength lambda should be associated with a corresponding electronic modulation of wavelength lambda/2, in good agreement with our observations.
Measurement of the far-infrared vibration-rotation tunneling spectrum of the perdeuterated water tetramer is described.  Precisely determined rotational constants and relative intensity measurements indicate a cyclic quasi-planar minimum energy structure, which is in agreement with recent ab initio calculations.  The O-O separation deduced from the data indicates a rapid exponential convergence to the ordered bulk value with increasing cluster size.  Observed quantum tunneling splittings are interpreted in terms of hydrogen bond rearrangements connecting two degenerate structures.
Venous blood velocities in intact human forearms can be measured by the use of nuclear magnetic resonance techniques. In essence, two separated coils are placed over the vein, and the arm is held in a magnetic field. Radio-frequency energy in one coil "flips" over the protons in the blood stream, and the second coil detects the arrival of the "flipped" protons. Human blood in vivo and in vitro has a nominal nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation time of 0.4 second.
Measurements of excess Ar(36) + Ar(38) ( released mainly at 1200 degrees C) in magnetic concentrates of Pacific sediments and in a dense concentrate of Greenland dust agree within an order of magnitude with expected concentrations implanted by solar-flare ion streams of energy less than 10 Mev per atomic-mass unit. The agreement implies that more than 10 percent of each concentrate may be extraterrestrial, depending on size distribution and flare spectra. Rare-gas measurements on fine-grained dust can provide data on: solar-flare "paleo-ion" fluxes, energy spectra, and isotopic abundances; identification, mineralogy, and chemistry of interplanetary dust; influx rates to Earth and sedimentation rates of oceanic cores; and lunar-surface residence and mixing times.
The properties of many nanoscale devices are sensitive to local atomic configurations, and so elemental identification and electronic state analysis at the scale of individual atoms is becoming increasingly important. For example, graphene is regarded as a promising candidate for future devices, and the electronic properties of nanodevices constructed from this material are in large part governed by the edge structures. The atomic configurations at graphene boundaries have been investigated by transmission electron microscopy and scanning tunnelling microscopy, but the electronic properties of these edge states have not yet been determined with atomic resolution. Whereas simple elemental analysis at the level of single atoms can now be achieved by means of annular dark field imaging or electron energy-loss spectroscopy, obtaining fine-structure spectroscopic information about individual light atoms such as those of carbon has been hampered by a combination of extremely weak signals and specimen damage by the electron beam. Here we overcome these difficulties to demonstrate site-specific single-atom spectroscopy at a graphene boundary, enabling direct investigation of the electronic and bonding structures of the edge atoms-in particular, discrimination of single-, double- and triple-coordinated carbon atoms is achieved with atomic resolution. By demonstrating how rich chemical information can be obtained from single atoms through energy-loss near-edge fine-structure analysis, our results should open the way to exploring the local electronic structures of various nanodevices and individual molecules.
When light illuminates a rough metallic surface, hotspots can appear, where the light is concentrated on the nanometre scale, producing an intense electromagnetic field. This phenomenon, called the surface enhancement effect, has a broad range of potential applications, such as the detection of weak chemical signals. Hotspots are believed to be associated with localized electromagnetic modes, caused by the randomness of the surface texture. Probing the electromagnetic field of the hotspots would offer much insight towards uncovering the mechanism generating the enhancement; however, it requires a spatial resolution of 1-2 nm, which has been a long-standing challenge in optics. The resolution of an optical microscope is limited to about half the wavelength of the incident light, approximately 200-300 nm. Although current state-of-the-art techniques, including near-field scanning optical microscopy, electron energy-loss spectroscopy, cathode luminescence imaging and two-photon photoemission imaging have subwavelength resolution, they either introduce a non-negligible amount of perturbation, complicating interpretation of the data, or operate only in a vacuum. As a result, after more than 30 years since the discovery of the surface enhancement effect, how the local field is distributed remains unknown. Here we present a technique that uses Brownian motion of single molecules to probe the local field. It enables two-dimensional imaging of the fluorescence enhancement profile of single hotspots on the surfaces of aluminium thin films and silver nanoparticle clusters, with accuracy down to 1.2 nm. Strong fluorescence enhancements, up to 54 and 136 times respectively, are observed in those two systems. This strong enhancement indicates that the local field, which decays exponentially from the peak of a hotspot, dominates the fluorescence enhancement profile.
The connection of electrical leads to wire-like molecules is a logical step in the development of molecular electronics, but also allows studies of fundamental physics. For example, metallic carbon nanotubes are quantum wires that have been found to act as one-dimensional quantum dots, Luttinger liquids, proximity-induced superconductors and ballistic and diffusive one-dimensional metals. Here we report that electrically contacted single-walled carbon nanotubes can serve as powerful probes of Kondo physics, demonstrating the universality of the Kondo effect. Arising in the prototypical case from the interaction between a localized impurity magnetic moment and delocalized electrons in a metallic host, the Kondo effect has been used to explain enhanced low-temperature scattering from magnetic impurities in metals, and also occurs in transport through semiconductor quantum dots. The far greater tunability of dots (in our case, nanotubes) compared with atomic impurities renders new classes of Kondo-like effects accessible. Our nanotube devices differ from previous systems in which Kondo effects have been observed, in that they are one-dimensional quantum dots with three-dimensional metal (gold) reservoirs. This allows us to observe Kondo resonances for very large electron numbers (N) in the dot, and approaching the unitary limit (where the transmission reaches its maximum possible value). Moreover, we detect a previously unobserved Kondo effect, occurring for even values of N in a magnetic field.
Soft-gamma-ray repeaters (SGRs) are galactic X-ray stars that emit numerous short-duration (about 0.1 s) bursts of hard X-rays during sporadic active periods. They are thought to be magnetars: strongly magnetized neutron stars with emissions powered by the dissipation of magnetic energy. Here we report the detection of a long (380 s) giant flare from SGR 1806-20, which was much more luminous than any previous transient event observed in our Galaxy. (In the first 0.2 s, the flare released as much energy as the Sun radiates in a quarter of a million years.) Its power can be explained by a catastrophic instability involving global crust failure and magnetic reconnection on a magnetar, with possible large-scale untwisting of magnetic field lines outside the star. From a great distance this event would appear to be a short-duration, hard-spectrum cosmic gamma-ray burst. At least a significant fraction of the mysterious short-duration gamma-ray bursts may therefore come from extragalactic magnetars.
New strategies for materials fabrication are of fundamental importance in the advancement of science and technology. Organometallic and other organic solution phase synthetic routes have enabled the synthesis of functional inorganic quantum dots or nanocrystals. These nanomaterials form the building blocks for new bottom-up approaches to materials assembly for a range of uses; such materials also receive attention because of their intrinsic size-dependent properties and resulting applications. Here we report a unified approach to the synthesis of a large variety of nanocrystals with different chemistries and properties and with low dispersity; these include noble metal, magnetic/dielectric, semiconducting, rare-earth fluorescent, biomedical, organic optoelectronic semiconducting and conducting polymer nanoparticles. This strategy is based on a general phase transfer and separation mechanism occurring at the interfaces of the liquid, solid and solution phases present during the synthesis. We believe our methodology provides a simple and convenient route to a variety of building blocks for assembling materials with novel structure and function in nanotechnology.
Altitude profiles of electron temperature and density in the ionosphere of Venus have been obtained by the Pioneer Venus orbiter electron temperatutre probe. Elevated temperatutres observed at times of low solar wind flux exhibit height profiles that are consistent with a model in which less than 5 percent of the solar wind energy is deposited at the ionopause and is conducted downward through an unmagnetized ionosphere to the region below 200 kilomneters where electron cooling to the neutral atmosphere proceeds rapidly. When solar wind fluxes are higher, the electron temperatures and densities are highly structured and the ionopause moves to lower altitudes. The ionopause height in the late afternoon sector observed thus far varies so widely from day to (day that any height variation with solar zenith angle is not apparent in the observations. In the neighborhood of the ionopause, measuremnents of plasma temperatures and densities and magnetic field strength indicate that an induced magnetic barrier plays an important role in the pressure transfer between the solar wind and the ionosphere. The bow, shock is marked by a distinct increase in electron current collected by the instrument, a featutre that provides a convenient identification of the bow shock location.
Probing the lowest energy configuration of a complex system by quantum annealing was recently found to be more effective than its classical, thermal counterpart. By comparing classical and quantum Monte Carlo annealing protocols on the two-dimensional random Ising model (a prototype spin glass), we confirm the superiority of quantum annealing relative to classical annealing. We also propose a theory of quantum annealing based on a cascade of Landau-Zener tunneling events. For both classical and quantum annealing, the residual energy after annealing is inversely proportional to a power of the logarithm of the annealing time, but the quantum case has a larger power that makes it faster.
The energy dissipation in a proposed digital device in which discrete degrees of freedom are used to represent digital information (a "single-electron parametron") was analyzed. If the switching speed is not too high, the device may operate reversibly (adiabatically), and the energy dissipation &Escr; per bit may be much less than the thermal energy scale kBT (where kB is Boltzmann's constant and T is temperature). The energy-time product &Escr;tau is, however, much greater than Planck's constant Planck's over 2pi, at least in the standard "orthodox" model of single-electron tunneling that was used in these calculations.
Lasing action has been demonstrated at blue wavelengths in vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers at room temperature. The microcavity was formed by sandwiching indium gallium nitride multiple quantum wells between nitride-based and oxide-based quarter-wave reflectors. Lasing action was observed at a wavelength of 399 nanometers under optical excitation and confirmed by a narrowing of the linewidth in the emission spectra from 0.8 nanometer below threshold to less than 0.1 nanometer (resolution limit) above threshold. The result suggests that practical blue vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers can be realized in gallium-nitride-based material systems.
Partial wave resonances, quasi-bound resonance states with well-defined rotation in the transition state region of a chemical reaction, play a governing role in reaction dynamics but have eluded direct experimental characterization. Here, we report the observation of individual partial wave resolved resonances in the F + HD --> HF + D reaction by measuring the collision energy-dependent, angle- and state-resolved differential cross section with extremely high resolution, providing a spectroscopic probe to the transition state of F + HD --> HF + D. The agreement of the data with the high-level theoretical calculations confirms the sensitivity of this probe to the subtle quantum mechanical factors guiding this benchmark reaction.
The first fully automated design and experimental validation of a novel sequence for an entire protein is described. A computational design algorithm based on physical chemical potential functions and stereochemical constraints was used to screen a combinatorial library of 1.9 x 10(27) possible amino acid sequences for compatibility with the design target, a betabetaalpha protein motif based on the polypeptide backbone structure of a zinc finger domain. A BLAST search shows that the designed sequence, full sequence design 1 (FSD-1), has very low identity to any known protein sequence. The solution structure of FSD-1 was solved by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and indicates that FSD-1 forms a compact well-ordered structure, which is in excellent agreement with the design target structure. This result demonstrates that computational methods can perform the immense combinatorial search required for protein design, and it suggests that an unbiased and quantitative algorithm can be used in various structural contexts.
The physical properties of lightly doped semiconductors are well described by electronic band-structure calculations and impurity energy levels. Such properties form the basis of present-day semiconductor technology. If the doping concentration n exceeds a critical value n(c), the system passes through an insulator-to-metal transition and exhibits metallic behaviour; this is widely accepted to occur as a consequence of the impurity levels merging to form energy bands. However, the electronic structure of semiconductors doped beyond n(c) have not been explored in detail. Therefore, the recent observation of superconductivity emerging near the insulator-to-metal transition in heavily boron-doped diamond has stimulated a discussion on the fundamental origin of the metallic states responsible for the superconductivity. Two approaches have been adopted for describing this metallic state: the introduction of charge carriers into either the impurity bands or the intrinsic diamond bands. Here we show experimentally that the doping-dependent occupied electronic structures are consistent with the diamond bands, indicating that holes in the diamond bands play an essential part in determining the metallic nature of the heavily boron-doped diamond superconductor. This supports the diamond band approach and related predictions, including the possibility of achieving dopant-induced superconductivity in silicon and germanium. It should also provide a foundation for the possible development of diamond-based devices.
Large-amplitude electron density oscillations were observed on a Be(0001) surface by means of variable-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy. Fourier transforms of the images showed a ring of radius 2kF, where kF is the Fermi wave vector of the Be(0001) surface state. This wavelength was expected from Friedel oscillations caused by electronic screening of surface defects, but the amplitude of the waves for energies near the Fermi energy was anomalously large and inconsistent with the Friedel concept of screening. The enhanced amplitude of the waves must be a many-body effect, either in the electron gas (possibly an incipient charge density wave) or in the response of the lattice (electron-phonon coupling).
Precision spectroscopy at ultraviolet and shorter wavelengths has been hindered by the poor access of narrow-band lasers to that spectral region. We demonstrate high-accuracy quantum interference metrology on atomic transitions with the use of an amplified train of phase-controlled pulses from a femtosecond frequency comb laser. The peak power of these pulses allows for efficient harmonic upconversion, paving the way for extension of frequency comb metrology in atoms and ions to the extreme ultraviolet and soft x-ray spectral regions. A proof-of-principle experiment was performed on a deep-ultraviolet (2 x 212.55 nanometers) two-photon transition in krypton; relative to measurement with single nanosecond laser pulses, the accuracy of the absolute transition frequency and isotope shifts was improved by more than an order of magnitude.
Despite twenty years of research, the phase diagram of high-transition-temperature superconductors remains enigmatic. A central issue is the origin of the differences in the physical properties of these copper oxides doped to opposite sides of the superconducting region. In the overdoped regime, the material behaves as a reasonably conventional metal, with a large Fermi surface. The underdoped regime, however, is highly anomalous and appears to have no coherent Fermi surface, but only disconnected 'Fermi arcs'. The fundamental question, then, is whether underdoped copper oxides have a Fermi surface, and if so, whether it is topologically different from that seen in the overdoped regime. Here we report the observation of quantum oscillations in the electrical resistance of the oxygen-ordered copper oxide YBa2Cu3O6.5, establishing the existence of a well-defined Fermi surface in the ground state of underdoped copper oxides, once superconductivity is suppressed by a magnetic field. The low oscillation frequency reveals a Fermi surface made of small pockets, in contrast to the large cylinder characteristic of the overdoped regime. Two possible interpretations are discussed: either a small pocket is part of the band structure specific to YBa2Cu3O6.5 or small pockets arise from a topological change at a critical point in the phase diagram. Our understanding of high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) superconductors will depend critically on which of these two interpretations proves to be correct.
Macroscopic quantum phenomena such as high-temperature superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance, ferrimagnetism and ferromagnetism arise from a delicate balance of different interactions among electrons, phonons and spins on the nanoscale. The study of the interplay among these various degrees of freedom in strongly coupled electron-lattice systems is thus crucial to their understanding and for optimizing their properties. Charge-density-wave (CDW) materials, with their inherent modulation of the electron density and associated periodic lattice distortion, represent ideal model systems for the study of such highly cooperative phenomena. With femtosecond time-resolved techniques, it is possible to observe these interactions directly by abruptly perturbing the electronic distribution while keeping track of energy relaxation pathways and coupling strengths among the different subsystems. Numerous time-resolved experiments have been performed on CDWs, probing the dynamics of the electronic subsystem. However, the dynamics of the periodic lattice distortion have been only indirectly inferred. Here we provide direct atomic-level information on the structural dynamics by using femtosecond electron diffraction to study the quasi two-dimensional CDW system 1T-TaS(2). Effectively, we have directly observed the atomic motions that result from the optically induced change in the electronic spatial distribution. The periodic lattice distortion, which has an amplitude of ~0.1 A, is suppressed by about 20% on a timescale (~250 femtoseconds) comparable to half the period of the corresponding collective mode. These highly cooperative, electronically driven atomic motions are accompanied by a rapid electron-phonon energy transfer (~350 femtoseconds) and are followed by fast recovery of the CDW (~4 picoseconds). The degree of cooperativity in the observed structural dynamics is remarkable and illustrates the importance of obtaining atomic-level perspectives of the processes directing the physics of strongly correlated systems.
Any quantum system, such as those used in quantum information or magnetic resonance, is subject to random phase errors that can dramatically affect the fidelity of a desired quantum operation or measurement. In the context of quantum information, quantum error correction techniques have been developed to correct these errors, but resource requirements are extraordinary. The realization of a physically tractable quantum information system will therefore be facilitated if qubit (quantum bit) error rates are far below the so-called fault-tolerance error threshold, predicted to be of the order of 10(-3)-10(-6). The need to realize such low error rates motivates a search for alternative strategies to suppress dephasing in quantum systems. Here we experimentally demonstrate massive suppression of qubit error rates by the application of optimized dynamical decoupling pulse sequences, using a model quantum system capable of simulating a variety of qubit technologies. We demonstrate an analytically derived pulse sequence, UDD, and find novel sequences through active, real-time experimental feedback. The latter sequences are tailored to maximize error suppression without the need for a priori knowledge of the ambient noise environment, and are capable of suppressing errors by orders of magnitude compared to other existing sequences (including the benchmark multi-pulse spin echo). Our work includes the extension of a treatment to predict qubit decoherence under realistic conditions, yielding strong agreement between experimental data and theory for arbitrary pulse sequences incorporating nonidealized control pulses. These results demonstrate the robustness of qubit memory error suppression through dynamical decoupling techniques across a variety of qubit technologies.
The observation that the magnetic flux in a hollow superconducting cylinder is quantized in units of hc/2e has confirmed Fritz London's prediction that superconductivity is a macroscopic quantum phenomenon and that the superconducting state is a single- valued quantum state. It has also conclusively demonstrated that the pair interaction of the Bardeen-Cooper- Schrieffer theory of superconductivity is the important one, at least for the few superconductors studied. A superconducting ring or hollow cylinder must "decide" at the transition temperature what final quantum state it will be in when the temperature is lowered. This "thinking process" has been observed in experiments which demonstrate that the free energy of a hollow superconducting cylinder at the transition temperature is periodic in the magnetic flux. Very recently quantum-mechanical interference effects have been observed in the Josephson tunneling characteristics of multiply linked superconducting circuits. These experiments complement the other experiments on quantized flux and provide perhaps the most elegant proof of long-range order in the superconducting state.
In the high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) superconductors the pseudogap phase becomes predominant when the density of doped holes is reduced. Within this phase it has been unclear which electronic symmetries (if any) are broken, what the identity of any associated order parameter might be, and which microscopic electronic degrees of freedom are active. Here we report the determination of a quantitative order parameter representing intra-unit-cell nematicity: the breaking of rotational symmetry by the electronic structure within each CuO(2) unit cell. We analyse spectroscopic-imaging scanning tunnelling microscope images of the intra-unit-cell states in underdoped Bi(2)Sr(2)CaCu(2)O(8 +) (delta) and, using two independent evaluation techniques, find evidence for electronic nematicity of the states close to the pseudogap energy. Moreover, we demonstrate directly that these phenomena arise from electronic differences at the two oxygen sites within each unit cell. If the characteristics of the pseudogap seen here and by other techniques all have the same microscopic origin, this phase involves weak magnetic states at the O sites that break 90 degrees -rotational symmetry within every CuO(2) unit cell.
An approach is described to monitor directly at the level of individual residues the formation of structure during protein folding. A two-dimensional heteronuclear nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum was recorded after the rapid initiation of the refolding of a protein labeled with nitrogen-15. The intensities and line shapes of the cross peaks in the spectrum reflected the kinetic time course of the folding events that occurred during the spectral accumulation. The method was used to demonstrate the cooperative nature of the acquisition of the native main chain fold of apo bovine alpha-lactalbumin. The general approach, however, should be applicable to the investigation of a wide range of chemical reactions.
One view of the high-transition-temperature (high-Tc) copper oxide superconductors is that they are conventional superconductors where the pairing occurs between weakly interacting quasiparticles (corresponding to the electrons in ordinary metals), although the theory has to be pushed to its limit. An alternative view is that the electrons organize into collective textures (for example, charge and spin stripes) which cannot be 'mapped' onto the electrons in ordinary metals. Understanding the properties of the material would then need quantum field theories of objects such as textures and strings, rather than point-like electrons. In an external magnetic field, magnetic flux penetrates type II superconductors via vortices, each carrying one flux quantum. The vortices form lattices of resistive material embedded in the non-resistive superconductor, and can reveal the nature of the ground state-for example, a conventional metal or an ordered, striped phase-which would have appeared had superconductivity not intervened, and which provides the best starting point for a pairing theory. Here we report that for one high-Tc superconductor, the applied field that imposes the vortex lattice also induces 'striped' antiferromagnetic order. Ordinary quasiparticle models can account for neither the strength of the order nor the nearly field-independent antiferromagnetic transition temperature observed in our measurements.
The information carrier of today's communications, a weak pulse of light, is an intrinsically quantum object. As a consequence, complete information about the pulse cannot be perfectly recorded in a classical memory, even in principle. In the field of quantum information, this has led to the long-standing challenge of how to achieve a high-fidelity transfer of an independently prepared quantum state of light onto an atomic quantum state. Here we propose and experimentally demonstrate a protocol for such a quantum memory based on atomic ensembles. Recording of an externally provided quantum state of light onto the atomic quantum memory is achieved with 70 per cent fidelity, significantly higher than the limit for classical recording. Quantum storage of light is achieved in three steps: first, interaction of the input pulse and an entangling field with spin-polarized caesium atoms; second, subsequent measurement of the transmitted light; and third, feedback onto the atoms using a radio-frequency magnetic pulse conditioned on the measurement result. The density of recorded states is 33 per cent higher than the best classical recording of light onto atoms, with a quantum memory lifetime of up to 4 milliseconds.
Measurements and theoretical calculations are reported for an interatomic multi-atom resonant photoemission (MARPE) effect that permits direct determination of near-neighbor atomic identities (atomic numbers). MARPE occurs when the photon energy is tuned to a core-level absorption edge of an atom neighboring the emitting atom, with the emitting level having a lower binding energy than the resonant level. Large peak-intensity enhancements of 33 to 105 percent and energy-integrated effects of 11 to 29 percent were seen in three metal oxides. MARPE should also be sensitive to bond distance, bonding type, and magnetic order, and be observable via the secondary processes of x-ray fluorescence and Auger decay.
Strong discrete aurorae on Earth are excited by electrons, which are accelerated along magnetic field lines towards the planet. Surprisingly, electrons accelerated in the opposite direction have been recently observed. The mechanisms and significance of this anti-earthward acceleration are highly uncertain because only earthward acceleration was traditionally considered, and observations remain limited. It is also unclear whether upward acceleration of the electrons is a necessary part of the auroral process or simply a special feature of Earth's complex space environment. Here we report anti-planetward acceleration of electron beams in Saturn's magnetosphere along field lines that statistically map into regions of aurora. The energy spectrum of these beams is qualitatively similar to the ones observed at Earth, and the energy fluxes in the observed beams are comparable with the energies required to excite Saturn's aurora. These beams, along with the observations at Earth and the barely understood electron beams in Jupiter's magnetosphere, demonstrate that anti-planetward acceleration is a universal feature of aurorae. The energy contained in the beams shows that upward acceleration is an essential part of the overall auroral process.
Molecular vibrations have oscillation periods that reflect the molecular structure, and are hence being used as a spectroscopic fingerprint for detection and identification. At present, all nonlinear spectroscopy schemes use two or more laser beams to measure such vibrations. The availability of ultrashort (femtosecond) optical pulses with durations shorter than typical molecular vibration periods has enabled the coherent excitation of molecular vibrations using a single pulse. Here we perform single-pulse vibrational spectroscopy on several molecules in the liquid phase, where both the excitation and the readout processes are performed by the same pulse. The main difficulty with single-pulse spectroscopy is that all vibrational levels with energies within the pulse bandwidth are excited. We achieve high spectral resolution, nearly two orders of magnitude better than the pulse bandwidth, by using quantum coherent control techniques. By appropriately modulating the spectral phase of the pulse we are able to exploit the quantum interference between multiple paths to selectively populate a given vibrational level, and to probe this population using the same pulse. This scheme, using a single broadband laser source, is particularly attractive for nonlinear microscopy applications, as we demonstrate by constructing a coherent anti-Stokes Raman (CARS) microscope operating with a single laser beam.
We observe a strong Kondo effect in a semiconductor quantum dot when a small magnetic field is applied. The Coulomb blockade for electron tunneling is overcome completely by the Kondo effect, and the conductance reaches the unitary limit value. We compare the experimental Kondo temperature with the theoretical predictions for the spin- 12 Anderson impurity model. Excellent agreement is found throughout the Kondo regime. Phase coherence is preserved when a Kondo quantum dot is included in one of the arms of an Aharonov-Bohm ring structure, and the phase behavior differs from previous results on a non-Kondo dot.
Since the 1950s, Heisenberg and others have addressed the problem of how to explain the appearance of countable particles in continuous fields. Stable localized field configurations were searched for an ingredient for a general field theory of elementary particles, but the majority of nonlinear field models were unable to predict them. As an exception, Skyrme succeeded in describing nuclear particles as localized states, so-called 'skyrmions'. Skyrmions are a characteristic of nonlinear continuum models ranging from microscopic to cosmological scales. Skyrmionic states have been found under non-equilibrium conditions, or when stabilized by external fields or the proliferation of topological defects. Examples are Turing patterns in classical liquids, spin textures in quantum Hall magnets, or the blue phases in liquid crystals. However, it has generally been assumed that skyrmions cannot form spontaneous ground states, such as ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic order, in magnetic materials. Here, we show theoretically that this assumption is wrong and that skyrmion textures may form spontaneously in condensed-matter systems with chiral interactions without the assistance of external fields or the proliferation of defects. We show this within a phenomenological continuum model based on a few material-specific parameters that can be determined experimentally. Our model has a condition not considered before: we allow for softened amplitude variations of the magnetization, characteristic of, for instance, metallic magnets. Our model implies that spontaneous skyrmion lattice ground states may exist generally in a large number of materials, notably at surfaces and in thin films, as well as in bulk compounds, where a lack of space inversion symmetry leads to chiral interactions.
The recent discovery that a spin-polarized electrical current can apply a large torque to a ferromagnet, through direct transfer of spin angular momentum, offers the possibility of manipulating magnetic-device elements without applying cumbersome magnetic fields. However, a central question remains unresolved: what type of magnetic motions can be generated by this torque? Theory predicts that spin transfer may be able to drive a nanomagnet into types of oscillatory magnetic modes not attainable with magnetic fields alone, but existing measurement techniques have provided only indirect evidence for dynamical states. The nature of the possible motions has not been determined. Here we demonstrate a technique that allows direct electrical measurements of microwave-frequency dynamics in individual nanomagnets, propelled by a d.c. spin-polarized current. We show that spin transfer can produce several different types of magnetic excitation. Although there is no mechanical motion, a simple magnetic-multilayer structure acts like a nanoscale motor; it converts energy from a d.c. electrical current into high-frequency magnetic rotations that might be applied in new devices including microwave sources and resonators.
Intense, magnetic field-aligned, bidirectional, energetic (>15 kiloelectron volts) electron beams were discovered by the Galileo energetic particles detector during the flyby of Io. These beams can carry sufficient energy flux into Jupiter's atmosphere to produce a visible aurora at the footprint of the magnetic flux tube connecting Io to Jupiter. Composition measurements through the torus showed that the spatial distributions of protons, oxygen, and sulfur are different, with sulfur being the dominant energetic (> approximately 10 kiloelectron volts per nucleon) ion at closest approach.
Optical parametric oscillation is a nonlinear process that enables coherent generation of 'signal' and 'idler' waves, shifted in frequency from the pump wave. Efficient parametric conversion is the paradigm for the generation of twin or entangled photons for quantum optics applications such as quantum cryptography, or for the generation of new frequencies in spectral domains not accessible by existing devices. Rapid development in the field of quantum information requires monolithic, alignment-free sources that enable efficient coupling into optical fibres and possibly electrical injection. During the past decade, much effort has been devoted to the development of integrated devices for quantum information and to the realization of all-semiconductor parametric oscillators. Nevertheless, at present optical parametric oscillators typically rely on nonlinear crystals placed into complex external cavities, and pumped by powerful external lasers. Long interaction lengths are typically required and the phase mismatch between the parametric waves propagating at different velocities results in poor parametric conversion efficiencies. Here we report the demonstration of parametric oscillation in a monolithic semiconductor triple microcavity with signal, pump and idler waves propagating along the vertical direction of the nanostructure. Alternatively, signal and idler beams can also be collected at finite angles, allowing the generation of entangled photon pairs. The pump threshold intensity is low enough to envisage the realization of an all-semiconductor electrically pumped micro-parametric oscillator.
In the copper oxide parent compounds of the high-transition-temperature superconductors the valence electrons are localized--one per copper site--by strong intra-atomic Coulomb repulsion. A symptom of this localization is antiferromagnetism, where the spins of localized electrons alternate between up and down. Superconductivity appears when mobile 'holes' are doped into this insulating state, and it coexists with antiferromagnetic fluctuations. In one approach to describing the coexistence, the holes are believed to self-organize into 'stripes' that alternate with antiferromagnetic (insulating) regions within copper oxide planes, which would necessitate an unconventional mechanism of superconductivity. There is an apparent problem with this picture, however: measurements of magnetic excitations in superconducting YBa2Cu3O6+x near optimum doping are incompatible with the naive expectations for a material with stripes. Here we report neutron scattering measurements on stripe-ordered La1.875Ba0.125CuO4. We show that the measured excitations are, surprisingly, quite similar to those in YBa2Cu3O6+x (refs 9, 10) (that is, the predicted spectrum of magnetic excitations is wrong). We find instead that the observed spectrum can be understood within a stripe model by taking account of quantum excitations. Our results support the concept that stripe correlations are essential to high-transition-temperature superconductivity.
The hyperfine interaction of an electron with the nuclei is considered as the primary obstacle to coherent control of the electron spin in semiconductor quantum dots. We show, however, that the nuclei in singly charged quantum dots act constructively by focusing the electron spin precession about a magnetic field into well-defined modes synchronized with a laser pulse protocol. In a dot with a synchronized electron, the light-stimulated fluctuations of the hyperfine nuclear field acting on the electron are suppressed. The information about electron spin precession is imprinted in the nuclei and thereby can be stored for tens of minutes in darkness. The frequency focusing drives an electron spin ensemble into dephasing-free subspaces with the potential to realize single frequency precession of the entire ensemble.
The state of a two-particle system is said to be entangled when its quantum-mechanical wavefunction cannot be factorized into two single-particle wavefunctions. This leads to one of the strongest counter-intuitive features of quantum mechanics, namely non-locality. Experimental realization of quantum entanglement is relatively easy for photons; a starting photon can spontaneously split into a pair of entangled photons inside a nonlinear crystal. Here we investigate the effects of nanostructured metal optical elements on the properties of entangled photons. To this end, we place optically thick metal films perforated with a periodic array of subwavelength holes in the paths of the two entangled photons. Such arrays convert photons into surface-plasmon waves--optically excited compressive charge density waves--which tunnel through the holes before reradiating as photons at the far side. We address the question of whether the entanglement survives such a conversion process. Our coincidence counting measurements show that it does, so demonstrating that the surface plasmons have a true quantum nature. Focusing one of the photon beams on its array reduces the quality of the entanglement. The propagation of the surface plasmons makes the array effectively act as a 'which way' detector.
We present a theory of the metal-insulator transition in a disordered two-dimensional electron gas. A quantum critical point, separating the metallic phase, which is stabilized by electronic interactions, from the insulating phase, where disorder prevails over the electronic interactions, has been identified. The existence of the quantum critical point leads to a divergence in the density of states of the underlying collective modes at the transition, causing the thermodynamic properties to behave critically as the transition is approached. We show that the interplay of electron-electron interactions and disorder can explain the observed transport properties and the anomalous enhancement of the spin susceptibility near the metal-insulator transition.
Within a Kondo lattice, the strong hybridization between electrons localized in real space (r-space) and those delocalized in momentum-space (k-space) generates exotic electronic states called 'heavy fermions'. In URu(2)Si(2) these effects begin at temperatures around 55 K but they are suddenly altered by an unidentified electronic phase transition at T(o) = 17.5 K. Whether this is conventional ordering of the k-space states, or a change in the hybridization of the r-space states at each U atom, is unknown. Here we use spectroscopic imaging scanning tunnelling microscopy (SI-STM) to image the evolution of URu(2)Si(2) electronic structure simultaneously in r-space and k-space. Above T(o), the 'Fano lattice' electronic structure predicted for Kondo screening of a magnetic lattice is revealed. Below T(o), a partial energy gap without any associated density-wave signatures emerges from this Fano lattice. Heavy-quasiparticle interference imaging within this gap reveals its cause as the rapid splitting below T(o) of a light k-space band into two new heavy fermion bands. Thus, the URu(2)Si(2) 'hidden order' state emerges directly from the Fano lattice electronic structure and exhibits characteristics, not of a conventional density wave, but of sudden alterations in both the hybridization at each U atom and the associated heavy fermion states.
We applied the velocity map imaging technique under high-resolution conditions to study ion pair products of the vacuum ultraviolet photodissociation of methyl chloride. We obtained rotationally resolved kinetic energy release spectra that directly provide vibrational frequencies and rotational constants of the fundamental carbocation, CH3+. The technique is analogous to photoelectron spectroscopy, with the chloride anion playing the role of a "heavy electron." The approach shows promise as a general probe of ionic species not amenable to study by traditional methods.
Fully rotationally resolved spectra of three isotopic species of 1:1 clusters of benzene with water (H(2)O, D(2)O, and HDO) were fit to yield moments of inertia that demonstrate unambiguously that water is positioned above the benzene plane in nearly free internal rotation with both hydrogen atoms pointing toward the pi cloud. Ab initio calculations (MP2 level of electron correlation and 6-31 G(**) basis set with basis set superposition error corrections) predict a binding energy D(e) greater, similar 1.78 kilocalories per mole. In both the experimental and theoretical structures, water is situated nearly 1 angstrom within the van der Waals contacts of the monomers, a clear manifestation of hydrogen bond formation in this simple model of aqueous-pi electron interactions.
Fluctuations are important near phase transitions, where they can be difficult to describe quantitatively. Superconductivity in mesoscopic rings is particularly intriguing because the critical temperature is an oscillatory function of magnetic field. There is an exact theory for thermal fluctuations in one-dimensional superconducting rings, which are therefore expected to be an excellent model system. We measured the susceptibility of many rings, one ring at a time, by using a scanning superconducting quantum interference device that can isolate magnetic signals that are seven orders of magnitude smaller than applied flux. We find that the fluctuation theory describes the results and that a single parameter characterizes the ways in which the fluctuations are especially important at magnetic fields where the critical temperature is suppressed.
We report manipulation of the atom number statistics associated with Bose-Einstein condensed atoms confined in an array of weakly linked mesoscopic traps. We used the interference of atoms released from the traps as a sensitive probe of these statistics. By controlling relative strengths of the tunneling rate between traps and atom-atom interactions within each trap, we observed trap states characterized by sub-Poissonian number fluctuations and adiabatic transitions between these number-squeezed states and coherent states of the atom field. The quantum states produced in this work may enable substantial gains in sensitivity for atom interference-based instruments as well as fundamental studies of quantum phase transitions.
A central goal in condensed matter and modern atomic physics is the exploration of quantum phases of matter--in particular, how the universal characteristics of zero-temperature quantum phase transitions differ from those established for thermal phase transitions at non-zero temperature. Compared to conventional condensed matter systems, atomic gases provide a unique opportunity to explore quantum dynamics far from equilibrium. For example, gaseous spinor Bose-Einstein condensates (whose atoms have non-zero internal angular momentum) are quantum fluids that simultaneously realize superfluidity and magnetism, both of which are associated with symmetry breaking. Here we explore spontaneous symmetry breaking in 87Rb spinor condensates, rapidly quenched across a quantum phase transition to a ferromagnetic state. We observe the formation of spin textures, ferromagnetic domains and domain walls, and demonstrate phase-sensitive in situ detection of spin vortices. The latter are topological defects resulting from the symmetry breaking, containing non-zero spin current but no net mass current.
Computer simulations of the supercoiling of DNA, largely limited to stochastic search techniques, can offer important information to complement analytical models and experimental data. Through association of an energy function, minimum-energy supercoiled conformations, fluctuations about these states, and interconversions among forms may be sought. In theory, the observation of such large-scale conformational changes is possible, but modeling and numerical considerations limit the picture obtained in practice. A new computational approach is reported that combines an idealized elastic energy model, a compact B-spline representation of circular duplex DNA, and deterministic minimization and molecular dynamics algorithms. A trefoil knotting result, made possible by a large time-step dynamics scheme, is described. The simulated strand passage supports and details a supercoiled-directed knotting mechanism. This process may be associated with collective bending and twisting motions involved in supercoiling propagation and interwound branching. The results also demonstrate the potential effectiveness of the Langevin/implicit-Euler dynamics scheme for studying biomolecular folding and reactions over biologically interesting time scales.
Recent advances in the precise control of ultracold atomic systems have led to the realisation of Bose Einstein condensates (BECs) and degenerate Fermi gases. An important challenge is to extend this level of control to more complicated molecular systems. One route for producing ultracold molecules is to form them from the atoms in a BEC. For example, a two-photon stimulated Raman transition in a (87)Rb BEC has been used to produce (87)Rb(2) molecules in a single rotational-vibrational state, and ultracold molecules have also been formed through photoassociation of a sodium BEC. Although the coherence properties of such systems have not hitherto been probed, the prospect of creating a superposition of atomic and molecular condensates has initiated much theoretical work. Here we make use of a time-varying magnetic field near a Feshbach resonance to produce coherent coupling between atoms and molecules in a (85)Rb BEC. A mixture of atomic and molecular states is created and probed by sudden changes in the magnetic field, which lead to oscillations in the number of atoms that remain in the condensate. The oscillation frequency, measured over a large range of magnetic fields, is in excellent agreement with the theoretical molecular binding energy, indicating that we have created a quantum superposition of atoms and diatomic molecules two chemically different species.
The van der Waals forces in the entrance valley of the Cl + HD reaction are shown here to play a decisive role in the reaction's dynamics. Exact quantum mechanical calculations of reactive scattering on a potential energy surface without Cl-HD van der Waals forces predict that the HCl and DCl products will be produced almost equally, whereas the same calculations on a new ab initio potential energy surface with van der Waals forces show a strong preference for the production of DCl. This preference is also seen in crossed molecular beam experiments on the reaction. The study of chemical reaction dynamics has now advanced to the stage where even comparatively weak van der Waals interactions can no longer be neglected in calculations of the potential energy surfaces of chemical reactions.
The quantum Hall effect takes place in a two-dimensional electron gas under a strong magnetic field and involves current flow along the edges of the sample. For some particle-hole conjugate states of the fractional regime (for example, with fillings between 1/2 and 1 of the lowest Landau level), early predictions suggested the presence of counter-propagating edge currents in addition to the expected ones. When this did not agree with the measured conductance, it was suggested that disorder and interactions will lead to counter-propagating modes that carry only energy--the so called neutral modes. In addition, a neutral upstream mode (the Majorana mode) was expected for selected wavefunctions proposed for the even-denominator filling 5/2. Here we report the direct observation of counter-propagating neutral modes for fillings of 2/3, 3/5 and 5/2. The basis of our approach is that, if such modes impinge on a narrow constriction, the neutral quasiparticles will be partly reflected and fragmented into charge carriers, which can be detected through shot noise measurements. We find that the resultant shot noise is proportional to the injected current. Moreover, when we simultaneously inject a charge mode, the presence of the neutral mode was found to significantly affect the Fano factor and the temperature of the backscattered charge mode. In particular, such observations for filling 5/2 may single out the non-Abelian wavefunctions for the state.
In materials science and biology, optical near-field microscopies enable spatial resolutions beyond the diffraction limit, but they cannot provide the atomic-scale imaging capabilities of electron microscopy. Given the nature of interactions between electrons and photons, and considering their connections through nanostructures, it should be possible to achieve imaging of evanescent electromagnetic fields with electron pulses when such fields are resolved in both space (nanometre and below) and time (femtosecond). Here we report the development of photon-induced near-field electron microscopy (PINEM), and the associated phenomena. We show that the precise spatiotemporal overlap of femtosecond single-electron packets with intense optical pulses at a nanostructure (individual carbon nanotube or silver nanowire in this instance) results in the direct absorption of integer multiples of photon quanta (nhomega) by the relativistic electrons accelerated to 200 keV. By energy-filtering only those electrons resulting from this absorption, it is possible to image directly in space the near-field electric field distribution, obtain the temporal behaviour of the field on the femtosecond timescale, and map its spatial polarization dependence. We believe that the observation of the photon-induced near-field effect in ultrafast electron microscopy demonstrates the potential for many applications, including those of direct space-time imaging of localized fields at interfaces and visualization of phenomena related to photonics, plasmonics and nanostructures.
Decision making in an uncertain environment poses a conflict between the opposing demands of gathering and exploiting information. In a classic illustration of this 'exploration-exploitation' dilemma, a gambler choosing between multiple slot machines balances the desire to select what seems, on the basis of accumulated experience, the richest option, against the desire to choose a less familiar option that might turn out more advantageous (and thereby provide information for improving future decisions). Far from representing idle curiosity, such exploration is often critical for organisms to discover how best to harvest resources such as food and water. In appetitive choice, substantial experimental evidence, underpinned by computational reinforcement learning (RL) theory, indicates that a dopaminergic, striatal and medial prefrontal network mediates learning to exploit. In contrast, although exploration has been well studied from both theoretical and ethological perspectives, its neural substrates are much less clear. Here we show, in a gambling task, that human subjects' choices can be characterized by a computationally well-regarded strategy for addressing the explore/exploit dilemma. Furthermore, using this characterization to classify decisions as exploratory or exploitative, we employ functional magnetic resonance imaging to show that the frontopolar cortex and intraparietal sulcus are preferentially active during exploratory decisions. In contrast, regions of striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex exhibit activity characteristic of an involvement in value-based exploitative decision making. The results suggest a model of action selection under uncertainty that involves switching between exploratory and exploitative behavioural modes, and provide a computationally precise characterization of the contribution of key decision-related brain systems to each of these functions.
In theory, quantum computers offer a means of solving problems that would be intractable on conventional computers. Assuming that a quantum computer could be constructed, it would in practice be required to function with noisy devices called 'gates'. These gates cause decoherence of the fragile quantum states that are central to the computer's operation. The goal of so-called 'fault-tolerant quantum computing' is therefore to compute accurately even when the error probability per gate (EPG) is high. Here we report a simple architecture for fault-tolerant quantum computing, providing evidence that accurate quantum computing is possible for EPGs as high as three per cent. Such EPGs have been experimentally demonstrated, but to avoid excessive resource overheads required by the necessary architecture, lower EPGs are needed. Assuming the availability of quantum resources comparable to the digital resources available in today's computers, we show that non-trivial quantum computations at EPGs of as high as one per cent could be implemented.
Recent observations of the extrasolar planet HD 189733b did not reveal the presence of water in the emission spectrum of the planet. Yet models of such 'hot-Jupiter' planets predict an abundance of atmospheric water vapour. Validating and constraining these models is crucial to understanding the physics and chemistry of planetary atmospheres in extreme environments. Indications of the presence of water in the atmosphere of HD 189733b have recently been found in transmission spectra, where the planet's atmosphere selectively absorbs the light of the parent star, and in broadband photometry. Here we report the detection of strong water absorption in a high-signal-to-noise, mid-infrared emission spectrum of the planet itself. We find both a strong downturn in the flux ratio below 10 microm and discrete spectral features that are characteristic of strong absorption by water vapour. The differences between these and previous observations are significant and admit the possibility that predicted planetary-scale dynamical weather structures may alter the emission spectrum over time. Models that match the observed spectrum and the broadband photometry suggest that heat redistribution from the dayside to the nightside is weak. Reconciling this with the high nightside temperature will require a better understanding of atmospheric circulation or possible additional energy sources.
Recent observations support the suggestion that short-duration gamma-ray bursts are produced by compact star mergers. The x-ray flares discovered in two short gamma-ray bursts last much longer than the previously proposed postmerger energy-release time scales. Here, we show that they can be produced by differentially rotating, millisecond pulsars after the mergers of binary neutron stars. The differential rotation leads to windup of interior poloidal magnetic fields and the resulting toroidal fields are strong enough to float up and break through the stellar surface. Magnetic reconnection-driven explosive events then occur, leading to multiple x-ray flares minutes after the original gamma-ray burst.
The spin of an electron is a natural two-level system for realizing a quantum bit in the solid state. For an electron trapped in a semiconductor quantum dot, strong quantum confinement highly suppresses the detrimental effect of phonon-related spin relaxation. However, this advantage is offset by the hyperfine interaction between the electron spin and the 10(4) to 10(6) spins of the host nuclei in the quantum dot. Random fluctuations in the nuclear spin ensemble lead to fast spin decoherence in about ten nanoseconds. Spin-echo techniques have been used to mitigate the hyperfine interaction, but completely cancelling the effect is more attractive. In principle, polarizing all the nuclear spins can achieve this but is very difficult to realize in practice. Exploring materials with zero-spin nuclei is another option, and carbon nanotubes, graphene quantum dots and silicon have been proposed. An alternative is to use a semiconductor hole. Unlike an electron, a valence hole in a quantum dot has an atomic p orbital which conveniently goes to zero at the location of all the nuclei, massively suppressing the interaction with the nuclear spins. Furthermore, in a quantum dot with strong strain and strong quantization, the heavy hole with spin-3/2 behaves as a spin-1/2 system and spin decoherence mechanisms are weak. We demonstrate here high fidelity (about 99 per cent) initialization of a single hole spin confined to a self-assembled quantum dot by optical pumping. Our scheme works even at zero magnetic field, demonstrating a negligible hole spin hyperfine interaction. We determine a hole spin relaxation time at low field of about one millisecond. These results suggest a route to the realization of solid-state quantum networks that can intra-convert the spin state with the polarization of a photon.
Quantum tunnelling through a potential barrier (such as occurs in nuclear fusion) is very sensitive to the detailed structure of the system and its intrinsic degrees of freedom. A strong increase of the fusion probability has been observed for heavy deformed nuclei. In light exotic nuclei such as 6He, 11Li and 11Be (termed 'halo' nuclei), the neutron matter extends much further than the usual nuclear interaction scale. However, understanding the effect of the neutron halo on fusion has been controversial--it could induce a large enhancement of fusion, but alternatively the weak binding energy of the nuclei could inhibit the process. Other reaction channels known as direct processes (usually negligible for ordinary nuclei) are also important: for example, a fragment of the halo nucleus could transfer to the target nucleus through a diminished potential barrier. Here we study the reactions of the halo nucleus 6He with a 238U target, at energies near the fusion barrier. Most of these reactions lead to fission of the system, which we use as an experimental signature to identify the contribution of the fusion and transfer channels to the total cross-section. At energies below the fusion barrier, we find no evidence for a substantial enhancement of fusion. Rather, the (large) fission yield is due to a two-neutron transfer reaction, with other direct processes possibly also involved.
Voyager 2 crossed the solar wind termination shock at 83.7 au in the southern hemisphere, approximately 10 au closer to the Sun than found by Voyager 1 in the north. This asymmetry could indicate an asymmetric pressure from an interstellar magnetic field, from transient-induced shock motion, or from the solar wind dynamic pressure. Here we report that the intensity of 4-5 MeV protons accelerated by the shock near Voyager 2 was three times that observed concurrently by Voyager 1, indicating differences in the shock at the two locations. (Companion papers report on the plasma, magnetic field, plasma-wave and lower energy particle observations at the shock.) Voyager 2 did not find the source of anomalous cosmic rays at the shock, suggesting that the source is elsewhere on the shock or in the heliosheath. The small intensity gradient of Galactic cosmic ray helium indicates that either the gradient is further out in the heliosheath or the local interstellar Galactic cosmic ray intensity is lower than expected.
The simple mechanical oscillator, canonically consisting of a coupled mass-spring system, is used in a wide variety of sensitive measurements, including the detection of weak forces and small masses. On the one hand, a classical oscillator has a well-defined amplitude of motion; a quantum oscillator, on the other hand, has a lowest-energy state, or ground state, with a finite-amplitude uncertainty corresponding to zero-point motion. On the macroscopic scale of our everyday experience, owing to interactions with its highly fluctuating thermal environment a mechanical oscillator is filled with many energy quanta and its quantum nature is all but hidden. Recently, in experiments performed at temperatures of a few hundredths of a kelvin, engineered nanomechanical resonators coupled to electrical circuits have been measured to be oscillating in their quantum ground state. These experiments, in addition to providing a glimpse into the underlying quantum behaviour of mesoscopic systems consisting of billions of atoms, represent the initial steps towards the use of mechanical devices as tools for quantum metrology or as a means of coupling hybrid quantum systems. Here we report the development of a coupled, nanoscale optical and mechanical resonator formed in a silicon microchip, in which radiation pressure from a laser is used to cool the mechanical motion down to its quantum ground state (reaching an average phonon occupancy number of 0.85 +- 0.08). This cooling is realized at an environmental temperature of 20 K, roughly one thousand times larger than in previous experiments and paves the way for optical control of mesoscale mechanical oscillators in the quantum regime.
High-temperature superconductivity in copper oxides arises when a parent insulator compound is doped beyond some critical concentration; what exactly happens at this superconductor-insulator transition is a key open question. The cleanest approach is to tune the carrier density using the electric field effect; for example, it was learned in this way that weak electron localization transforms superconducting SrTiO(3) into a Fermi-glass insulator. But in the copper oxides this has been a long-standing technical challenge, because perfect ultrathin films and huge local fields (>10(9) V m(-1)) are needed. Recently, such fields have been obtained using electrolytes or ionic liquids in the electric double-layer transistor configuration. Here we report synthesis of epitaxial films of La(2- x)Sr(x)CuO(4) that are one unit cell thick, and fabrication of double-layer transistors. Very large fields and induced changes in surface carrier density enable shifts in the critical temperature by up to 30 K. Hundreds of resistance versus temperature and carrier density curves were recorded and shown to collapse onto a single function, as predicted for a two-dimensional superconductor-insulator transition. The observed critical resistance is precisely the quantum resistance for pairs, R(Q) = h/(2e) = 6.45 kO, suggestive of a phase transition driven by quantum phase fluctuations, and Cooper pair (de)localization.
Improved control of the motional and internal quantum states of ultracold neutral atoms and ions has opened intriguing possibilities for quantum simulation and quantum computation. Many-body effects have been explored with hundreds of thousands of quantum-degenerate neutral atoms, and coherent light-matter interfaces have been built. Systems of single or a few trapped ions have been used to demonstrate universal quantum computing algorithms and to search for variations of fundamental constants in precision atomic clocks. Until now, atomic quantum gases and single trapped ions have been treated separately in experiments. Here we investigate whether they can be advantageously combined into one hybrid system, by exploring the immersion of a single trapped ion into a Bose-Einstein condensate of neutral atoms. We demonstrate independent control over the two components of the hybrid system, study the fundamental interaction processes and observe sympathetic cooling of the single ion by the condensate. Our experiment calls for further research into the possibility of using this technique for the continuous cooling of quantum computers. We also anticipate that it will lead to explorations of entanglement in hybrid quantum systems and to fundamental studies of the decoherence of a single, locally controlled impurity particle coupled to a quantum environment.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) in liquids and solids is primarily detected by recording the net dipolar magnetic field outside the spin-polarized sample. But the recorded bulk magnetic field itself provides only limited spatial or structural information about the sample. Most NMR applications rely therefore on more elaborate techniques such as magnetic field gradient encoding or spin correlation spectroscopy, which enable spatially resolved imaging and molecular structure analysis, respectively. Here we demonstrate a fundamentally different and intrinsically information-richer modality of detecting NMR, based on the rotation of the polarization of a laser beam by the nuclear spins in a liquid sample. Optical NMR detection has in fact a long history in atomic vapours with narrow resonance lines, but has so far only been applied to highly specialized condensed matter systems such as quantum dots. It has been predicted that laser illumination can shift NMR frequencies and thus aid detection, but the effect is very small and has never been observed. In contrast, our measurements on water and liquid 129Xe show that the complementary effect-the rotation of light polarization by nuclear spins-is readily measurable, and that it is enhanced dramatically in samples containing heavy nuclei. This approach to optical NMR detection should allow correlated optical and NMR spectroscopy on complex molecules, and continuous two-dimensional imaging of nuclear magnetization with spatial resolution limited only by light diffraction.
A fully developed bow shock and magnetosheath were observed near Mercury, providing unambiguous evidence for a strong interaction between Mercury and the solar wind. Inside the sheath there is a distinct region analogous to the magnetosphere or magnetotail of Earth, populated by electrons with lower density and higher temperature than the electrons observed in the solar wind or magnetosheath. At the time of encounter, conditions were such that a perpendicular shock was observed on the inbound leg and a parallel shock was observed on the outbound leg of the trajectory, and energetic plasma electron events were detected upstream from the outbound shock crossing. The interaction is most likely not atmospheric, but the data clearly indicate that the obstacle to solar wind flow is magnetic, either intrinsic or induced. The particle fluxes and energy spectra showed large variations while the spacecraft was inside the magnetosphere, and these variations could be either spatial or temporal.
The production and spectroscopic characterization of fullerene-encapsulated metal-atom clusters is reported. In particular, both solution and solid-state electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra of Sc(3)C(82) have been obtained. ScC(82) also gives an EPR spectrum, but Sc2Cn species-the most abundant metallofullerenes in the mass spectrum-are EPR-silent even though Sc(2) is EPR-active in a rare-gas matrix at 4.2 K. The results suggest that the three scandium atoms in Sc(3)C(82) form an equilateral triangle-as was previously suggested for Sc(3) molecules isolated in a cryogenic rare-gas matrix. The spectrum of ScC(82) has features similar to those found earlier for LaC(82) and YC(82), suggesting that it can also be described as a +3 metal cation within a -3 fullerene radical anion. An implication of this work is that production of macroscopic quantities of clustercontaining fullerenes may make possible the fabrication of exotic new structures with regular arrays of metal-atom clusters isolated in fullerene molecules, resulting in a new type of host/guest nanostructured material.
Deciphering and understanding the small-scale magnetic activity of the quiet solar photosphere should help to solve many of the key problems of solar and stellar physics, such as the magnetic coupling to the outer atmosphere and the coronal heating. At present, we can see only approximately 1 per cent of the complex magnetism of the quiet Sun, which highlights the need to develop a reliable way to investigate the remaining 99 per cent. Here we report three-dimensional radiative transfer modelling of scattering polarization in atomic and molecular lines that indicates the presence of hidden, mixed-polarity fields on subresolution scales. Combining this modelling with recent observational data, we find a ubiquitous tangled magnetic field with an average strength of approximately 130 G, which is much stronger in the intergranular regions of solar surface convection than in the granular regions. So the average magnetic energy density in the quiet solar photosphere is at least two orders of magnitude greater than that derived from simplistic one-dimensional investigations, and sufficient to balance radiative energy losses from the solar chromosphere.
Voyager 1 provided the first look at Saturn's magnetotail and magnetosphere during relatively quiet interplanetary conditions. This report discusses the energetic particle populations of the outer magnetosphere of Saturn and absorption features associated with Titan and Rhea, and compares these observations with Pioneer 11 data of a year earlier. The trapped proton fluxes had soft spectra, represented by power laws E(-gamma) in kinetic energy E, with gamma approximately 7 in the outer magnetosphere and gamma approximately 9 in the magnetotail. Structure associated with the magnetotial was observed as close as 10 Saturn radii (R(s)) on the outbound trajectory. The proton and electron fluxes in the outer magnetosphere and in the magnetotail were variable and appeared to respond to changes in interplanetary conditions. Protons with energies >/= 2 million electron volts had free access to the magnetosphere from interplanetary space and were not stably trapped outside approximately 7.5 R(s).
We demonstrate a quantum coherent electron spin filter by directly measuring the spin polarization of emitted current. The spin filter consists of an open quantum dot in an in-plane magnetic field; the in-plane field gives the two spin directions different Fermi wavelengths resulting in spin-dependent quantum interference of transport through the device. The gate voltage is used to select the preferentially transmitted spin, thus setting the polarity of the filter. This provides a fully electrical method for the creation and detection of spin-polarized currents. Polarizations of emitted current as high as 70% for both spin directions (either aligned or anti-aligned with the external field) are observed.
One of the most surprising predictions of modern quantum theory is that the vacuum of space is not empty. In fact, quantum theory predicts that it teems with virtual particles flitting in and out of existence. Although initially a curiosity, it was quickly realized that these vacuum fluctuations had measurable consequences--for instance, producing the Lamb shift of atomic spectra and modifying the magnetic moment of the electron. This type of renormalization due to vacuum fluctuations is now central to our understanding of nature. However, these effects provide indirect evidence for the existence of vacuum fluctuations. From early on, it was discussed whether it might be possible to more directly observe the virtual particles that compose the quantum vacuum. Forty years ago, it was suggested that a mirror undergoing relativistic motion could convert virtual photons into directly observable real photons. The phenomenon, later termed the dynamical Casimir effect, has not been demonstrated previously. Here we observe the dynamical Casimir effect in a superconducting circuit consisting of a coplanar transmission line with a tunable electrical length. The rate of change of the electrical length can be made very fast (a substantial fraction of the speed of light) by modulating the inductance of a superconducting quantum interference device at high frequencies (>10 gigahertz). In addition to observing the creation of real photons, we detect two-mode squeezing in the emitted radiation, which is a signature of the quantum character of the generation process.
Multiexciton generation (MEG) has been indirectly observed in colloidal quantum dots, both in solution and the solid state, but has not yet been shown to enhance photocurrent in an optoelectronic device. Here, we report a class of solution-processed photoconductive detectors, sensitive in the ultraviolet, visible, and the infrared, in which the internal gain is dramatically enhanced for photon energies Ephoton greater than 2.7 times the quantum-confined bandgap Ebandgap. Three thin-film devices with different quantum-confined bandgaps (set by the size of their constituent lead sulfide nanoparticles) show enhancement determined by the bandgap-normalized photon energy, Ephoton/Ebandgap, which is a clear signature of MEG. The findings point to a valuable role for MEG in enhancing the photocurrent in a solid-state optoelectronic device. We compare the conditions on carrier excitation, recombination, and transport for photoconductive versus photovoltaic devices to benefit from MEG.
The observation of the superfluid to Mott insulator phase transition of ultracold atoms in optical lattices was an enabling discovery in experimental many-body physics, providing the first tangible example of a quantum phase transition (one that occurs even at zero temperature) in an ultracold atomic gas. For a trapped gas, the spatially varying local chemical potential gives rise to multiple quantum phases within a single sample, complicating the interpretation of bulk measurements. Here we report spatially resolved, in-situ imaging of a two-dimensional ultracold atomic gas as it crosses the superfluid to Mott insulator transition, providing direct access to individual characteristics of the insulating, superfluid and normal phases. We present results for the local compressibility in all phases, observing a strong suppression in the insulator domain and suppressed density fluctuations for the Mott insulator, in accordance with the fluctuation-dissipation theorem. Furthermore, we obtain a direct measure of the finite temperature of the system. Taken together, these methods enable a complete characterization of multiple phases in a strongly correlated Bose gas, and of the interplay between quantum and thermal fluctuations in the quantum critical regime.
Topological insulators are a new class of insulators in which a bulk gap for electronic excitations is generated because of the strong spin-orbit coupling inherent to these systems. These materials are distinguished from ordinary insulators by the presence of gapless metallic surface states, resembling chiral edge modes in quantum Hall systems, but with unconventional spin textures. A key predicted feature of such spin-textured boundary states is their insensitivity to spin-independent scattering, which is thought to protect them from backscattering and localization. Recently, experimental and theoretical efforts have provided strong evidence for the existence of both two- and three-dimensional classes of such topological insulator materials in semiconductor quantum well structures and several bismuth-based compounds, but so far experiments have not probed the sensitivity of these chiral states to scattering. Here we use scanning tunnelling spectroscopy and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to visualize the gapless surface states in the three-dimensional topological insulator Bi(1-x)Sb(x), and examine in detail the influence of scattering from disorder caused by random alloying in this compound. We show that, despite strong atomic scale disorder, backscattering between states of opposite momentum and opposite spin is absent. Our observations demonstrate that the chiral nature of these states protects the spin of the carriers. These chiral states are therefore potentially useful for spin-based electronics, in which long spin coherence is critical, and also for quantum computing applications, where topological protection can enable fault-tolerant information processing.
For mercury-free fluorescent lamps and plasma display panels, alternative luminescent materials are required for the efficient conversion of vacuum ultraviolet radiation to visible light. Quantum cutting involving the emission of two visible photons for each vacuum ultraviolet photon absorbed is demonstrated in Eu3+-doped LiGdF4 with the concept of downconversion. Upon excitation of Gd3+ with a high-energy photon, two visible photons can be emitted by Eu3+ through an efficient two-step energy transfer from Gd3+ to Eu3+, with a quantum efficiency that approaches 200 percent.
We measure the differential conductance of a single-electron transistor (SET) irradiated with microwaves. The spin-entangled many-electron Kondo state produces a zero-bias peak in the dc differential conductance if the quantum dot in the SET contains an unpaired electron. When the photon energy hf is comparable to the energy width of the Kondo peak and to e (the charge on the electron) times the microwave voltage across the dot, satellites appear in the differential conductance shifted in voltage by +/-hf/e from the zero-bias resonance. We also observe an overall suppression of the Kondo features with increasing microwave voltage.
The far-infrared spectral region (10-100 cm(-1)) is a fruitful one for studies of solids. The experimental obstacle of weak sources has been partially overcome in recent years by the introduction of very sensitive bolometric radiation detectors cooled by liquid helium to temperatures near 1 degrees K. Used with a mercury arc source and a simple grating monochromator, these detectors have made work in a number of areas of solid-state physics possible. Important examples of such work are, (i) demonstration of the energy gap in superconductors and measurement of gap widths in various metals; (ii) observation of magnetic resonances in ordered magnetic materials, from which precise information about exchange fields and anisotropy energies can be obtained; and (iii) demonstration of the existence of a temperature-dependent low-frequency vibrational mode associated with the Curie-law dielectric constant in certain types of ferroelectric crystals.
The case is made that the spin-liquid state of a Mott insulator, hypothesized to exist by Anderson and identified by him as the correct context for discussing high-temperature superconductors, occurs in these materials and exhibits the principles of fractional quantization identified in the fractional quantum Hall effect. The most important of these is that particles carrying a fraction of an elementary quantum number, in this case spin, attract one another by a powerful gauge force, which can lead to a new kind of superconductivity. The temperature scale for the superconductivity is set by an energy gap in the spin-wave spectrum, which is also the fundamental measure of how "liquid" the spins are.
Recently, there has been great interest in determining the three-dimensional structures of membrane proteins, particularly bacteriorhodopsin, for which a variety of possible folding arrangements have been suggested. In this paper we present nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of deuterated bacteriorhodopsin, and use the data to help interpret the various suggested bacteriorhodopsin folding patterns. The results strongly indicate that (1) a membrane surface (+/- 1 residue) may be defined by NMR in bacteriorhodopsin; (2) all amino acids inside the surface are essentially crystalline; (3) all amino acids outside the surface (surface residues) in bacteriorhodopsin are highly mobile on the time scale of the 2H NMR experiments; (4) NMR data may be used to help evaluate the various structural models that have been proposed; (5) aggregation of purple membrane sheets may lead to an immobilization of the surface residues.
Local manipulation of electric fields at the atomic scale may enable new methods for quantum transport and creates new opportunities for field control of ferromagnetism and spin-based quantum information processing in semiconductors. We used a scanning tunneling microscope to position charged arsenic (As) vacancies in the gallium arsenide 110 [GaAs(110)] surface with atomic precision, thereby tuning the local electrostatic field experienced by single manganese (Mn) acceptors. The effects of this field are quantified by measuring the shift of an acceptor state within the band gap of GaAs. Experiments with varying tip-induced band-bending conditions suggest a large binding energy for surface-layer Mn, which is reduced by direct Coulomb repulsion when the As vacancy is moved nearby.
The ability to switch the coupling between quantum bits (qubits) on and off is essential for implementing many quantum-computing algorithms. We demonstrated such control with two flux qubits coupled together through their mutual inductances and through the dc superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) that reads out their magnetic flux states. A bias current applied to the SQUID in the zero-voltage state induced a change in the dynamic inductance, reducing the coupling energy controllably to zero and reversing its sign.
Protonated methane, CH5+, has unusual vibrational and rotational behavior because its three nonequivalent equilibrium structures have nearly identical energies and its five protons scramble freely. Although many theoretical papers have been published on the quantum mechanics of the system, a better understanding requires spectral data. A complex, high-resolution infrared spectrum of CH5+ corresponding to the C-H stretching band in the 3.4-micrometer region is reported. Although no detailed assignment of the individual lines was made, comparison with other carbocation spectra strongly suggests that the transitions are due to CH5+.
Astrophysical jets are linear structures associated with stars and galaxies which span about seven orders of magnitude in size; the largest jets emanating from galaxies are about 100 times the size of our galaxy and are the largest single objects in the universe. Jets associated with stars are composed of ionized gas moving away from the star with velocities of a few hundred kilometers per second. Extragalactic jets are composed of relativistic particles, magnetic field, and probably additional amounts of cooler ionized plasma either originally ejected in the jet or entired by it out of the surrounding gaseous medium. The initial outflow velocity for extragalactic jets may be relativistic, and average outflow speeds of several thousand kilometers per second are likely. The energy flux carried by extragalactic jets may be in excess of 10(46) ergs per second, depending upon the nature of the jet. A definition of jet properties, deduced from their interaction with the ambient medium, can place essential constraints on models for the central power source in the parent galaxy or quasi-stellar object where they originate.
Intense femtosecond (10(-15) s) light pulses can be used to transform electronic, magnetic and structural order in condensed-matter systems on timescales of electronic and atomic motion. This technique is particularly useful in the study and in the control of materials whose physical properties are governed by the interactions between multiple degrees of freedom. Time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy is in this context a direct and comprehensive, energy- and momentum-selective probe of the ultrafast processes that couple to the electronic degrees of freedom. Previously, the capability of such studies to access electron momentum space away from zero momentum was, however, restricted owing to limitations of the available probing photon energy. Here, using femtosecond extreme-ultraviolet pulses delivered by a high-harmonic-generation source, we use time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to measure the photoinduced vaporization of a charge-ordered state in the potential excitonic insulator 1T-TiSe(2 )(refs 12, 13). By way of stroboscopic imaging of electronic band dispersions at large momentum, in the vicinity of the edge of the first Brillouin zone, we reveal that the collapse of atomic-scale periodic long-range order happens on a timescale as short as 20 femtoseconds. The surprisingly fast response of the system is assigned to screening by the transient generation of free charge carriers. Similar screening scenarios are likely to be relevant in other photoinduced solid-state transitions and may generally determine the response times. Moreover, as electron states with large momenta govern fundamental electronic properties in condensed matter systems, we anticipate that the experimental advance represented by the present study will be useful to study the ultrafast dynamics and microscopic mechanisms of electronic phenomena in a wide range of materials.
Quantum teleportation is the faithful transfer of quantum states between systems, relying on the prior establishment of entanglement and using only classical communication during the transmission. We report teleportation of quantum information between atomic quantum memories separated by about 1 meter. A quantum bit stored in a single trapped ytterbium ion (Yb+) is teleported to a second Yb+ atom with an average fidelity of 90% over a replete set of states. The teleportation protocol is based on the heralded entanglement of the atoms through interference and detection of photons emitted from each atom and guided through optical fibers. This scheme may be used for scalable quantum computation and quantum communication.
Brownian motion of particles affects many branches of science. We report on the Brownian motion of micrometer-sized beads of glass held in air by an optical tweezer, over a wide range of pressures, and we measured the instantaneous velocity of a Brownian particle. Our results provide direct verification of the energy equipartition theorem for a Brownian particle. For short times, the ballistic regime of Brownian motion was observed, in contrast to the usual diffusive regime. We discuss the applications of these methods toward cooling the center-of-mass motion of a bead in vacuum to the quantum ground motional state.
Combined inferences from seismology, high-pressure experiment and theory, geomagnetism, fluid dynamics, and current views of terrestrial planetary evolution lead to models of the earth's core with the following properties. Core formation was contemporaneous with earth accretion; the core is not in chemical equilibrium with the mantle; the outer core is a fluid iron alloy containing significant quantities of lighter elements and is probably almost adiabatic and compositionally uniform; the more iron-rich inner solid core is a consequence of partial freezing of the outer core, and the energy release from this process sustains the earth's magnetic field; and the thermodynamic properties of the core are well constrained by the application of liquid-state theory to seismic and laboratory data.
Frustrated magnets are materials in which localized magnetic moments, or spins, interact through competing exchange interactions that cannot be simultaneously satisfied, giving rise to a large degeneracy of the system ground state. Under certain conditions, this can lead to the formation of fluid-like states of matter, so-called spin liquids, in which the constituent spins are highly correlated but still fluctuate strongly down to a temperature of absolute zero. The fluctuations of the spins in a spin liquid can be classical or quantum and show remarkable collective phenomena such as emergent gauge fields and fractional particle excitations. This exotic behaviour is now being uncovered in the laboratory, providing insight into the properties of spin liquids and challenges to the theoretical description of these materials.
Experiments to investigate the quantum behavior of a macroscopic degree of freedom, namely the phase difference across a Josephson tunnel junction, are described. The experiments involve measurements of the escape rate of the junction from its zero voltage state. Low temperature measurements of the escape rate for junctions that are either nearly undamped or moderately damped agree very closely with predictions for macroscopic quantum tunneling, with no adjustable parameters. Microwave spectroscopy reveals quantized energy levels in the potential well of the junction in excellent agreement with quantum-mechanical calculations. The system can be regarded as a "macroscopic nucleus with wires."
Quantum mechanics allows for many-particle wavefunctions that cannot be factorized into a product of single-particle wavefunctions, even when the constituent particles are entirely distinct. Such 'entangled' states explicitly demonstrate the non-local character of quantum theory, having potential applications in high-precision spectroscopy, quantum communication, cryptography and computation. In general, the more particles that can be entangled, the more clearly nonclassical effects are exhibited--and the more useful the states are for quantum applications. Here we implement a recently proposed entanglement technique to generate entangled states of two and four trapped ions. Coupling between the ions is provided through their collective motional degrees of freedom, but actual motional excitation is minimized. Entanglement is achieved using a single laser pulse, and the method can in principle be applied to any number of ions.
Acceleration of particles by intense laser-plasma interactions represents a rapidly evolving field of interest, as highlighted by the recent demonstration of laser-driven relativistic beams of monoenergetic electrons. Ultrahigh-intensity lasers can produce accelerating fields of 10 TV m(-1) (1 TV = 10(12) V), surpassing those in conventional accelerators by six orders of magnitude. Laser-driven ions with energies of several MeV per nucleon have also been produced. Such ion beams exhibit unprecedented characteristics--short pulse lengths, high currents and low transverse emittance--but their exponential energy spectra have almost 100% energy spread. This large energy spread, which is a consequence of the experimental conditions used to date, remains the biggest impediment to the wider use of this technology. Here we report the production of quasi-monoenergetic laser-driven C5+ ions with a vastly reduced energy spread of 17%. The ions have a mean energy of 3 MeV per nucleon (full-width at half-maximum approximately 0.5 MeV per nucleon) and a longitudinal emittance of less than 2 x 10(-6) eV s for pulse durations shorter than 1 ps. Such laser-driven, high-current, quasi-monoenergetic ion sources may enable significant advances in the development of compact MeV ion accelerators, new diagnostics, medical physics, inertial confinement fusion and fast ignition.
The Rutherford scattering of carged particles from the heavier elements and nuclear scattering and (alpha,p) reactions from the light elements result in energy spectra that are characteristic of the nucleus being bombarded. A simple apparatus for analyzing surfaces based on these ideas can be made by using an alpha source such as Cm244, a solid state detector, and an electronic pulse height analyzer.
Coulomb-blockade transport--whereby the Coulomb interaction between electrons can prohibit their transport around a circuit--occurs in systems in which both the tunnel resistance, Rb between neighbouring sites is large (>>h/e2) and the charging energy, E(C) (E(C) = e2/2C, where C is the capacitance of the site), of an excess electron on a site is large compared to kT. (Here e is the charge of an electron, k is Boltzmann's constant, and h is Planck's constant.) The nature of the individual sites--metallic, superconducting, semiconducting or quantum dot--is to first order irrelevant for this phenomenon to be observed. Coulomb blockade has also been observed in two-dimensional arrays of normal-metal tunnel junctions, but the relatively large capacitances of these micrometre-sized metal islands results in a small charging energy, and so the effect can be seen only at extremely low temperatures. Here we demonstrate that organic thin-film transistors based on highly ordered molecular materials can, to first order, also be considered as an array of sites separated by tunnel resistances. And as a result of the sub-nanometre sizes of the sites (the individual molecules), and hence their small capacitances, the charging energy dominates at room temperature. Conductivity measurements as a function of both gate bias and temperature reveal the presence of thermally activated transport, consistent with the conventional model of Coulomb blockade.
Arrays of weakly coupled quantum systems might compute if subjected to a sequence of electromagnetic pulses of well-defined frequency and length. Such pulsed arrays are true quantum computers: Bits can be placed in superpositionsof 0 and 1, logical operations take place coherently, and dissipation is required only for error correction. Operated with frequent error correction, such a system functions as a parallel digital computer. Operated in a quantum-mechanically coherent manner, such a device functions as a generalpurpose quantum-mechanical micromanipulator, capable of both creating any desired quantum state of the array and transforming that state in any desired way.
The fact that electrical current is carried by individual charges has been known for over 100 years, yet this discreteness has not been directly observed so far. Almost all current measurements involve measuring the voltage drop across a resistor, using Ohm's law, in which the discrete nature of charge does not come into play. However, by sending a direct current through a microelectronic circuit with a chain of islands connected by small tunnel junctions, the individual electrons can be observed one by one. The quantum mechanical tunnelling of single charges in this one-dimensional array is time correlated, and consequently the detected signal has the average frequency f = I/e, where I is the current and e is the electron charge. Here we report a direct observation of these time-correlated single-electron tunnelling oscillations, and show electron counting in the range 5 fA-1 pA. This represents a fundamentally new way to measure extremely small currents, without offset or drift. Moreover, our current measurement, which is based on electron counting, is self-calibrated, as the measured frequency is related to the current only by a natural constant.
Bose-Einstein condensation denotes the formation of a collective quantum ground state of identical particles with integer spin or intrinsic angular momentum. In magnetic insulators, the magnetic properties are due to the unpaired shell electrons that have half-integer spin. However, in some such compounds (KCuCl3 and TlCuCl3), two Cu2+ ions are antiferromagnetically coupled to form a dimer in a crystalline network: the dimer ground state is a spin singlet (total spin zero), separated by an energy gap from the excited triplet state (total spin one). In these dimer compounds, Bose-Einstein condensation becomes theoretically possible. At a critical external magnetic field, the energy of one of the Zeeman split triplet components (a type of boson) intersects the ground-state singlet, resulting in long-range magnetic order; this transition represents a quantum critical point at which Bose-Einstein condensation occurs. Here we report an experimental investigation of the excitation spectrum in such a field-induced magnetically ordered state, using inelastic neutron scattering measurements of TlCuCl3 single crystals. We verify unambiguously the theoretically predicted gapless Goldstone mode characteristic of the Bose-Einstein condensation of the triplet states.
Mesoscopic quantum phase coherence is important because it improves the prospects for handling quantum degrees of freedom in technology. Here we show that the development of such coherence can be monitored using magnetic neutron scattering from a one-dimensional spin chain of an oxide of nickel (Y2BaNiO5), a quantum spin fluid in which no classical static magnetic order is present. In the cleanest samples, the quantum coherence length is 20 nanometers, which is almost an order of magnitude larger than the classical antiferromagnetic correlation length of 3 nanometers. We also demonstrate that the coherence length can be modified by static and thermally activated defects in a quantitatively predictable manner.
Two separate theories are often used to characterize the paramagnetic properties of ferromagnetic materials. At temperatures T well above the Curie temperature, Tc (where the transition from paramagnetic to ferromagnetic behaviour occurs), classical mean-field theory yields the Curie-Weiss law for the magnetic susceptibility: X(T) infinity 1/(T - Weiss constant), where Weiss constant is the Weiss constant. Close to Tc, however, the standard mean-field approach breaks down so that better agreement with experimental data is provided by critical scaling theory: X(T) infinity 1/(T - Tc)gamma, where gamma is a scaling exponent. But there is no known model capable of predicting the measured values of gamma nor its variation among different substances. Here I use a mean-field cluster model based on finite-size thermostatistics to extend the range of mean-field theory, thereby eliminating the need for a separate scaling regime. The mean-field approximation is justified by using a kinetic-energy term to maintain the microcanonical ensembles. The model reproduces the Curie-Weiss law at high temperatures, but the classical Weiss transition at Tc = Weiss constant is suppressed by finite-size effects. Instead, the fraction of clusters with a specific amount of order diverges at Tc, yielding a transition that is mathematically similar to Bose-Einstein condensation. At all temperatures above Tc, the model matches the measured magnetic susceptibilities of crystalline EuO, Gd, Co and Ni, thus providing a unified picture for both the critical-scaling and Curie-Weiss regimes.
Long-duration gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) release copious amounts of energy across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, and so provide a window into the process of black hole formation from the collapse of massive stars. Previous early optical observations of even the most exceptional GRBs (990123 and 030329) lacked both the temporal resolution to probe the optical flash in detail and the accuracy needed to trace the transition from the prompt emission within the outflow to external shocks caused by interaction with the progenitor environment. Here we report observations of the extraordinarily bright prompt optical and gamma-ray emission of GRB 080319B that provide diagnostics within seconds of its formation, followed by broadband observations of the afterglow decay that continued for weeks. We show that the prompt emission stems from a single physical region, implying an extremely relativistic outflow that propagates within the narrow inner core of a two-component jet.
A full quantum dynamical study of the reactions of a hydrogen atom with water, on an accurate ab initio potential energy surface, is reported. The theoretical results are compared with available experimental data for the exchange and abstraction reactions in H + D2O and H + H2O. Clear agreement between theory and experiment is revealed for available thermal rate coefficients and the effects of vibrational excitation of the reactants. The excellent agreement between experiment and theory on integral cross sections for the exchange reaction is unprecedented beyond atom-diatom reactions. However, the experimental cross sections for abstraction are larger than the theoretical values by more than a factor of 10. Further experiments are required to resolve this.
During magnetic reconnection, the field lines must break and reconnect to release the energy that drives solar and stellar flares and other explosive events in space and in the laboratory. Exactly how this happens has been unclear, because dissipation is needed to break magnetic field lines and classical collisions are typically weak. Ion-electron drag arising from turbulence, dubbed 'anomalous resistivity', and thermal momentum transport are two mechanisms that have been widely invoked. Measurements of enhanced turbulence near reconnection sites in space and in the laboratory support the anomalous resistivity idea but there has been no demonstration from measurements that this turbulence produces the necessary enhanced drag. Here we report computer simulations that show that neither of the two previously favoured mechanisms controls how magnetic field lines reconnect in the plasmas of greatest interest, those in which the magnetic field dominates the energy budget. Rather, we find that when the current layers that form during magnetic reconnection become too intense, they disintegrate and spread into a complex web of filaments that causes the rate of reconnection to increase abruptly. This filamentary web can be explored in the laboratory or in space with satellites that can measure the resulting electromagnetic turbulence.
Power dissipation is a fundamental problem for nanoelectronic circuits. Scaling the supply voltage reduces the energy needed for switching, but the field-effect transistors (FETs) in today's integrated circuits require at least 60 mV of gate voltage to increase the current by one order of magnitude at room temperature. Tunnel FETs avoid this limit by using quantum-mechanical band-to-band tunnelling, rather than thermal injection, to inject charge carriers into the device channel. Tunnel FETs based on ultrathin semiconducting films or nanowires could achieve a 100-fold power reduction over complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) transistors, so integrating tunnel FETs with CMOS technology could improve low-power integrated circuits.
Despite the abundance of "sandwich" complexes, in which two cyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ligands flank a metal center, this motif has not been extended to sheets of multiple metal atoms. We prepared and isolated two such compounds. In the first, three palladium centers form a planar triangular array, capped by chlorides, between two cycloheptatrienyl ligands. In the second, a pentapalladium sheet adopts an edge-sharing triangle-trapezoid skeleton between two naphthacene rings. The compounds were characterized by x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The nature of bonding in the clusters was analyzed by quantum calculations.
Hot electrons in semiconductors lose their energy very quickly (within picoseconds) to lattice vibrations. Slowing this energy loss could prove useful for more efficient photovoltaic or infrared devices. With their well-separated electronic states, quantum dots should display slow relaxation, but other mechanisms have made it difficult to observe. We report slow intraband relaxation (>1 nanosecond) in colloidal quantum dots. The small cadmium selenide (CdSe) dots, with an intraband energy separation of approximately 0.25 electron volts, are capped by an epitaxial zinc selenide (ZnSe) shell. The shell is terminated by a CdSe passivating layer to remove electron traps and is covered by ligands of low infrared absorbance (alkane thiols) at the intraband energy. We found that relaxation is markedly slowed with increasing ZnSe shell thickness.
The superconducting transport characteristics of HgBa(2) CaCu(2)O(6+delta) (Hg-1212) films and grain-boundary junctions grown on (100)-oriented SrTiO(3) bicrystal substrates have been investigated. The films exhibit a zero-resistance temperature of approximately 120 kelvin and sustain large critical current densities, with values as high as 10(6) amperes per square centimeter at around 100 kelvin. On the other hand, the grain boundaries behave as weak links, with substantially lower critical currents, as is observed for other cuprate superconductors. A reduction of three orders of magnitude in critical current was observed for transport across a 36.8 degrees grain boundary. The current-voltage characteristics of bridges across such a grain boundary show weak-link behavior qualitatively resembling that of a resistively shunted junction. Single-level direct-current superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) have been fabricated with such bicrystal junctions. These SQUIDs show clear periodic voltage modulations when subjected to applied magnetic fields. The SQUIDs operate at temperatures as high as 111.8 kelvin, which makes them attractive for operation in portable sensors and devices that utilize nonconventional cooling methods.
Magnetic neutron scattering provides evidence for nucleation of antiferromagnetic droplets around impurities in a doped nickel oxide-based quantum magnet. The undoped parent compound contains a spin liquid with a cooperative singlet ground state and a gap in the magnetic excitation spectrum. Calcium doping creates excitations below the gap with an incommensurate structure factor. We show that weakly interacting antiferromagnetic droplets with a central phase shift of pi and a size controlled by the correlation length of the quantum liquid can account for the data. The experiment provides a quantitative impression of the magnetic polarization cloud associated with holes in a doped transition metal oxide.
Magnetic fields play a key role in most astrophysical systems, from the Sun to active galactic nuclei. They can be studied through their effects on atomic energy levels, which produce polarized spectral lines. In particular, anisotropic radiation 'pumping' processes (which send electrons to higher atomic levels) induce population imbalances that are modified by weak magnetic fields. Here we report peculiarly polarized light in the He I 10,830-A multiplet observed in a coronal filament located at the centre of the solar disk. We show that the polarized light arises from selective absorption from the ground level of the triplet system of helium, and that it implies the presence of magnetic fields of the order of a few gauss that are highly inclined with respect to the solar radius vector. This disproves the common belief that population imbalances in long-lived atomic levels are insignificant in the presence of inclined fields of the order of a few gauss, and opens up a new diagnostic window for the investigation of solar magnetic fields.
The scanning tunneling microscope (STM) can be used to measure current-voltage characteristics on an atomic scale. The attachment of copper phthalocyanine molecules, in contrast to a variety of other molecules, to graphite changes the electrical characteristics of the STM from relatively symmetric to highly asymmetric or rectifying. Evidence is presented to show that the asymmetry arises because of the electronic energy levels of the copper phthalocyanine. The organic molecules were bonded to the graphite by an acid-base reaction that may have wide applicability.
It is important to be able to determine the state of a quantum system and to measure properties of its evolution. State determination can be achieved using tomography, in which the system is subjected to a series of experiments, whereas spectroscopy can be used to probe the energy spectrum associated with the system's evolution. Here we show that, for a quantum system whose state or evolution can be modelled on a quantum computer, tomography and spectroscopy can be interpreted as dual forms of quantum computation. Specifically, we find that the phase estimation algorithm (which underlies a quantum computer's ability to perform efficient simulations and to factorize large numbers) can be adapted for tomography or spectroscopy. This is analogous to the situation encountered in scattering experiments, in which it is possible to obtain information about both the state of the scatterer and its interactions. We provide an experimental demonstration of the tomographic application by performing a measurement of the Wigner function (a phase space distribution) of a quantum system. For this purpose, we use three qubits formed from spin-1/2 nuclei in a quantum computation involving liquid-state nuclear magnetic resonance.
Light usually propagates inside transparent materials in well known ways. However, recent research has examined the possibility of modifying the way the light travels by taking a normal transparent dielectric and inserting tiny metallic inclusions of various shapes and arrangements. As light passes through these structures, oscillating electric currents are set up that generate electromagnetic field moments; these can lead to dramatic effects on the light propagation, such as negative refraction. Possible applications include lenses that break traditional diffraction limits and 'invisibility cloaks' (refs 5, 6). Significantly less research has focused on the potential of such structures for slowing, trapping and releasing light signals. Here we demonstrate theoretically that an axially varying heterostructure with a metamaterial core of negative refractive index can be used to efficiently and coherently bring light to a complete standstill. In contrast to previous approaches for decelerating and storing light, the present scheme simultaneously allows for high in-coupling efficiencies and broadband, room-temperature operation. Surprisingly, our analysis reveals a critical point at which the effective thickness of the waveguide is reduced to zero, preventing the light wave from propagating further. At this point, the light ray is permanently trapped, its trajectory forming a double light-cone that we call an 'optical clepsydra'. Each frequency component of the wave packet is stopped at a different guide thickness, leading to the spatial separation of its spectrum and the formation of a 'trapped rainbow'. Our results bridge the gap between two important contemporary realms of science-metamaterials and slow light. Combined investigations may lead to applications in optical data processing and storage or the realization of quantum optical memories.
Measurements with the Energetic Particle Composition instrument (EPAC) aboard Ulysses show particles from near the ecliptic that were apparently accelerated by shocks associated with a corotating interaction region. The particles were detected together with the shocks and even when shocks no longer arrived at Ulysses up to -65 degrees of heliographic latitude but not beyond. Particles could have reached these latitudes along magnetic fields; such connections to the outer lower latitude heliosphere evidently do not exist above that latitude. The accelerated streams have composition similar to solar wind abundances, no dispersion, and a net inward anisotropy. The underlying composition between the recurrent stream is similar to the anomalous component of cosmic rays. The channel sensitive to high-energy protons (> 230 megaelectron volts) shows a 26-day variation of the flux superimposed on the heliospheric modulation of galactic ions.
Spectroscopic methods involving the sudden injection or ejection of electrons in materials are a powerful probe of electronic structure and interactions. These techniques, such as photoemission and tunnelling, yield measurements of the 'single-particle' density of states spectrum of a system. This density of states is proportional to the probability of successfully injecting or ejecting an electron in these experiments. It is equal to the number of electronic states in the system able to accept an injected electron as a function of its energy, and is among the most fundamental and directly calculable quantities in theories of highly interacting systems. However, the two-dimensional electron system (2DES), host to remarkable correlated electron states such as the fractional quantum Hall effect, has proved difficult to probe spectroscopically. Here we present an improved version of time-domain capacitance spectroscopy that allows us to measure the single-particle density of states of a 2DES with unprecedented fidelity and resolution. Using the method, we perform measurements of a cold 2DES, providing direct measurements of interesting correlated electronic effects at energies that are difficult to reach with other techniques; these effects include the single-particle exchange-enhanced spin gap, single-particle lifetimes in the quantum Hall system, and exchange splitting of Landau levels not at the Fermi surface.
Terrestrial gamma-ray flashes (TGFs) from Earth's upper atmosphere have been detected with the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (RHESSI) satellite. The gamma-ray spectra typically extend up to 10 to 20 megaelectron volts (MeV); a simple bremsstrahlung model suggests that most of the electrons that produce the gamma rays have energies on the order of 20 to 40 MeV. RHESSI detects 10 to 20 TGFs per month, corresponding to approximately 50 per day globally, perhaps many more if they are beamed. Both the frequency of occurrence and maximum photon energy are more than an order of magnitude higher than previously known for these events.
We measured Kondo-assisted tunneling via C60 molecules in contact with ferromagnetic nickel electrodes. Kondo correlations persisted despite the presence of ferromagnetism, but the Kondo peak in the differential conductance was split by an amount that decreased (even to zero) as the moments in the two electrodes were turned from parallel to antiparallel alignment. The splitting is too large to be explained by a local magnetic field. However, the voltage, temperature, and magnetic field dependence of the signals agree with predictions for an exchange splitting of the Kondo resonance. The Kondo effect leads to negative values of magnetoresistance, with magnitudes much larger than the Julliere estimate.
The drive towards the development of molecular electronics is placing increasing demands on the level of control that must be exerted on the electronic structure of materials. Proposed device architectures ultimately rely on tuning the interactions between individual electronic states, which amounts to controlling the detailed spatial structure of the electronic wavefunctions in the constituent molecules. Few experimental tools are available to probe this spatial structure directly, and the shapes of molecular wavefunctions are usually only known from theoretical investigations. Here we present scanning tunnelling spectroscopy measurements of the two-dimensional structure of individual wavefunctions in metallic single-walled carbon nanotubes; these measurements reveal spatial patterns that can be directly understood from the electronic structure of a single graphite sheet, and which represent an elegant illustration of Bloch's theorem at the level of individual wavefunctions. We also observe energy-dependent interference patterns in the wavefunctions and exploit these to directly measure the linear electronic dispersion relation of the metallic single-walled carbon nanotube.
There is currently much interest in the development of 'spintronic' devices, in which harnessing the spins of electrons (rather than just their charges) is anticipated to provide new functionalities that go beyond those possible with conventional electronic devices. One widely studied example of an effect that has its roots in the electron's spin degree of freedom is the torque exerted by a spin-polarized electric current on the spin moment of a nanometre-scale magnet. This torque causes the magnetic moment to rotate at potentially useful frequencies. Here we report a very different phenomenon that is also based on the interplay between spin dynamics and spin-dependent transport, and which arises from unusual diode behaviour. We show that the application of a small radio-frequency alternating current to a nanometre-scale magnetic tunnel junction can generate a measurable direct-current (d.c.) voltage across the device when the frequency is resonant with the spin oscillations that arise from the spin-torque effect: at resonance (which can be tuned by an external magnetic field), the structure exhibits different resistance states depending on the direction of the current. This behaviour is markedly different from that of a conventional semiconductor diode, and could form the basis of a nanometre-scale radio-frequency detector in telecommunication circuits.
A hallmark of graphene is its unusual conical band structure that leads to a zero-energy band gap at a single Dirac crossing point. By measuring the spectral function of charge carriers in quasi-freestanding graphene with angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, we showed that at finite doping, this well-known linear Dirac spectrum does not provide a full description of the charge-carrying excitations. We observed composite "plasmaron" particles, which are bound states of charge carriers with plasmons, the density oscillations of the graphene electron gas. The Dirac crossing point is resolved into three crossings: the first between pure charge bands, the second between pure plasmaron bands, and the third a ring-shaped crossing between charge and plasmaron bands.
Large-scale superconducting electric devices for power industry depend critically on wires with high critical current densities at temperatures where cryogenic losses are tolerable. This restricts choice to two high-temperature cuprate superconductors, (Bi,Pb)2Sr2Ca2Cu3Ox and YBa2Cu3Ox, and possibly to MgB2, recently discovered to superconduct at 39 K. Crystal structure and material anisotropy place fundamental restrictions on their properties, especially in polycrystalline form. So far, power applications have followed a largely empirical, twin-track approach of conductor development and construction of prototype devices. The feasibility of superconducting power cables, magnetic energy-storage devices, transformers, fault current limiters and motors, largely using (Bi,Pb)2Sr2Ca2Cu3Ox conductor, is proven. Widespread applications now depend significantly on cost-effective resolution of fundamental materials and fabrication issues, which control the production of low-cost, high-performance conductors of these remarkable compounds.
Magnetotunneling spectroscopy is used as a noninvasive and nondestructive probe to produce two-dimensional spatial images of the probability density of an electron confined in a self-assembled semiconductor quantum dot. The technique exploits the effect of the classical Lorentz force on the motion of a tunneling electron and can be regarded as the momentum (k) space analog of scanning tunneling microscopy imaging. The images reveal the elliptical symmetry of the ground state and the characteristic lobes of the higher energy states.
An inhomogeneous superconducting state, not yet conclusively identified, was predicted by Fulde and Ferrell and Larkin and Ovchinnikov (FFLO) to arise in superconductors with strong Pauli limiting, a consequence of the electrons' Zeeman (spin) energy in a magnetic field. Radovan et al. propose that the observed cascades of steps in magnetization of the heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn5, within the recently discovered second low-temperature state, are due to transitions between Landau-level (LL) states with different m-quanta vortices, expected under certain conditions when the magnetic field is swept within the FFLO state. The authors then conclude that the observed steps in magnetization constitute a proof that the low-temperature state in CeCoIn5 is indeed an FFLO state. We argue that this interpretation of the observed steps in magnetization cannot be supported on either quantitative or qualitative grounds.
The pseudogap region of the phase diagram is an important unsolved puzzle in the field of high-transition-temperature (high-T(c)) superconductivity, characterized by anomalous physical properties. There are open questions about the number of distinct phases and the possible presence of a quantum-critical point underneath the superconducting dome. The picture has remained unclear because there has not been conclusive evidence for a new type of order. Neutron scattering measurements for YBa(2)Cu(3)O(6+delta) (YBCO) resulted in contradictory claims of no and weak magnetic order, and the interpretation of muon spin relaxation measurements on YBCO and of circularly polarized photoemission experiments on Bi(2)Sr(2)CaCu(2)O(8+delta)(refs 12, 13) has been controversial. Here we use polarized neutron diffraction to demonstrate for the model superconductor HgBa(2)CuO(4+delta) (Hg1201) that the characteristic temperature T* marks the onset of an unusual magnetic order. Together with recent results for YBCO, this observation constitutes a demonstration of the universal existence of such a state. The findings appear to rule out theories that regard T* as a crossover temperature rather than a phase transition temperature. Instead, they are consistent with a variant of previously proposed charge-current-loop order that involves apical oxygen orbitals, and with the notion that many of the unusual properties arise from the presence of a quantum-critical point.
Echolocating bats can use sonar to discriminate among targets which reflect echoes differing in spectral distribution of energy but not in overall intensity. They can detect differences smaller than 1 millimeter in fine target structure. Bats may be capable of classifying targets from echo spectral signatures and might thus be able to distinguish among flying insect prey by sonar.
Stochastic resonance is a counterintuitive concept: the addition of noise to a noisy system induces coherent amplification of its response. First suggested as a mechanism for the cyclic recurrence of ice ages, stochastic resonance has been seen in a wide variety of macroscopic physical systems: bistable ring lasers, superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs), magnetoelastic ribbons and neurophysiological systems such as the receptors in crickets and crayfish. Although fundamentally important as a mechanism of coherent signal amplification, stochastic resonance has yet to be observed in nanoscale systems. Here we report the observation of stochastic resonance in bistable nanomechanical silicon oscillators. Our nanomechanical systems consist of beams that are clamped at each end and driven into transverse oscillation with the use of a radiofrequency source. Modulation of the source induces controllable switching of the beams between two stable, distinct states. We observe that the addition of white noise causes a marked amplification of the signal strength. Stochastic resonance in nanomechanical systems could have a function in the realization of controllable high-speed nanomechanical memory cells, and paves the way for exploring macroscopic quantum coherence and tunnelling.
Gold clusters ranging in diameter from 1 to 6 nanometers have been prepared on single crystalline surfaces of titania in ultrahigh vacuum to investigate the unusual size dependence of the low-temperature catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide. Scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) and elevated pressure reaction kinetics measurements show that the structure sensitivity of this reaction on gold clusters supported on titania is related to a quantum size effect with respect to the thickness of the gold islands; islands with two layers of gold are most effective for catalyzing the oxidation of carbon monoxide. These results suggest that supported clusters, in general, may have unusual catalytic properties as one dimension of the cluster becomes smaller than three atomic spacings.
It was established over a decade ago that the remarkable high-energy transients known as soft gamma-ray repeaters (SGRs) are located in our Galaxy and originate from neutron stars with intense (< or = 10(15)G) magnetic fields-so-called 'magnetars'. On 27 December 2004, a giant flare with a fluence exceeding 0.3 erg cm(-2) was detected from SGR 1806-20. Here we report the detection of a fading radio counterpart to this event. We began a monitoring programme from 0.2 to 250 GHz and obtained a high-resolution 21-cm radio spectrum that traces the intervening interstellar neutral hydrogen clouds. Analysis of the spectrum yields the first direct distance measurement of SGR 1806-20: the source is located at a distance greater than 6.4 kpc and we argue that it is nearer than 9.8 kpc. If correct, our distance estimate lowers the total energy of the explosion and relaxes the demands on theoretical models. The energetics and the rapid decay of the radio source are not compatible with the afterglow model that is usually invoked for gamma-ray bursts. Instead, we suggest that the rapidly decaying radio emission arises from the debris ejected during the explosion.
The x-ray photoelectron spectra of the oxygen 1s level of olivines contain a single component whereas those of pyroxenes contain two components with an intensity ratio of 2:1 and an energy separation of about 1 electron volt. We interpret these two components to be the result of the binding energy differences between nonbridging and bridging oxygen atoms within a silicate chain in the pyroxene structure.
The energy source of the anomalous X-ray pulsars (AXPs) is not understood, hence their designation as anomalous. Unlike binary X-ray pulsars, no companions are seen, so the energy cannot be supplied by accretion of matter from a companion star. The loss of rotational energy, which powers radio pulsars, is insufficient to power AXPs. Two models are generally considered: accretion from a large disk left over from the birth process, or decay of a very strong magnetic field (10(15) G) associated with a 'magnetar'. The lack of counterparts at other wavelengths has hampered progress in our understanding of these objects. Here we report deep optical observations of the field around 4U0142+61, which is the brightest AXP in X-rays. The source has no associated supernova remnant, which, together with its spin-down timescale of approximately 10(5) yr (ref. 5), suggests that it may be relatively old. We find an object with peculiar optical colours at the position of the X-ray source, and argue that it is the optical counterpart. The optical emission is too faint to admit the presence of a large accretion disk, but may be consistent with magnetospheric emission from a magnetar.
The light-induced insulator-metal transition in the "colossal magnetoresistance" compound Pr0.7Ca0.3MnO3 is shown to generate a well-localized conducting path while the bulk of the sample remains insulating. The path can be visualized through a change of reflectivity that accompanies the phase transition. Its visibility provides a tool for gaining insight into electronic transport in materials with strong magnetic correlations. For example, a conducting path can be generated or removed at an arbitrary position just because of the presence of another path. Such manipulation may be useful in the construction of optical switches.
The frequency sensitivity of the auditory nervous system of cricket frogs (Acris) varies geographically. This variation is closely matched to the spectral energy in their mating calls, thus enabling them to respond preferentially to the calls of their local dialect.
High-quality crystals of the organic molecular semiconductors tetracene and pentacene were used to prepare metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) structures exhibiting hole and electron mobilities exceeding 10(4) square centimeters per volt per second. The carrier concentration in the channel region of these ambipolar field-effect devices was controlled by the applied gate voltage. Well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations and quantized Hall plateaus were observed for two-dimensional carrier densities in the range of 10(11) per square centimeter. Fractional quantum Hall states were observed in tetracene crystals at temperatures as high as approximately 2 kelvin.
Organic ligands have been designed for the stabilization of specific geometries of compounds of nonmetallic elements. These ligands have made possible the isolation, or direct observation, of large numbers of trigonal bipyramidal organo-nonmetallic species. Many of these species are analogs of transition states for nucleophilic displacement reactions and have been stabilized by the ligands to such a degree that they have become ground-state energy minima. Ideas derived from research on these species have been applied to carbon species to generate a molecule that is an analog of the transition state for the associative nucleophilic displacement reaction. The molecule is a pentavalent carbon species that has been observed by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
Trapped atomic ions have been used successfully to demonstrate basic elements of universal quantum information processing. Nevertheless, scaling up such methods to achieve large-scale, universal quantum information processing (or more specialized quantum simulations) remains challenging. The use of easily controllable and stable microwave sources, rather than complex laser systems, could remove obstacles to scalability. However, the microwave approach has drawbacks: it involves the use of magnetic-field-sensitive states, which shorten coherence times considerably, and requires large, stable magnetic field gradients. Here we show how to overcome both problems by using stationary atomic quantum states as qubits that are induced by microwave fields (that is, by dressing magnetic-field-sensitive states with microwave fields). This permits fast quantum logic, even in the presence of a small (effective) Lamb-Dicke parameter (and, therefore, moderate magnetic field gradients). We experimentally demonstrate the basic building blocks of this scheme, showing that the dressed states are long lived and that coherence times are increased by more than two orders of magnitude relative to those of bare magnetic-field-sensitive states. This improves the prospects of microwave-driven ion trap quantum information processing, and offers a route to extending coherence times in all systems that suffer from magnetic noise, such as neutral atoms, nitrogen-vacancy centres, quantum dots or circuit quantum electrodynamic systems.
We have designed and operated a superconducting tunnel junction circuit that behaves as a two-level atom: the "quantronium." An arbitrary evolution of its quantum state can be programmed with a series of microwave pulses, and a projective measurement of the state can be performed by a pulsed readout subcircuit. The measured quality factor of quantum coherence Qphi approximately 25,000 is sufficiently high that a solid-state quantum processor based on this type of circuit can be envisioned.
Vibrational spectra for a single molecule adsorbed on a solid surface have been obtained with a scanning tunneling microscope (STM). Inelastic electron tunneling spectra for an isolated acetylene (C2H2) molecule adsorbed on the copper (100) surface showed an increase in the tunneling conductance at 358 millivolts, resulting from excitation of the C-H stretch mode. An isotopic shift to 266 millivolts was observed for deuterated acetylene (C2D2). Vibrational microscopy from spatial imaging of the inelastic tunneling channels yielded additional data to further distinguish and characterize the two isotopes. Single-molecule vibrational analysis should lead to better understanding and control of surface chemistry at the atomic level.
Quantum information processing offers potentially great advantages over classical information processing, both for efficient algorithms and for secure communication. Therefore, it is important to establish that scalable control of a large number of quantum bits (qubits) can be achieved in practice. There are a rapidly growing number of proposed device technologies for quantum information processing. Of these technologies, those exploiting nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) have been the first to demonstrate non-trivial quantum algorithms with small numbers of qubits. To compare different physical realizations of quantum information processors, it is necessary to establish benchmark experiments that are independent of the underlying physical system, and that demonstrate reliable and coherent control of a reasonable number of qubits. Here we report an experimental realization of an algorithmic benchmark using an NMR technique that involves coherent manipulation of seven qubits. Moreover, our experimental procedure can be used as a reliable and efficient method for creating a standard pseudopure state, the first step for implementing traditional quantum algorithms in liquid state NMR systems. The benchmark and the techniques can be adapted for use with other proposed quantum devices.
The homogeneous linewidths in the photoluminescence excitation spectrum of a single, naturally formed gallium arsenide (GaAs) quantum dot have been measured with high spatial and spectral resolution. The energies and linewidths of the homogeneous spectrum provide a new perspective on the dephasing dynamics of the exciton in a quantum-confined, solid-state system. The origins of the linewidths are discussed in terms of the dynamics of the exciton in zero dimensions, in particular, in terms of lifetime broadening through the emission or absorption of phonons and photons.
Clusters of metal ions are a class of compounds actively investigated for their magnetic properties, which should gradually change from those of simple paramagnets to those of bulk magnets. However, their interest lies in a number of different disciplines: chemistry, which seeks new synthetic strategies to make larger and larger clusters in a controlled manner; physics, which can test the validity of quantum mechanical approaches at the nanometer scale; and biology, which can use them as models of biomineralization of magnetic particles.
Although microscopic laws of physics are invariant under the reversal of the arrow of time, the transport of energy and information in most devices is an irreversible process. It is this irreversibility that leads to intrinsic dissipations in electronic devices and limits the possibility of quantum computation. We theoretically predict that the electric field can induce a substantial amount of dissipationless quantum spin current at room temperature, in hole-doped semiconductors such as Si, Ge, and GaAs. On the basis of a generalization of the quantum Hall effect, the predicted effect leads to efficient spin injection without the need for metallic ferromagnets. Principles found here could enable quantum spintronic devices with integrated information processing and storage units, operating with low power consumption and performing reversible quantum computation.
The massive flare of 27 December 2004 from the soft gamma-ray repeater SGR 1806-20, a possible magnetar, saturated almost all gamma-ray detectors, meaning that the profile of the pulse was poorly characterized. An accurate profile is essential to determine physically what was happening at the source. Here we report the unsaturated gamma-ray profile for the first 600 ms of the flare, with a time resolution of 5.48 ms. The peak of the profile (of the order of 10(7) photons cm(-2) s(-1)) was reached approximately 50 ms after the onset of the flare, and was then followed by a gradual decrease with superposed oscillatory modulations possibly representing repeated energy injections with approximately 60-ms intervals. The implied total energy is comparable to the stored magnetic energy in a magnetar (approximately 10(47) erg) based on the dipole magnetic field intensity (approximately 10(15) G), suggesting either that the energy release mechanism was extremely efficient or that the interior magnetic field is much stronger than the external dipole field.
According to Bloch's theorem, electronic wavefunctions in perfectly ordered crystals are extended, which implies that the probability of finding an electron is the same over the entire crystal. Such extended states can lead to metallic behaviour. But when disorder is introduced in the crystal, electron states can become localized, and the system can undergo a metal-insulator transition (also known as an Anderson transition). Here we theoretically investigate the effect on the physical properties of the electron wavefunctions of introducing long-range correlations in the disorder in one-dimensional binary solids, and find a correlation-induced metal-insulator transition. We perform numerical simulations using a one-dimensional tight-binding model, and find a threshold value for the exponent characterizing the long-range correlations of the system. Above this threshold, and in the thermodynamic limit, the system behaves as a conductor within a broad energy band; below threshold, the system behaves as an insulator. We discuss the possible relevance of this result for electronic transport in DNA, which displays long-range correlations and has recently been reported to be a one-dimensional disordered conductor.
As the speed of a crack propagating through a brittle material increases, a dynamical instability leads to an increased roughening of the fracture surface. Cracks moving at low speeds create atomically flat mirror-like surfaces; at higher speeds, rougher, less reflective ('mist') and finally very rough, irregularly faceted ('hackle') surfaces are formed. The behaviour is observed in many different brittle materials, but the underlying physical principles, though extensively debated, remain unresolved. Most existing theories of fracture assume a linear elastic stress-strain law. However, the relation between stress and strain in real solids is strongly nonlinear due to large deformations near a moving crack tip, a phenomenon referred to as hyperelasticity. Here we use massively parallel large-scale atomistic simulations--employing a simple atomistic material model that allows a systematic transition from linear elastic to strongly nonlinear behaviour--to show that hyperelasticity plays a governing role in the onset of the instability. We report a generalized model that describes the onset of instability as a competition between different mechanisms controlled by the local stress field and local energy flow near the crack tip. Our results indicate that such instabilities are intrinsic to dynamical fracture and they help to explain a range of controversial experimental and computational results.
The low-energy charged-particle (LECP) instrument on Voyager 2 measured lowenergy electrons and ions near and within the magnetosphere of Uranus. Initial analysis of the LECP measurements has revealed the following. (i) The magnetospheric particle population consists principally of protons and electrons having energies to at least 4 and 1.2 megaelectron volts, respectively, with electron intensities substantially excceding proton intensities at a given energy. (ii) The intensity profile for both particle species shows evidence that the particles were swept by planetry satellites out to at least the orbit of Titania. (iii) The ion and electron spectra may be described by a Maxwellian core at low energies (less than about 200 kiloelectron volts) and a power law at high energies (greater than about 590 kiloelectron volts; exponentmicro, 3 to 10) except inside the orbit of Miranda, where power-law spectra (micro approximately 1.1 and 3.1 for electrons and protons, respectively) are observed. (iv) At ion energies between 0.6 and 1 megaelectron volt per nucleon, the composition is dominated by protons with a minor fraction (about 10(-3)) of molecular hydrogen; the lower limit for the ratio of hydrogen to helium is greater than 10(4). (v) The proton population is sufficiently intense that fluences greater than 10(16) per square centimeter can accumulate in 10(4) to 10(') years; such fluences are sufficient to polymerize carbon monoxide and methane ice surfaces. The overall morphology of Uranus' magnetosphere resembles that of Jupiter, as evidenced by the fact that the spacecraft crossed the plasma sheet through the dawn magnetosheath twice per planetary rotation period (17.3 hours). Uranus' magnetosphere differs from that of Jupiter and of Saturn in that the plasma 1 is at most 0.1 rather than 1. Therefore, little distortion ofthe field is expected from particle loading at distances less than about 15 Uranus radii.
When electrons pair in a superconductor, quasi-particles develop an acute sensitivity to different types of scattering potential that is described by the appearance of coherence factors in the scattering amplitudes. Although the effects of coherence factors are well established in isotropic superconductors, they are much harder to detect in their anisotropic counterparts, such as high-superconducting-transition-temperature cuprates. We demonstrate an approach that highlights the momentum-dependent coherence factors in Ca2-xNaxCuO2Cl2. We used Fourier-transform scanning tunneling spectroscopy to reveal a magnetic-field dependence in quasi-particle scattering interference patterns that is sensitive to the sign of the anisotropic gap. This result is associated with the d-wave coherence factors and quasi-particle scattering off vortices. Our technique thus provides insights into the nature of electron pairing as well as quasi-particle scattering processes in unconventional superconductors.
Emergent quantum technologies have led to increasing interest in decoherence--the processes that limit the appearance of quantum effects and turn them into classical phenomena. One important cause of decoherence is the interaction of a quantum system with its environment, which 'entangles' the two and distributes the quantum coherence over so many degrees of freedom as to render it unobservable. Decoherence theory has been complemented by experiments using matter waves coupled to external photons or molecules, and by investigations using coherent photon states, trapped ions and electron interferometers. Large molecules are particularly suitable for the investigation of the quantum-classical transition because they can store much energy in numerous internal degrees of freedom; the internal energy can be converted into thermal radiation and thus induce decoherence. Here we report matter wave interferometer experiments in which C70 molecules lose their quantum behaviour by thermal emission of radiation. We find good quantitative agreement between our experimental observations and microscopic decoherence theory. Decoherence by emission of thermal radiation is a general mechanism that should be relevant to all macroscopic bodies.
The origin and growth of magnetic fields in galaxies is still something of an enigma. It is generally assumed that seed fields are amplified over time through the dynamo effect, but there are few constraints on the timescale. It was recently demonstrated that field strengths as traced by rotation measures of distant (and hence ancient) quasars are comparable to those seen today, but it was unclear whether the high fields were in the unusual environments of the quasars themselves or distributed along the lines of sight. Here we report high-resolution spectra that demonstrate that the quasars with strong Mg II absorption lines are unambiguously associated with larger rotation measures. Because Mg ii absorption occurs in the haloes of normal galaxies along the sightlines to the quasars, this association requires that organized fields of surprisingly high strengths are associated with normal galaxies when the Universe was only about one-third of its present age.
The counter-intuitive properties of quantum mechanics have the potential to revolutionize information processing by enabling the development of efficient algorithms with no known classical counterparts. Harnessing this power requires the development of a set of building blocks, one of which is a method to initialize the set of quantum bits (qubits) to a known state. Additionally, fresh ancillary qubits must be available during the course of computation to achieve fault tolerance. In any physical system used to implement quantum computation, one must therefore be able to selectively and dynamically remove entropy from the part of the system that is to be mapped to qubits. One such method is an 'open-system' cooling protocol in which a subset of qubits can be brought into contact with an external system of large heat capacity. Theoretical efforts have led to an implementation-independent cooling procedure, namely heat-bath algorithmic cooling. These efforts have culminated with the proposal of an optimal algorithm, the partner-pairing algorithm, which was used to compute the physical limits of heat-bath algorithmic cooling. Here we report the experimental realization of multi-step cooling of a quantum system via heat-bath algorithmic cooling. The experiment was carried out using nuclear magnetic resonance of a solid-state ensemble three-qubit system. We demonstrate the repeated repolarization of a particular qubit to an effective spin-bath temperature, and alternating logical operations within the three-qubit subspace to ultimately cool a second qubit below this temperature. Demonstration of the control necessary for these operations represents an important step forward in the manipulation of solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance qubits.
The authors used Landau-Pekar variational method to investigate a strong-coupling singlet optical bipolaron in different configuration of quantum confinement. Numerical and analytical results showed that when configuration changes from quantum dot and wire to well, confinement shows different effect on the formation of a bipolaron. In contrast to a bipolaron in a quantum dot or wire, the binding energy of a bipolaron in a quantum well increases with increasing confinement, indicating that confinement favors bipolaron formation in a quantum well.
The discrete nature of crystal lattices plays a role in virtually every material property. But it is only when the size of entities hosted by a crystal becomes comparable to the lattice period--as occurs for dislocations, vortices in superconductors and domain walls--that this discreteness is manifest explicitly. The associated phenomena are usually described in terms of a background Peierls 'atomic washboard' energy potential, which was first introduced for the case of dislocation motion in the 1940s. This concept has subsequently been invoked in many situations to describe certain features in the bulk behaviour of materials, but has to date eluded direct detection and experimental scrutiny at a microscopic level. Here we report observations of the motion of a single magnetic domain wall at the scale of the individual peaks and troughs of the atomic energy landscape. Our experiments reveal that domain walls can become trapped between crystalline planes, and that they propagate by distinct jumps that match the lattice periodicity. The jumps between valleys are found to involve unusual dynamics that shed light on the microscopic processes underlying domain-wall propagation. Such observations offer a means for probing experimentally the physics of topological defects in discrete lattices--a field rich in phenomena that have been subject to extensive theoretical study.
We show that the quantum spin Hall (QSH) effect, a state of matter with topological properties distinct from those of conventional insulators, can be realized in mercury telluride-cadmium telluride semiconductor quantum wells. When the thickness of the quantum well is varied, the electronic state changes from a normal to an "inverted" type at a critical thickness d(c). We show that this transition is a topological quantum phase transition between a conventional insulating phase and a phase exhibiting the QSH effect with a single pair of helical edge states. We also discuss methods for experimental detection of the QSH effect.
Single-stranded nucleic acids in aqueous media exhibit proton magnetic resonance spectra with acceptable signal-noise ratios if multiple scans of the spectra are stored in and subsequently read out of a computer of average transients. Partial ordering of the adenine bases of polyadenylic acid in solution is reflected in contributions to the chemical shifts that are removed on "melting." More significantly, secondary structure such as occurs in complexes ofpolyA and polyU and in double-stranded DNA is manifested in proton magnetic resonance spectrabelow the "melting" temperature by severe resonance line broadening which results from anisotropic nuclear dipole-dipole interactions. The proton resonances are narrowed in and above the "melting" region, and measurement of integrated resonance intensities can give insight into quantitative aspects of hybridization, "melting," and other nucleic acid interactions.
A current drawback of spintronics is the large power that is usually required for magnetic writing, in contrast with nanoelectronics, which relies on "zero-current," gate-controlled operations. Efforts have been made to control the spin-relaxation rate, the Curie temperature, or the magnetic anisotropy with a gate voltage, but these effects are usually small and volatile. We used ferroelectric tunnel junctions with ferromagnetic electrodes to demonstrate local, large, and nonvolatile control of carrier spin polarization by electrically switching ferroelectric polarization. Our results represent a giant type of interfacial magnetoelectric coupling and suggest a low-power approach for spin-based information control.
We present a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) study of K(x)C60 monolayers on Au(111) for 3 < or = x < or = 4. The STM spectrum evolves from one that is characteristic of a metal at x = 3 to one that is characteristic of an insulator at x = 4. This electronic transition is accompanied by a dramatic structural rearrangement of the C60 molecules. The Jahn-Teller effect, a charge-induced mechanical deformation of molecular structure, is directly visualized in the K4C60 monolayer at the single-molecule level. These results, along with theoretical analyses, provide strong evidence that the transition from metal to insulator in K(x)C60 monolayers is caused by the Jahn-Teller effect.
Non-locality is a fundamental property of quantum mechanics that manifests itself as correlations between spatially separated parts of a quantum system. A fundamental route for the exploration of such phenomena is the generation of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) pairs of quantum-entangled objects for the test of so-called Bell inequalities. Whereas such experimental tests of non-locality have been successfully conducted with pairwise entangled photons, it has not yet been possible to realize an electronic analogue of it in the solid state, where spin-1/2 mobile electrons are the natural quantum objects. The difficulty stems from the fact that electrons are immersed in a macroscopic ground state-the Fermi sea-which prevents the straightforward generation and splitting of entangled pairs of electrons on demand. A superconductor, however, could act as a source of EPR pairs of electrons, because its ground-state is composed of Cooper pairs in a spin-singlet state. These Cooper pairs can be extracted from a superconductor by tunnelling, but, to obtain an efficient EPR source of entangled electrons, the splitting of the Cooper pairs into separate electrons has to be enforced. This can be achieved by having the electrons 'repel' each other by Coulomb interaction. Controlled Cooper pair splitting can thereby be realized by coupling of the superconductor to two normal metal drain contacts by means of individually tunable quantum dots. Here we demonstrate the first experimental realization of such a tunable Cooper pair splitter, which shows a surprisingly high efficiency. Our findings open a route towards a first test of the EPR paradox and Bell inequalities in the solid state.
Interest in magnetic nanoparticles has increased in the past few years by virtue of their potential for applications in fields such as ultrahigh-density recording and medicine. Most applications rely on the magnetic order of the nanoparticles being stable with time. However, with decreasing particle size the magnetic anisotropy energy per particle responsible for holding the magnetic moment along certain directions becomes comparable to the thermal energy. When this happens, the thermal fluctuations induce random flipping of the magnetic moment with time, and the nanoparticles lose their stable magnetic order and become superparamagnetic. Thus, the demand for further miniaturization comes into conflict with the superparamagnetism caused by the reduction of the anisotropy energy per particle: this constitutes the so-called 'superparamagnetic limit' in recording media. Here we show that magnetic exchange coupling induced at the interface between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic systems can provide an extra source of anisotropy, leading to magnetization stability. We demonstrate this principle for ferromagnetic cobalt nanoparticles of about 4 nm in diameter that are embedded in either a paramagnetic or an antiferromagnetic matrix. Whereas the cobalt cores lose their magnetic moment at 10 K in the first system, they remain ferromagnetic up to about 290 K in the second. This behaviour is ascribed to the specific way ferromagnetic nanoparticles couple to an antiferromagnetic matrix.
Quantum confinement of itinerant electrons in atomically smooth ultrathin lead films produces strong oscillations in the thickness-dependent film energy. By adding extra electrons via bismuth alloying, we showed that both the structural stability and the superconducting properties of such films can be tuned. The phase boundary (upper critical field) between the superconducting vortex state and the normal state indicates an anomalous suppression of superconducting order just below the critical temperature, Tc. This suppression varies systematically with the film thickness and the bismuth content and can be parametrized in terms of a characteristic temperature, Tc* (less than Tc), that is inversely proportional to the scattering mean free path. The results indicate that the isotropic nature of the superconductive pairing in bulk lead-bismuth alloys is altered in the quantum regime.
Nanoscale quantum emitters are key elements in quantum optics and sensing. However, efficient optical excitation and detection of such emitters involves large solid angles because their interaction with freely propagating light is omnidirectional. Here, we present unidirectional emission of a single emitter by coupling to a nanofabricated Yagi-Uda antenna. A quantum dot is placed in the near field of the antenna so that it drives the resonant feed element of the antenna. The resulting quantum-dot luminescence is strongly polarized and highly directed into a narrow forward angular cone. The directionality of the quantum dot can be controlled by tuning the antenna dimensions. Our results show the potential of optical antennas to communicate energy to, from, and between nano-emitters.
The generation of non-classical states of light is of fundamental scientific and technological interest. For example, 'squeezed' states enable measurements to be performed at lower noise levels than possible using classical light. Deterministic (or triggered) single-photon sources exhibit non-classical behaviour in that they emit, with a high degree of certainty, just one photon at a user-specified time. (In contrast, a classical source such as an attenuated pulsed laser emits photons according to Poisson statistics.) A deterministic source of single photons could find applications in quantum information processing, quantum cryptography and certain quantum computation problems. Here we realize a controllable source of single photons using optical pumping of a single molecule in a solid. Triggered single photons are produced at a high rate, whereas the probability of simultaneous emission of two photons is nearly zero--a useful property for secure quantum cryptography. Our approach is characterized by simplicity, room temperature operation and improved performance compared to other triggered sources of single photons.
The layer-structure cuprates with high superconducting transition temperatures T(c) exhibit a number of anomalous electronic properties in both superconducting and normal states. These anomalies are ascribed to the existence of independent spectra of excitations for charge and for spin, signaling a collective state, a "quantum protectorate."
Molecular beam epitaxy has been used to grow microcrystalline clusters of gallium arsenide (GaAs) in the size range from 2.5 to 60 nanometers on high-purity, amorphous silica supports. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy reveals that clusters as small as 3.5 nanometers have good crystalline order with a lattice constant equal to that of bulk GaAs. Study of the microcrystallite surfaces by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy shows that they are covered with a shell (1.0 to 1.5 nanometers thick) of native oxides of gallium and arsenic (Ga(2)O(3) and As(2)O(3)), whose presence could explain the low luminescence efficiency of the clusters. Optical absorption spectra of the supported GaAs are consistent with the blue-shifted band edge expected for semiconductor microcrystallites in the quantum size regime.
The magnetic fields of Earth and Jupiter, along with those of rapidly rotating, low-mass stars, are generated by convection-driven dynamos that may operate similarly (the slowly rotating Sun generates its field through a different dynamo mechanism). The field strengths of planets and stars vary over three orders of magnitude, but the critical factor causing that variation has hitherto been unclear. Here we report an extension of a scaling law derived from geodynamo models to rapidly rotating stars that have strong density stratification. The unifying principle in the scaling law is that the energy flux available for generating the magnetic field sets the field strength. Our scaling law fits the observed field strengths of Earth, Jupiter, young contracting stars and rapidly rotating low-mass stars, despite vast differences in the physical conditions of the objects. We predict that the field strengths of rapidly rotating brown dwarfs and massive extrasolar planets are high enough to make them observable.
We report on the electron analog of the single-photon gun. On-demand single-electron injection in a quantum conductor was obtained using a quantum dot connected to the conductor via a tunnel barrier. Electron emission was triggered by the application of a potential step that compensated for the dot-charging energy. Depending on the barrier transparency, the quantum emission time ranged from 0.1 to 10 nanoseconds. The single-electron source should prove useful for the use of quantum bits in ballistic conductors. Additionally, periodic sequences of single-electron emission and absorption generate a quantized alternating current.
Electrical transport through molecules has been much studied since it was proposed that individual molecules might behave like basic electronic devices, and intriguing single-molecule electronic effects have been demonstrated. But because transport properties are sensitive to structural variations on the atomic scale, further progress calls for detailed knowledge of how the functional properties of molecules depend on structural features. The characterization of two-terminal structures has become increasingly robust and reproducible, and for some systems detailed structural characterization of molecules on electrodes or insulators is available. Here we present scanning tunnelling microscopy observations and classical electrostatic and quantum mechanical modelling results that show that the electrostatic field emanating from a fixed point charge regulates the conductivity of nearby substrate-bound molecules. We find that the onset of molecular conduction is shifted by changing the charge state of a silicon surface atom, or by varying the spatial relationship between the molecule and that charged centre. Because the shifting results in conductivity changes of substantial magnitude, these effects are easily observed at room temperature.
Frustrated systems are ubiquitous, and they are interesting because their behaviour is difficult to predict; frustration can lead to macroscopic degeneracies and qualitatively new states of matter. Magnetic systems offer good examples in the form of spin lattices, where all interactions between spins cannot be simultaneously satisfied. Here we report how unusual composite spin degrees of freedom can emerge from frustrated magnetic interactions in the cubic spinel ZnCr(2)O(4). Upon cooling, groups of six spins self-organize into weakly interacting antiferromagnetic loops, whose directors -- the unique direction along which the spins are aligned, parallel or antiparallel -- govern all low-temperature dynamics. The experimental evidence comes from a measurement of the magnetic form factor by inelastic neutron scattering; the data show that neutrons scatter from hexagonal spin clusters rather than individual spins. The hexagon directors are, to a first approximation, decoupled from each other, and hence their reorientations embody the long-sought local zero energy modes for the pyrochlore lattice.
Intermolecular multiple-quantum coherences between bulk water and a glycoprotein fragment at modest concentration (20 mM) have been experimentally produced and detected, although such coherences are inconceivable in the normal theoretical framework of nuclear magnetic resonance. A density matrix treatment explains these results by including the long-range dipolar interaction between spins and by discarding the high-temperature approximation. These results imply that peak intensities (critical for structural determinations) can be distorted in many gradient experiments, and show that magic-angle gradients provide substantial improvements with reduced gradient strengths. They also suggest methods for contrast enhancement in magnetic resonance imaging.
Quantum teleportation provides a means to transport quantum information efficiently from one location to another, without the physical transfer of the associated quantum-information carrier. This is achieved by using the non-local correlations of previously distributed, entangled quantum bits (qubits). Teleportation is expected to play an integral role in quantum communication and quantum computation. Previous experimental demonstrations have been implemented with optical systems that used both discrete and continuous variables, and with liquid-state nuclear magnetic resonance. Here we report unconditional teleportation of massive particle qubits using atomic (9Be+) ions confined in a segmented ion trap, which aids individual qubit addressing. We achieve an average fidelity of 78 per cent, which exceeds the fidelity of any protocol that does not use entanglement. This demonstration is also important because it incorporates most of the techniques necessary for scalable quantum information processing in an ion-trap system.
Classical studies show that for many proteins, the information required for specifying the tertiary structure is contained in the amino acid sequence. Here, we attempt to define the sequence rules for specifying a protein fold by computationally creating artificial protein sequences using only statistical information encoded in a multiple sequence alignment and no tertiary structure information. Experimental testing of libraries of artificial WW domain sequences shows that a simple statistical energy function capturing coevolution between amino acid residues is necessary and sufficient to specify sequences that fold into native structures. The artificial proteins show thermodynamic stabilities similar to natural WW domains, and structure determination of one artificial protein shows excellent agreement with the WW fold at atomic resolution. The relative simplicity of the information used for creating sequences suggests a marked reduction to the potential complexity of the protein-folding problem.
Superconductivity is related to the presence of a narrow forbidden gap in the spectrum of the possible energies for the electrons in the material. These "superconductivity gaps" have traditionally been studied with tunneling and infrared absorption experiments. A third, powerful technique has been made possible by the discovery of hightransition temperature materials: the direct observation of the gap in photoemission spectra. The data analysis requires a careful reconsideration of the standard Einstein-Fermi model of the photoelectric effect. The conclusions are surprisingly simple and offer an alternate way to measure superconductivity gaps. This approach can also be used to study the directional properties of the gap, phenomena related to the coherence length, and possible departures from Fermi-liquid behavior.
Heat generation by electric current, which is ubiquitous in electronic devices and circuits, raises energy consumption and will become increasingly problematic in future generations of high-density electronics. The control and re-use of heat are therefore important topics for existing and emerging technologies, including spintronics. Recently it was reported that heat flow within a ferromagnet can produce a flow of spin angular momentum-a spin current-and an associated voltage. This spin Seebeck effect has been observed in metallic, insulating and semiconductor ferromagnets with temperature gradients across them. Here we describe and report the demonstration of Seebeck spin tunnelling-a distinctly different thermal spin flow, of purely interfacial nature-generated in a tunnel contact between electrodes of different temperatures when at least one of the electrodes is a ferromagnet. The Seebeck spin current is governed by the energy derivative of the tunnel spin polarization. By exploiting this in ferromagnet-oxide-silicon tunnel junctions, we observe thermal transfer of spins from the ferromagnet to the silicon without a net tunnel charge current. The induced spin accumulation scales linearly with heating power and changes sign when the temperature differential is reversed. This thermal spin current can be used by itself, or in combination with electrical spin injection, to increase device efficiency. The results highlight the engineering of heat transport in spintronic devices and facilitate the functional use of heat.
A spin valve is a layered structure of magnetic and non-magnetic (spacer) materials whose electrical resistance depends on the spin state of electrons passing through the device and so can be controlled by an external magnetic field. The discoveries of giant magnetoresistance and tunnelling magnetoresistance in metallic spin valves have revolutionized applications such as magnetic recording and memory, and launched the new field of spin electronics--'spintronics'. Intense research efforts are now devoted to extending these spin-dependent effects to semiconductor materials. But while there have been noteworthy advances in spin injection and detection using inorganic semiconductors, spin-valve devices with semiconducting spacers have not yet been demonstrated. pi-conjugated organic semiconductors may offer a promising alternative approach to semiconductor spintronics, by virtue of their relatively strong electron-phonon coupling and large spin coherence. Here we report the injection, transport and detection of spin-polarized carriers using an organic semiconductor as the spacer layer in a spin-valve structure, yielding low-temperature giant magnetoresistance effects as large as 40 per cent.
A long-standing problem in the field of space physics has been the origin of plasmaspheric hiss, a naturally occurring electromagnetic wave in the high-density plasmasphere (roughly within 20,000 kilometers of Earth) that is known to remove the high-energy Van Allen Belt electrons that pose a threat to satellites and astronauts. A recent theory tied the origin of plasmaspheric hiss to a seemingly different wave in the outer magnetosphere, but this theory was difficult to test because of a challenging set of observational requirements. Here we report on the experimental verification of the theory, made with a five-satellite NASA mission. This confirmation will allow modeling of plasmaspheric hiss and its effects on the high-energy radiation environment.
A novel current-source active power filter (APF) based on multi-modular converter with carrier phase-shifted SPWM (CPS-SPWM) technique is proposed. With this technique, the effect of equivalent high switching frequency converter is obtained with low switching frequency converter. It is very promising in current-source APF that adopt superconducting magnetic energy storage component.
The temperature-dependent redistribution of the spectral weight of the CuO2 plane-derived conduction band of the YBa2Cu3O6.9 high-temperature superconductor (superconducting transition temperature = 92.7 kelvin) was studied with wide-band (0.01- to 5.6-electron volt) spectroscopic ellipsometry. A superconductivity-induced transfer of the spectral weight involving a high-energy scale in excess of 1 electron volt was observed. Correspondingly, the charge carrier spectral weight was shown to decrease in the superconducting state. The ellipsometric data also provide detailed information about the evolution of the optical self-energy in the normal and superconducting states.
Two new products were isolated from uracil irradiated with ultraviolet light in frozen aqueous solution. As judged by mass, nuclear magnetic resonance, and ultraviolet and infrared spectra, one is a photopolymer, U(3) and the structure of the other is probably 6-4'-[ pyrimidin-2'-one]-uracil. Formations of these products between pyrimidine bases are apparently common photoreactions, and may be important to the study of the photochemistry and photobiology of nucleic acids.
Scanning tunneling spectroscopy was used to investigate single crystals and thin films of La(1-x)Ca(x)MnO(3) (with x of about 0.3), which exhibit colossal magnetoresistance. The different spectroscopic signatures of the insulating (paramagnetic) and metallic (ferromagnetic) phases enable their spatial extent to be imaged down to a lateral scale of the order of 10 nanometers. Above the bulk transition temperature T(c), the images show mostly insulating behavior. Below T(c), a phase separation is observed where inhomogeneous structures of metallic and more insulating areas coexist and are strongly field dependent in their size and structure. Insulating areas are found to persist far below T(c). These results suggest that the transition and the associated magnetoresistance behavior should be viewed as a percolation of metallic ferromagnetic domains.
Synchronized oscillators are ubiquitous in nature, and synchronization plays a key part in various classical and quantum phenomena. Several experiments have shown that in thin superconducting films, disorder enforces the droplet-like electronic texture--superconducting islands immersed into a normal matrix--and that tuning disorder drives the system from superconducting to insulating behaviour. In the vicinity of the transition, a distinct state forms: a Cooper-pair insulator, with thermally activated conductivity. It results from synchronization of the phase of the superconducting order parameter at the islands across the whole system. Here we show that at a certain finite temperature, a Cooper--air insulator undergoes a transition to a superinsulating state with infinite resistance. We present experimental evidence of this transition in titanium nitride films and show that the superinsulating state is dual to the superconducting state: it is destroyed by a sufficiently strong critical magnetic field, and breaks down at some critical voltage that is analogous to the critical current in superconductors.
The measurement of magnetic fields in the femtotesla (fT, 10(-15) tesla) range is important for applications such as magnetometry, quantum computing, solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance, and magnetoencephalography. The only sensors capable of detecting these very small fields have been based on low-temperature superconducting quantum interference devices operating at 4.2 kelvin. We present a magnetic field sensor that combines a superconducting flux-to-field transformer with a low-noise giant magnetoresistive sensor. The sensor can be operated up to 77 kelvin. Our small-size prototype provides the capability of measuring 32 fT.
Anderson localization of waves in disordered media was originally predicted fifty years ago, in the context of transport of electrons in crystals. The phenomenon is much more general and has been observed in a variety of systems, including light waves. However, Anderson localization has not been observed directly for matter waves. Owing to the high degree of control over most of the system parameters (in particular the interaction strength), ultracold atoms offer opportunities for the study of disorder-induced localization. Here we use a non-interacting Bose-Einstein condensate to study Anderson localization. The experiment is performed with a one-dimensional quasi-periodic lattice-a system that features a crossover between extended and exponentially localized states, as in the case of purely random disorder in higher dimensions. Localization is clearly demonstrated through investigations of the transport properties and spatial and momentum distributions. We characterize the crossover, finding that the critical disorder strength scales with the tunnelling energy of the atoms in the lattice. This controllable system may be used to investigate the interplay of disorder and interaction (ref. 7 and references therein), and to explore exotic quantum phases.
Submillimetre surveys during the past decade have discovered a population of luminous, high-redshift, dusty starburst galaxies. In the redshift range 1 <or= z <or= 4, these massive submillimetre galaxies go through a phase characterized by optically obscured star formation at rates several hundred times that in the local Universe. Half of the starlight from this highly energetic process is absorbed and thermally re-radiated by clouds of dust at temperatures near 30 K with spectral energy distributions peaking at 100 microm in the rest frame. At 1 <or= z <or= 4, the peak is redshifted to wavelengths between 200 and 500 microm. The cumulative effect of these galaxies is to yield extragalactic optical and far-infrared backgrounds with approximately equal energy densities. Since the initial detection of the far-infrared background (FIRB), higher-resolution experiments have sought to decompose this integrated radiation into the contributions from individual galaxies. Here we report the results of an extragalactic survey at 250, 350 and 500 microm. Combining our results at 500 microm with those at 24 microm, we determine that all of the FIRB comes from individual galaxies, with galaxies at z >or= 1.2 accounting for 70% of it. As expected, at the longest wavelengths the signal is dominated by ultraluminous galaxies at z > 1.
The intermediate coupling regime for electronic energy transfer is of particular interest because excitation moves in space, as in a classical hopping mechanism, but quantum phase information is conserved. We conducted an ultrafast polarization experiment specifically designed to observe quantum coherent dynamics in this regime. Conjugated polymer samples with different chain conformations were examined as model multichromophoric systems. The data, recorded at room temperature, reveal coherent intrachain (but not interchain) electronic energy transfer. Our results suggest that quantum transport effects occur at room temperature when chemical donor-acceptor bonds help to correlate dephasing perturbations.
We have detected an x-ray nebula around the binary millisecond pulsar B1957+20. A narrow tail, corresponding to the shocked pulsar wind, is seen interior to the known Halpha bow shock and proves the long-held assumption that the rotational energy of millisecond pulsars is dissipated through relativistic winds. Unresolved x-ray emission likely represents the shock where the winds of the pulsar and its companion collide. This emission indicates that the efficiency with which relativistic particles are accelerated in the postshock flow is similar to that for young pulsars, despite the shock proximity and much weaker surface magnetic field of this millisecond pulsar.
Matter and energy cannot be teleported (that is, transferred from one place to another without passing through intermediate locations). However, teleportation of quantum states (the ultimate structure of objects) is possible: only the structure is teleported--the matter stays at the source side and must be already present at the final location. Several table-top experiments have used qubits (two-dimensional quantum systems) or continuous variables to demonstrate the principle over short distances. Here we report a long-distance experimental demonstration of probabilistic quantum teleportation. Qubits carried by photons of 1.3 micro m wavelength are teleported onto photons of 1.55 micro m wavelength from one laboratory to another, separated by 55 m but connected by 2 km of standard telecommunications fibre. The first (and, with foreseeable technologies, the only) application of quantum teleportation is in quantum communication, where it could help to extend quantum cryptography to larger distances.
The point at absolute zero where matter becomes unstable to new forms of order is called a quantum critical point (QCP). The quantum fluctuations between order and disorder that develop at this point induce profound transformations in the finite temperature electronic properties of the material. Magnetic fields are ideal for tuning a material as close as possible to a QCP, where the most intense effects of criticality can be studied. A previous study on the heavy-electron material YbRh2Si2 found that near a field-induced QCP electrons move ever more slowly and scatter off one another with ever increasing probability, as indicated by a divergence to infinity of the electron effective mass and scattering cross-section. But these studies could not shed light on whether these properties were an artefact of the applied field, or a more general feature of field-free QCPs. Here we report that, when germanium-doped YbRh2Si2 is tuned away from a chemically induced QCP by magnetic fields, there is a universal behaviour in the temperature dependence of the specific heat and resistivity: the characteristic kinetic energy of electrons is directly proportional to the strength of the applied field. We infer that all ballistic motion of electrons vanishes at a QCP, forming a new class of conductor in which individual electrons decay into collective current-carrying motions of the electron fluid.
The energy-level structure of a quantum system, which has a fundamental role in its behaviour, can be observed as discrete lines and features in absorption and emission spectra. Conventionally, spectra are measured using frequency spectroscopy, whereby the frequency of a harmonic electromagnetic driving field is tuned into resonance with a particular separation between energy levels. Although this technique has been successfully employed in a variety of physical systems, including natural and artificial atoms and molecules, its application is not universally straightforward and becomes extremely challenging for frequencies in the range of tens to hundreds of gigahertz. Here we introduce a complementary approach, amplitude spectroscopy, whereby a harmonic driving field sweeps an artificial atom through the avoided crossings between energy levels at a fixed frequency. Spectroscopic information is obtained from the amplitude dependence of the system's response, thereby overcoming many of the limitations of a broadband-frequency-based approach. The resulting 'spectroscopy diamonds', the regions in parameter space where transitions between specific pairs of levels can occur, exhibit interference patterns and population inversion that serve to distinguish the atom's spectrum. Amplitude spectroscopy provides a means of manipulating and characterizing systems over an extremely broad bandwidth, using only a single driving frequency that may be orders of magnitude smaller than the energy scales being probed.
Increasingly detailed structural and dynamic studies are highlighting the precision with which biomolecules execute often complex tasks at the molecular scale. The efficiency and versatility of these processes have inspired many attempts to mimic or harness them. To date, biomolecules have been used to perform computational operations and actuation, to construct artificial transcriptional loops that behave like simple circuit elements and to direct the assembly of nanocrystals. Further development of these approaches requires new tools for the physical and chemical manipulation of biological systems. Biomolecular activity has been triggered optically through the use of chromophores, but direct electronic control over biomolecular 'machinery' in a specific and fully reversible manner has not yet been achieved. Here we demonstrate remote electronic control over the hybridization behaviour of DNA molecules, by inductive coupling of a radio-frequency magnetic field to a metal nanocrystal covalently linked to DNA. Inductive coupling to the nanocrystal increases the local temperature of the bound DNA, thereby inducing denaturation while leaving surrounding molecules relatively unaffected. Moreover, because dissolved biomolecules dissipate heat in less than 50 picoseconds (ref. 16), the switching is fully reversible. Inductive heating of macroscopic samples is widely used, but the present approach should allow extension of this concept to the control of hybridization and thus of a broad range of biological functions on the molecular scale.
Symmetry-breaking interactions have a crucial role in many areas of physics, ranging from classical ferrofluids to superfluid (3)He and d-wave superconductivity. For superfluid quantum gases, a variety of new physical phenomena arising from the symmetry-breaking interaction between electric or magnetic dipoles are expected. Novel quantum phases in optical lattices, such as chequerboard or supersolid phases, are predicted for dipolar bosons. Dipolar interactions can also enrich considerably the physics of quantum gases with internal degrees of freedom. Arrays of dipolar particles could be used for efficient quantum information processing. Here we report the realization of a chromium Bose-Einstein condensate with strong dipolar interactions. By using a Feshbach resonance, we reduce the usual isotropic contact interaction, such that the anisotropic magnetic dipole-dipole interaction between 52Cr atoms becomes comparable in strength. This induces a change of the aspect ratio of the atom cloud; for strong dipolar interactions, the inversion of ellipticity during expansion (the usual 'smoking gun' evidence for a Bose-Einstein condensate) can be suppressed. These effects are accounted for by taking into account the dipolar interaction in the superfluid hydrodynamic equations governing the dynamics of the gas, in the same way as classical ferrofluids can be described by including dipolar terms in the classical hydrodynamic equations. Our results are a first step in the exploration of the unique properties of quantum ferrofluids.
The unusual hard x-ray burster GRO J1744-28 recently discovered by the Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory can be modeled as a strange star with a dipolar magnetic field of </=10(11) gauss. According to this model, when the accreted mass of the star exceeds some critical mass, its crust breaks, resulting in the conversion of the accreted matter into strange matter and a release of energy. Subsequently, a fireball forms and expands relativistically outward. The expanding fireball interacts with the surrounding interstellar medium, causing its kinetic energy to be radiated in shock waves and producing a burst of x-ray radiation. The burst energy, duration, interval, and spectrum derived from such a model are consistent with the observations of GRO J1744-28.
Data from solar and stellar occultations of Uranus indicate a temperature of about 750 kelvins in the upper levels of the atmosphere (composed mostly of atomic and molecular hydrogen) and define the distributions of methane and acetylene in the lower levels. The ultraviolet spectrum of the sunlit hemisphere is dominated by emissions from atomic and molecular hydrogen, which are kmown as electroglow emissions. The energy source for these emissions is unknown, but the spectrum implies excitation by low-energy electrons (modeled with a 3-electron-volt Maxwellian energy distribution). The major energy sink for the electrons is dissociation of molecular hydrogen, producing hydrogen atoms at a rate of 10(29) per second. Approximately half the atoms have energies higher than the escape energy. The high temperature of the atmosphere, the small size of Uranus, and the number density of hydrogen atoms in the thermosphere imply an extensive thermal hydrogen corona that reduces the orbital lifetime of ring particles and biases the size distribution toward larger particles. This corona is augmented by the nonthermal hydrogen atoms associated with the electroglow. An aurora near the magnetic pole in the dark hemisphere arises from excitation of molecular hydrogen at the level where its vertical column abundance is about 10(20) per square centimeter with input power comparable to that of the sunlit electroglow (approximately 2x10(11) watts). An initial estimate of the acetylene volume mixing ratio, as judged from measurements of the far ultraviolet albedo, is about 2 x 10(-7) at a vertical column abundance of molecular hydrogen of 10(23) per square centimeter (pressure, approximately 0.3 millibar). Carbon emissions from the Uranian atmosphere were also detected.
Recent years have seen tremendous progress in creating complex atomic many-body quantum systems. One approach is to use macroscopic, effectively thermodynamic ensembles of ultracold atoms to create quantum gases and strongly correlated states of matter, and to analyse the bulk properties of the ensemble. For example, bosonic and fermionic atoms in a Hubbard-regime optical lattice can be used for quantum simulations of solid-state models. The opposite approach is to build up microscopic quantum systems atom-by-atom, with complete control over all degrees of freedom. The atoms or ions act as qubits and allow the realization of quantum gates, with the goal of creating highly controllable quantum information systems. Until now, the macroscopic and microscopic strategies have been fairly disconnected. Here we present a quantum gas 'microscope' that bridges the two approaches, realizing a system in which atoms of a macroscopic ensemble are detected individually and a complete set of degrees of freedom for each of them is determined through preparation and measurement. By implementing a high-resolution optical imaging system, single atoms are detected with near-unity fidelity on individual sites of a Hubbard-regime optical lattice. The lattice itself is generated by projecting a holographic mask through the imaging system. It has an arbitrary geometry, chosen to support both strong tunnel coupling between lattice sites and strong on-site confinement. Our approach can be used to directly detect strongly correlated states of matter; in the context of condensed matter simulation, this corresponds to the detection of individual electrons in the simulated crystal. Also, the quantum gas microscope may enable addressing and read-out of large-scale quantum information systems based on ultracold atoms.
We propose an experimentally feasible scheme to achieve quantum computation based solely on geometric manipulations of a quantum system. The desired geometric operations are obtained by driving the quantum system to undergo appropriate adiabatic cyclic evolutions. Our implementation of the all-geometric quantum computation is based on laser manipulation of a set of trapped ions. An all-geometric approach, apart from its fundamental interest, offers a possible method for robust quantum computation.
We observed highly efficient generation of electron-hole pairs due to impact excitation in single-walled carbon nanotube p-n junction photodiodes. Optical excitation into the second electronic subband E22 leads to striking photocurrent steps in the device I-V(SD) characteristics that occur at voltage intervals of the band-gap energy E(GAP)/e. Spatially and spectrally resolved photocurrent combined with temperature-dependent studies suggest that these steps result from efficient generation of multiple electron-hole pairs from a single hot E22 carrier. This process is both of fundamental interest and relevant for applications in future ultra-efficient photovoltaic devices.
Linked by strings of diphenylhexatriene (DPH) molecules, beta- and gamma-cyclodextrins (CDs) can form nanotube aggregates that contain as many as approximately 20 betaCDs (20 nanometers long) or approximately 20 to 35 gammaCDs (20 to 35 nanometers long). Nanotube formation was indicated in solution, by fluorescence anisotropy and light scattering results, and on graphite surfaces, by scanning tunneling microscopy. Tubes were not observed for the smaller alphaCDs. Molecular modeling shows that CD cavity size and the rodlike DPH structure are key factors in nanotube formation. Spectra generated by proton nuclear magnetic resonance indicate the inclusion of DPH in the interior of the CDs and formation of nanotubes in betaCDs and gammaCDs only. The photophysical properties of DPH are affected by its arrangement into a one-dimensional array within the CD nanotube, possibly because of exciton formation.
Controlling the interaction between localized optical and mechanical excitations has recently become possible following advances in micro- and nanofabrication techniques. So far, most experimental studies of optomechanics have focused on measurement and control of the mechanical subsystem through its interaction with optics, and have led to the experimental demonstration of dynamical back-action cooling and optical rigidity of the mechanical system. Conversely, the optical response of these systems is also modified in the presence of mechanical interactions, leading to effects such as electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) and parametric normal-mode splitting. In atomic systems, studies of slow and stopped light (applicable to modern optical networks and future quantum networks) have thrust EIT to the forefront of experimental study during the past two decades. Here we demonstrate EIT and tunable optical delays in a nanoscale optomechanical crystal, using the optomechanical nonlinearity to control the velocity of light by way of engineered photon-phonon interactions. Our device is fabricated by simply etching holes into a thin film of silicon. At low temperature (8.7 kelvin), we report an optically tunable delay of 50 nanoseconds with near-unity optical transparency, and superluminal light with a 1.4 microsecond signal advance. These results, while indicating significant progress towards an integrated quantum optomechanical memory, are also relevant to classical signal processing applications. Measurements at room temperature in the analogous regime of electromagnetically induced absorption show the utility of these chip-scale optomechanical systems for optical buffering, amplification, and filtering of microwave-over-optical signals.
Composite sheets and nanotubes of different morphologies containing carbon, boron, and nitrogen were grown in the electric arc discharge between graphite cathodes and amorphous boron-filled graphite anodes in a nitrogen atmosphere. Concentration profiles derived from electron energy-loss line spectra show that boron and nitrogen are correlated in a one-to-one ratio; core energy-loss fine structures reveal small differences compared to pure hexagonal boron nitride. Boron and carbon are anticorrelated, suggesting the substitution of boron and nitrogen into the carbon network. Results indicate that singlephaase CyBxNx as well as separated domains (nanosize) of boron nitride in carbon networks may exist.
Since the discovery of superconductivity, there has been a drive to understand the mechanisms by which it occurs. The BCS (Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer) model successfully treats the electrons in conventional superconductors as pairs coupled by phonons (vibrational modes of oscillation) moving through the material, but there is as yet no accepted model for high-transition-temperature, organic or 'heavy fermion' superconductivity. Experiments that reveal unusual properties of those superconductors could therefore point the way to a deeper understanding of the underlying physics. In particular, the response of a material to a magnetic field can be revealing, because this usually reduces or quenches superconductivity. Here we report measurements of the heat capacity and magnetization that show that, for particular orientations of an external magnetic field, superconductivity in the heavy-fermion material CeCoIn(5) is enhanced through the magnetic moments (spins) of individual electrons. This enhancement occurs by fundamentally altering how the superconducting state forms, resulting in regions of superconductivity alternating with walls of spin-polarized unpaired electrons; this configuration lowers the free energy and allows superconductivity to remain stable. The large magnetic susceptibility of this material leads to an unusually strong coupling of the field to the electron spins, which dominates over the coupling to the electron orbits.
Macroscopic mechanical objects and electromagnetic degrees of freedom can couple to each other through radiation pressure. Optomechanical systems in which this coupling is sufficiently strong are predicted to show quantum effects and are a topic of considerable interest. Devices in this regime would offer new types of control over the quantum state of both light and matter, and would provide a new arena in which to explore the boundary between quantum and classical physics. Experiments so far have achieved sufficient optomechanical coupling to laser-cool mechanical devices, but have not yet reached the quantum regime. The outstanding technical challenge in this field is integrating sensitive micromechanical elements (which must be small, light and flexible) into high-finesse cavities (which are typically rigid and massive) without compromising the mechanical or optical properties of either. A second, and more fundamental, challenge is to read out the mechanical element's energy eigenstate. Displacement measurements (no matter how sensitive) cannot determine an oscillator's energy eigenstate, and measurements coupling to quantities other than displacement have been difficult to realize in practice. Here we present an optomechanical system that has the potential to resolve both of these challenges. We demonstrate a cavity which is detuned by the motion of a 50-nm-thick dielectric membrane placed between two macroscopic, rigid, high-finesse mirrors. This approach segregates optical and mechanical functionality to physically distinct structures and avoids compromising either. It also allows for direct measurement of the square of the membrane's displacement, and thus in principle the membrane's energy eigenstate. We estimate that it should be practical to use this scheme to observe quantum jumps of a mechanical system, an important goal in the field of quantum measurement.
High pressure is known to influence electronic structure and crystal packing, and can in some cases even induce compound formation between elements that do not bond under ambient conditions. Here we present a computational study showing that high pressure fundamentally alters the reactivity of the light elements lithium (Li) and beryllium (Be), which are the first of the metals in the condensed state and immiscible under normal conditions. We identify four stoichiometric Li(x)Be(1-x) compounds that are stable over a range of pressures, and find that the electronic density of states of one of them displays a remarkable step-like feature near the bottom of the valence band and then remains almost constant with increasing energy. These characteristics are typical of a quasi-two-dimensional electronic structure, the emergence of which in a three-dimensional environment is rather unexpected. We attribute this observation to large size differences between the ionic cores of Li and Be: as the density increases, the Li cores start to overlap and thereby expel valence electrons into quasi-two-dimensional layers characterized by delocalized free-particle-like states in the vicinity of Be ions.
We observed negative Coulomb drag for parallel coupled quantum wires, in which electrons flow in the opposite directions between the wires. This only occurred under the conditions of strong correlation in the wires, that is, low density, high magnetic field, and low temperature, and cannot be addressed by a standard theory of momentum transfer. We propose a Coulomb drag model in which formation of a Wigner crystal state in the drag wire and a particle-like state in the drive wire is taken into account.
A combination of spectroscopic and calorimetric techniques has been used to characterize the structures formed by a family of short, guanine-containing DNA single strands of the form d[GGTTXTTGG], X = A, C, G, T. In 1 molar NaCl at low temperatures, these molecules do not behave like single strands, but rather exhibit properties consistent with tetraplex formation. The standard state enthalpies, entropies, and free energies for formation of each tetraplex have been measured, as have preliminary nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra. In 1 molar KCl, the melting behavior of the structure or structures is more complex than in 1 molar NaCl. This observation may be related to the recently proposed "sodium-potassium switch."
Throughout physics, stable composite objects are usually formed by way of attractive forces, which allow the constituents to lower their energy by binding together. Repulsive forces separate particles in free space. However, in a structured environment such as a periodic potential and in the absence of dissipation, stable composite objects can exist even for repulsive interactions. Here we report the observation of such an exotic bound state, which comprises a pair of ultracold rubidium atoms in an optical lattice. Consistent with our theoretical analysis, these repulsively bound pairs exhibit long lifetimes, even under conditions when they collide with one another. Signatures of the pairs are also recognized in the characteristic momentum distribution and through spectroscopic measurements. There is no analogue in traditional condensed matter systems of such repulsively bound pairs, owing to the presence of strong decay channels. Our results exemplify the strong correspondence between the optical lattice physics of ultracold bosonic atoms and the Bose-Hubbard model-a link that is vital for future applications of these systems to the study of strongly correlated condensed matter and to quantum information.
The folding of small proteins has been assumed to be an all-or-none process that involves high cooperativity within the structure and substantial kinetic-energy barriers. Sadqi et al. claim that the small re-engineered protein Naf-BBL unfolds without significant cooperativity or kinetic hindrance, a conclusion that is based on calculation of a broad distribution of midpoint thermal-transition temperatures measured by the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) chemical shifts of 158 protons. We find that all of the unprocessed melting curves can be fitted to the same two-state global unfolding when uncertainties in the experimental data are taken into account. We conclude that the authors' melting data for Naf-BBL remain consistent with the all-or-none process.
The machinery used by the cell to perform essential biological processes is made up of large molecular assemblies. One such complex, the proteasome, is the central molecular machine for removal of damaged and misfolded proteins from the cell. Here we show that for the 670-kilodalton 20S proteasome core particle it is possible to overcome the molecular weight limitations that have traditionally hampered quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy studies of such large systems. This is achieved by using an isotope labelling scheme where isoleucine, leucine and valine methyls are protonated in an otherwise highly deuterated background in concert with experiments that preserve the lifetimes of the resulting NMR signals. The methodology has been applied to the 20S core particle to reveal functionally important motions and interactions by recording spectra on complexes with molecular weights of up to a megadalton. Our results establish that NMR spectroscopy can provide detailed insight into supra-molecular structures over an order of magnitude larger than those routinely studied using methodology that is generally applicable.
Upon cooling, the isolated ferromagnetic domains in thin films of La0.33Pr0.34Ca0.33MnO3 start to grow and merge at the metal-insulator transition temperature TP1, leading to a steep drop in resistivity, and continue to grow far below TP1. In contrast, upon warming, the ferromagnetic domain size remains unchanged until near the transition temperature. The jump in the resistivity results from the decrease in the average magnetization. The ferromagnetic domains almost disappear at a temperature TP2 higher than TP1, showing a local magnetic hysteresis in agreement with the resistivity hysteresis. Even well above TP2, some ferromagnetic domains with higher transition temperatures are observed, indicating magnetic inhomogeneity. These results may shed more light on the origin of the magnetoresistance in these materials.
Understanding exotic forms of magnetism in quantum mechanical systems is a central goal of modern condensed matter physics, with implications for systems ranging from high-temperature superconductors to spintronic devices. Simulating magnetic materials in the vicinity of a quantum phase transition is computationally intractable on classical computers, owing to the extreme complexity arising from quantum entanglement between the constituent magnetic spins. Here we use a degenerate Bose gas of rubidium atoms confined in an optical lattice to simulate a chain of interacting quantum Ising spins as they undergo a phase transition. Strong spin interactions are achieved through a site-occupation to pseudo-spin mapping. As we vary a magnetic field, quantum fluctuations drive a phase transition from a paramagnetic phase into an antiferromagnetic phase. In the paramagnetic phase, the interaction between the spins is overwhelmed by the applied field, which aligns the spins. In the antiferromagnetic phase, the interaction dominates and produces staggered magnetic ordering. Magnetic domain formation is observed through both in situ site-resolved imaging and noise correlation measurements. By demonstrating a route to quantum magnetism in an optical lattice, this work should facilitate further investigations of magnetic models using ultracold atoms, thereby improving our understanding of real magnetic materials.
Systematic studies of the transport properties of La(0.67)Ca(0.33)Mn(1-x)Fe(x)O3 (x=0-0.3) systems showed that with increasing Fe-doping content x the resistance increases and the insulator-metal transition temperature moves to lower temperature. For small doping content, the transport property satisfies metal transport behavior below the transition temperature, and above the transition temperature it satisfies the small polaron model. This behavior can be explained by Fe3+ doping, which easily forms Fe(3+)-O(2-)-Mn4+ channel, suppressing the double exchange Mn(3+)-O(2-)-Mn4+ channel and enhancing the spin scattering of Mn ions induced by antiferromagnetic clusters of Fe ions.
A microscopic method for simulating quantum mechanical, nuclear tunneling effects in biological electron transfer reactions is presented and applied to several electron transfer steps in photosynthetic bacterial reaction centers. In this "dispersed polaron" method the fluctuations of the protein and the electron carriers are projected as effective normal modes onto an appropriate reaction coordinate and used to evaluate the quantum mechanical rate constant. The simulations, based on the crystallographic structure of the reaction center from Rhodopseudomonas viridis, focus on electron transfer from a bacteriopheophytin to a quinone and the subsequent back-reaction. The rates of both of these reactions are almost independent of temperature or even increase with decreasing temperature. The simulations reproduce this unusual temperature dependence in a qualitative way, without the use of adjustable parameters for the protein's Franck-Condon factors. The observed dependence of the back-reaction on the free energy of the reaction also is reproduced, including the special behavior in the "inverted region."
The alternating- and direct-current (a.c. and d.c.) Josephson effects were first discovered in a system of two superconductors, the macroscopic wavefunctions of which are weakly coupled via a tunnelling barrier. In the a.c. Josephson effect, a constant chemical potential difference (voltage) is applied, which causes an oscillating current to flow through the barrier. Because the frequency is proportional to the chemical potential difference only, the a.c. Josephson effect serves as a voltage standard. In the d.c. Josephson effect, a small constant current is applied, resulting in a constant supercurrent flowing through the barrier. In a sense, the particles do not 'feel' the presence of the tall tunnelling barrier, and flow freely through it with no driving potential. Bose-Einstein condensates should also support Josephson effects; however, while plasma oscillations have been seen in a single Bose-Einstein condensate Josephson junction, the a.c. Josephson effect remains elusive. Here we observe the a.c. and d.c. Josephson effects in a single Bose-Einstein condensate Josephson junction. The d.c. Josephson effect has been observed previously only in superconducting systems; in our study, it is evident when we measure the chemical potential-current relation of the Bose-Einstein condensate Josephson junction. Our system constitutes a trapped-atom interferometer with continuous readout, which operates on the basis of the a.c. Josephson effect. In addition, the measured chemical potential-current relation shows that the device is suitable for use as an analogue of the superconducting quantum interference device, which would sense rotation.
The rotational mobility of myoglobin in situ was determined by proton nuclear magnetic resonance line width measurements of a characteristic myoglobin resonance observed in bovine heart muscle spectra. The protein diffuses intracellularly at nearly half the rate observed in dilute solution. This high mobility allows the oxygenated form of myoglobin to contribute significantly to the overall diffusive flux of oxygen in respiring heart muscle.
We report experiments on quantum dot single-electron-tunneling (SET) transistors made from short multiwall nanotubes and threaded by magnetic flux. Such systems allow us to probe the electronic energy spectrum of the nanotube and its dependence on the magnetic field. Evidence is provided for the interconversion between gapped (semiconducting) and ungapped (metallic) states. Our tubes exhibit h/e-period magnetic flux dependence, in agreement with simple tight-binding calculations.
The two-dimensional electron system is a powerful laboratory for investigating the physics of interacting particles. Application of a large magnetic field produces massively degenerate quantum levels known as Landau levels; within a Landau level the kinetic energy of the electrons is suppressed, and electron-electron interactions set the only energy scale. Coulomb interactions break the degeneracy of the Landau levels and can cause the electrons to order into complex ground states. Here we observe, in the high energy single particle spectrum of this system, salient and unexpected structure that extends across a wide range of Landau level filling fractions. The structure appears only when the two-dimensional electron system is cooled to very low temperatures, indicating that it arises from delicate ground state correlations. We characterize this structure by its evolution with changing electron density and applied magnetic field, and present two possible models for understanding these observations. Some of the energies of the features agree qualitatively with what might be expected for composite fermions, which have proven effective for interpreting other experiments in this regime. At the same time, a simple model with electrons localized on ordered lattice sites also generates structure similar to that observed in the experiment. Neither of these models alone is sufficient to explain the observations across the entire range of densities measured. The discovery of this unexpected prominent structure in the single particle spectrum of an otherwise thoroughly studied system suggests that there exist core features of the two-dimensional electron system that have yet to be understood.
Spin systems and harmonic oscillators comprise two archetypes in quantum mechanics. The spin-1/2 system, with two quantum energy levels, is essentially the most nonlinear system found in nature, whereas the harmonic oscillator represents the most linear, with an infinite number of evenly spaced quantum levels. A significant difference between these systems is that a two-level spin can be prepared in an arbitrary quantum state using classical excitations, whereas classical excitations applied to an oscillator generate a coherent state, nearly indistinguishable from a classical state. Quantum behaviour in an oscillator is most obvious in Fock states, which are states with specific numbers of energy quanta, but such states are hard to create. Here we demonstrate the controlled generation of multi-photon Fock states in a solid-state system. We use a superconducting phase qubit, which is a close approximation to a two-level spin system, coupled to a microwave resonator, which acts as a harmonic oscillator, to prepare and analyse pure Fock states with up to six photons. We contrast the Fock states with coherent states generated using classical pulses applied directly to the resonator.
A new method of desorption ionization is described and applied to the ionization of various compounds, including peptides and proteins present on metal, polymer, and mineral surfaces. Desorption electrospray ionization (DESI) is carried out by directing electrosprayed charged droplets and ions of solvent onto the surface to be analyzed. The impact of the charged particles on the surface produces gaseous ions of material originally present on the surface. The resulting mass spectra are similar to normal ESI mass spectra in that they show mainly singly or multiply charged molecular ions of the analytes. The DESI phenomenon was observed both in the case of conductive and insulator surfaces and for compounds ranging from nonpolar small molecules such as lycopene, the alkaloid coniceine, and small drugs, through polar compounds such as peptides and proteins. Changes in the solution that is sprayed can be used to selectively ionize particular compounds, including those in biological matrices. In vivo analysis is demonstrated.
Over the past 70 years, numerous gas-surface adsorption studies have indicated the existence of a weakly bound, mobile intermediate that is a precursor to chemical bond formation. The direct observation and characterization of such a species are presented. Precursor and chemisorbed benzene on a silicon surface were clearly distinguished with the use of a tunable-temperature scanning tunneling microscope. Precursor decay to chemisorption was observed, allowing the salient features of the potential energy surface to be determined.
Our understanding of the chemical effects of high-intensity ultrasonic irradiation of liquids is still quite limited. It is generally accepted that sonochemistry results from acoustic cavitation: the creation, growth, and implosive collapse of bubbles in ultrasonically irradiated liquids. The mechanism of sonoluminescence in aqueous systems has been a matter of some dispute; recent discussions have suggested at least three possible origins: black-body emission, chemiluminescence from radical recombination, and electric discharge. Few studies of non-aqueous sonoluminescence, however, have been conducted. We present here the first spectrally resolved sonoluminescence spectra from hydrocarbon and halocarbon liquids. These spectra originate unambiguously from excited-state molecules created during acoustic cavitation. These high-energy species probably result from the recombination of radical and atomic species generated during the high temperatures and pressures of cavitation.
Advances in extreme-ultraviolet (EUV) and X-ray optics are providing powerful new capabilities in high-resolution imaging and trace-element analysis of microscopic specimens, and the potential for fabricating devices of smaller critical dimensions in next-generation integrated circuit lithography. However, achieving the highest resolution with such optics usually requires the illuminating EUV or X-ray beam to be highly monochromatic. It would therefore be highly desirable to have large-field-of-view, sub-100-nm resolution optics that are achromatic to a significant degree, allowing more light to be utilized from broader bandwidth sources such as laser-produced plasmas. Here we report an achromatic Fresnel optical system for EUV or X-ray radiation that combines a Fresnel zone plate with a refractive lens with opposite chromatic aberration. We use the large anomalous dispersion property of the refractive lens material near an absorption edge to make its fabrication practical. The resulting structure can deliver a resolution comparable to that of the Fresnel zone plates that have achieved the highest resolution (25 nm; ref. 3) in the entire electromagnetic spectrum, but with an improvement of two or more orders of magnitude in spectral bandwidth.
Landau-Fermi liquid theory, with its pivotal assertion that electrons in metals can be simply understood as independent particles with effective masses replacing the free electron mass, has been astonishingly successful. This is true despite the Coulomb interactions an electron experiences from the host crystal lattice, lattice defects and the other approximately 10(22) cm(-3) electrons. An important extension to the theory accounts for the behaviour of doped semiconductors. Because little in the vast literature on materials contradicts Fermi liquid theory and its extensions, exceptions have attracted great attention, and they include the high-temperature superconductors, silicon-based field-effect transistors that host two-dimensional metals, and certain rare-earth compounds at the threshold of magnetism. The origin of the non-Fermi liquid behaviour in all of these systems remains controversial. Here we report that an entirely different and exceedingly simple class of materials-doped small-bandgap semiconductors near a metal-insulator transition-can also display a non-Fermi liquid state. Remarkably, a modest magnetic field functions as a switch which restores the ordinary disordered Fermi liquid. Our data suggest that we have found a physical realization of the only mathematically rigorous route to a non-Fermi liquid, namely the 'undercompensated Kondo effect', where there are too few mobile electrons to compensate for the spins of unpaired electrons localized on impurity atoms.
We studied fermionic pairing in an ultracold two-component gas of 6Li atoms by observing an energy gap in the radio-frequency excitation spectra. With control of the two-body interactions through a Feshbach resonance, we demonstrated the dependence of the pairing gap on coupling strength, temperature, and Fermi energy. The appearance of an energy gap with moderate evaporative cooling suggests that our full evaporation brought the strongly interacting system deep into a superfluid state.
Short alanine peptides, containing 16 or 17 residues, appear to form alpha-helices in aqueous solution. But the main spectroscopic analyses used on helical peptides (circular dichroism and nuclear magnetic resonance) cannot distinguish between an alpha-helix (in which the ith residue is hydrogen-bonded to residue i + 4; ref. 9) and the next most common peptide helix, the 3(10)-helix10 (i-->i + 3 hydrogen-bonding). To address this problem we have designed single and doubly spin-labelled analogues of alanine-based peptides in which the nitroxide spin label forms an unbranched side chain extending from the sulphur atom of a cysteine residue. Here we report the circular dichroism, Fourier-transform infrared and electron-spin resonance spectra of these peptides under helix-forming conditions. The infrared absorbance gives an amide I' band with a frequency that is substantially different from that observed for alpha-helices. The electron-spin resonance spectra of doubly labelled helices show that the ranking of distances between side chains, around a single turn (residues 4-8), is inconsistent with an alpha-helical structure. Our experiments suggest that the more likely peptide geometry is a 3(10)-helix.
Quantum computers, which harness the superposition and entanglement of physical states, could outperform their classical counterparts in solving problems with technological impact-such as factoring large numbers and searching databases. A quantum processor executes algorithms by applying a programmable sequence of gates to an initialized register of qubits, which coherently evolves into a final state containing the result of the computation. Building a quantum processor is challenging because of the need to meet simultaneously requirements that are in conflict: state preparation, long coherence times, universal gate operations and qubit readout. Processors based on a few qubits have been demonstrated using nuclear magnetic resonance, cold ion trap and optical systems, but a solid-state realization has remained an outstanding challenge. Here we demonstrate a two-qubit superconducting processor and the implementation of the Grover search and Deutsch-Jozsa quantum algorithms. We use a two-qubit interaction, tunable in strength by two orders of magnitude on nanosecond timescales, which is mediated by a cavity bus in a circuit quantum electrodynamics architecture. This interaction allows the generation of highly entangled states with concurrence up to 94 per cent. Although this processor constitutes an important step in quantum computing with integrated circuits, continuing efforts to increase qubit coherence times, gate performance and register size will be required to fulfil the promise of a scalable technology.
In a pioneering experiment, Hanbury Brown and Twiss (HBT) demonstrated that noise correlations could be used to probe the properties of a (bosonic) particle source through quantum statistics; the effect relies on quantum interference between possible detection paths for two indistinguishable particles. HBT correlations--together with their fermionic counterparts--find numerous applications, ranging from quantum optics to nuclear and elementary particle physics. Spatial HBT interferometry has been suggested as a means to probe hidden order in strongly correlated phases of ultracold atoms. Here we report such a measurement on the Mott insulator phase of a rubidium Bose gas as it is released from an optical lattice trap. We show that strong periodic quantum correlations exist between density fluctuations in the expanding atom cloud. These spatial correlations reflect the underlying ordering in the lattice, and find a natural interpretation in terms of a multiple-wave HBT interference effect. The method should provide a useful tool for identifying complex quantum phases of ultracold bosonic and fermionic atoms.
Using the tip of a scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) to mechanically manipulate individual atoms and molecules on a surface is now a well established procedure. Similarly, selective vibrational excitation of adsorbed molecules with an STM tip to induce motion or dissociation has been widely demonstrated. Such experiments are usually performed on weakly bound atoms that need to be stabilized by operating at cryogenic temperatures. Analogous experiments at room temperature are more difficult, because they require relatively strongly bound species that are not perturbed by random thermal fluctuations. But manipulation can still be achieved through electronic excitation of the atom or molecule by the electron current tunnelling between STM tip and surface at relatively high bias voltages, typically 1-5 V. Here we use this approach to selectively dissociate chlorine atoms from individual oriented chlorobenzene molecules adsorbed on a Si(111)-7 x 7 surface. We map out the final destination of the chlorine daughter atoms, finding that their radial and angular distributions depend on the tunnelling current and hence excitation rate. In our system, one tunnelling electron has nominally sufficient energy to induce dissociation, yet the process requires two electrons. We explain these observations by a two-electron mechanism that couples vibrational excitation and dissociative electron attachment steps.
Phase-sensitive measurements were made on Sr2RuO4 to establish unambiguously the odd-parity pairing in this material. The critical current of Au(0.5)In(0.5)-Sr2RuO4 superconducting quantum interference devices prepared on Sr2RuO4 single crystals was found to be a maximum for devices with junctions on the same side of the crystal and a minimum for devices with junctions on opposite sides, in the limit of zero magnetic flux; these findings indicate that the phase of the superconducting order parameter in Sr2RuO4 changes by pi under inversion. This result verifies the odd-parity pairing symmetry and the formation of spin-triplet Cooper pairs in Sr2RuO4.
Illumination of Chromatium with light absorbed by bacteriochlorophyll causes the oxidation of intracellular cytochrome. The quantum efficiency of this reaction approaches one electron per photon at 589 millimicrons and at wavelengths between 862 and 908 millimicrons. The efficiency of converting excitation energy to chemical energy is estimated to be about 30 percent.
Although an atom is a manifestly quantum mechanical system, the electron in an atom can be made to move in a classical orbit almost indefinitely if it is exposed to a weak microwave field oscillating at its orbital frequency. The field effectively tethers the electron, phase-locking its motion to the oscillating microwave field. By exploiting this phase-locking, we have sped up or slowed down the orbital motion of the electron in excited lithium atoms by increasing or decreasing the microwave frequency between 13 and 19 gigahertz; the binding energy and orbital size change concurrently.
Models predict that magnetic fields play a crucial role in the physics of astrophysical accretion disks and their associated winds and jets. For example, the rotation of the disk twists around the rotation axis the initially vertical magnetic field, which responds by slowing down the plasma in the disk and by causing it to fall towards the central star. The magnetic energy flux produced in this process points away from the disk, pushing the surface plasma outwards, leading to a wind from the disk and sometimes a collimated jet. But these predictions have hitherto not been supported by observations. Here we report the direct detection of the magnetic field in the core of the protostellar accretion disk FU Orionis. The surface field reaches strengths of about 1 kG close to the centre of the disk, and it includes a significant azimuthal component, in good agreement with recent models. But we find that the field is very filamentary and slows down the disk plasma much more than models predict, which may explain why FU Ori fails to collimate its wind into a jet.
Existence of the magnetic monopole is compatible with the fundamental laws of nature; however, this elusive particle has yet to be detected experimentally. We show theoretically that an electric charge near a topological surface state induces an image magnetic monopole charge due to the topological magneto-electric effect. The magnetic field generated by the image magnetic monopole may be experimentally measured, and the inverse square law of the field dependence can be determined quantitatively. We propose that this effect can be used to experimentally realize a gas of quantum particles carrying fractional statistics, consisting of the bound states of the electric charge and the image magnetic monopole charge.
The mechanosensitive channel of small conductance (MscS) is a key determinant in the prokaryotic response to osmotic challenges. We determined the structural rearrangements associated with MscS activation in membranes, using functorial measurements, electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, and computational analyses. MscS was trapped in its open conformation after the transbilayer pressure profile was modified through the asymmetric incorporation of lysophospholipids. The transition from the closed to the open state is accompanied by the downward tilting of the transmembrane TM1-TM2 hairpin and by the expansion, tilt, and rotation of the TM3 helices. These movements expand the permeation pathway, leading to an increase in accessibility to water around TM3. Our open MscS model is compatible with single-channel conductance measurements and supports the notion that helix tilting is associated with efficient pore widening in mechanosensitive channels.
We report a high Curie-temperature ferromagnet, CaB2C2. Although the compound has neither transition metal nor rare earth ions, the ferromagnetic transition temperature Tc is about 770 Kelvin. Despite this high T(c), the magnitude of the ordered moment at room temperatures is on the order of 10(-4) Bohr magneton per formula unit. These properties are rather similar to those of doped divalent hexaborides, such as Ca(1-x)La(x)B6. The calculated electronic states also show similarity near the Fermi level between CaB2C2 and divalent hexaborides. However, there is an important difference: CaB2C2 crystallizes in a tetragonal structure, and there are no equivalent pockets in the energy bands for electrons and holes-in contrast with CaB6. Thus, the disputed threefold degeneracy, specific to the cubic structure, in the energy bands of divalent hexaborides turns out not to be essential for high-temperature ferromagnetism. It is the peculiar molecular orbitals near the Fermi level that appear to be crucial to the high-Tc ferromagnetism.
The engineering of biological systems is anticipated to provide effective solutions to challenges that include energy and food production, environmental quality, and health and medicine. Our ability to transmit information to and from living systems, and to process and act on information inside cells, is critical to advancing the scale and complexity at which we can engineer, manipulate, and probe biological systems. We developed a general approach for assembling RNA devices that can execute higher-order cellular information processing operations from standard components. The engineered devices can function as logic gates (AND, NOR, NAND, or OR gates) and signal filters, and exhibit cooperativity. RNA devices process and transmit molecular inputs to targeted protein outputs, linking computation to gene expression and thus the potential to control cellular function.
Ions that are stored in electromagnetic "traps" provid the basis for extremely high resolution spectroscopy. By using lasers, the kinetic energy of the ions can be cooled to millikelvin temperatures, thereby suppressing Doppler frequency shifts. Potential accuracies of frequency standards and clocks based on such experiments are anticipated to be better than one part in 10(15).
Recent work on solar cells based on interpenetrating polymer networks and solid-state dye-sensitized devices shows that efficient solar-energy conversion is possible using organic materials. Further, it has been demonstrated that the performance of photovoltaic devices based on small molecules can be effectively enhanced by doping the organic material with electron-accepting molecules. But as inorganic solar cells show much higher efficiencies, well above 15 per cent, the practical utility of organic-based cells will require their fabrication by lower-cost techniques, ideally on flexible substrates. Here we demonstrate efficiency enhancement by molecular doping in Schottky-type photovoltaic diodes based on pentacene--an organic semiconductor that has received much attention as a promising material for organic thin-film transistors, but relatively little attention for use in photovoltaic devices. The incorporation of the dopant improves the internal quantum efficiency by more than five orders of magnitude and yields an external energy conversion efficiency as high as 2.4 per cent for a standard solar spectrum. Thin-film devices based on doped pentacene therefore appear promising for the production of efficient 'plastic' solar cells.
The excess extreme-ultraviolet (EUV) emission detected in the Virgo and Coma clusters is explained by inverse Compton scattering of cosmic microwave background photons, which are scattered by the relativistic electrons that account for the extended radio synchrotron emission of these clusters. The lower limits of the average magnetic fields of these clusters estimated from the EUV excess are close to the equipartition magnetic fields derived from radio observations, indicating that the electron energies and magnetic field energies might be close to equipartition. The excess emission suggests energy reservoirs of approximately 10(61) and approximately 10(60) ergs for the Coma and Virgo clusters, respectively.
Most of our knowledge of the structures of free molecules comes from indirect observations that focus on other properties (for example, energy or mass spectra) that depend on structure. Recently, a new method has been developed that instead yields geometrical images of individual molecules. This method takes advantage of the large Coulomb repulsion of the nuclei within molecules rapidly stripped of their electrons. The first experiments with this new technique have already revealed structural images of several important species, such as positively charged methane ions.
The current-perpendicular-to-plane magnetoresistance (CPP-MR) has been investigated for the layered manganite, La2-2xSr1+2xMn2O7 (x = 0.3), which is composed of the ferromagnetic-metallic MnO2 bilayers separated by nonmagnetic insulating block layers. The CPP-MR is extremely large (10(4) percent at 50 kilo-oersted) at temperatures near above the three-dimensional ordering temperature (Tc approximately 90 kelvin) because of the field-induced coherent motion between planes of the spin-polarized electrons. Below Tc, the interplane magnetic domain boundary on the insulating block layer serves as the charge-transport barrier, but it can be removed by a low saturation field, which gives rise to the low-field tunneling MR as large as 240 percent.
The tetravalency of carbon and its ability to form covalent bonds with itself and other elements enables large organic molecules with complex structures, functions and dynamics to be constructed. The varied electronic configurations and bonding patterns of inorganic elements, on the other hand, can impart diverse electronic, magnetic, catalytic and other useful properties to molecular-level structures. Some hybrid organic-inorganic materials that combine features of both chemistries have been developed, most notably metal-organic frameworks, dense and extended organic-inorganic frameworks and coordination polymers. Metal ions have also been incorporated into molecules that contain interlocked subunits, such as rotaxanes and catenanes, and structures in which many inorganic clusters encircle polymer chains have been described. Here we report the synthesis of a series of discrete rotaxane molecules in which inorganic and organic structural units are linked together mechanically at the molecular level. Structural units (dialkyammonium groups) in dumb-bell-shaped organic molecules template the assembly of essentially inorganic 'rings' about 'axles' to form rotaxanes consisting of various numbers of rings and axles. One of the rotaxanes behaves as a 'molecular shuttle': the ring moves between two binding sites on the axle in a large-amplitude motion typical of some synthetic molecular machine systems. The architecture of the rotaxanes ensures that the electronic, magnetic and paramagnetic characteristics of the inorganic rings-properties that could make them suitable as qubits for quantum computers-can influence, and potentially be influenced by, the organic portion of the molecule.
The energetics and the electronic, magnetic, and geometric structure of the metallocarbohedrene Ti(8)C(12) have been calculated self-consistently in the density functional formulation. The structure of Ti(8)C(12) is a distorted dodecahedron with a binding energy of 6.1 electron volts per atom. The unusual stability is derived from covalent-like bonding between carbon atoms and between titanium and carbon atoms with no appreciable interaction between titanium atoms. The density of states at the Fermi energy is high and is derived from a strong hybridization between titanium 3d and carbon sp electrons. Titanium sites carry a small magnetic moment of 0.35 Bohr magneton per atom and the cluster is only weakly magnetic.
Quantum walks of correlated particles offer the possibility of studying large-scale quantum interference; simulating biological, chemical, and physical systems; and providing a route to universal quantum computation. We have demonstrated quantum walks of two identical photons in an array of 21 continuously evanescently coupled waveguides in a SiO(x)N(y) chip. We observed quantum correlations, violating a classical limit by 76 standard deviations, and found that the correlations depended critically on the input state of the quantum walk. These results present a powerful approach to achieving quantum walks with correlated particles to encode information in an exponentially larger state space.
Following the realization of Bose-Einstein condensates in atomic gases, an experimental challenge is the production of molecular gases in the quantum regime. A promising approach is to create the molecular gas directly from an ultracold atomic gas; for example, bosonic atoms in a Bose-Einstein condensate have been coupled to electronic ground-state molecules through photoassociation or a magnetic field Feshbach resonance. The availability of atomic Fermi gases offers the prospect of coupling fermionic atoms to bosonic molecules, thus altering the quantum statistics of the system. Such a coupling would be closely related to the pairing mechanism in a fermionic superfluid, predicted to occur near a Feshbach resonance. Here we report the creation and quantitative characterization of ultracold 40K2 molecules. Starting with a quantum degenerate Fermi gas of atoms at a temperature of less than 150 nK, we scan the system over a Feshbach resonance to create adiabatically more than 250,000 trapped molecules; these can be converted back to atoms by reversing the scan. The small binding energy of the molecules is controlled by detuning the magnetic field away from the Feshbach resonance, and can be varied over a wide range. We directly detect these weakly bound molecules through their radio-frequency photodissociation spectra; these probe the molecular wavefunction, and yield binding energies that are consistent with theory.
In the Earth's fluid outer core, a dynamo process converts thermal and gravitational energy into magnetic energy. The power needed to sustain the geomagnetic field is set by the ohmic losses (dissipation due to electrical resistance). Recent estimates of ohmic losses cover a wide range, from 0.1 to 3.5 TW, or roughly 0.3-10% of the Earth's surface heat flow. The energy requirement of the dynamo puts constraints on the thermal budget and evolution of the core through Earth's history. Here we use a set of numerical dynamo models to derive scaling relations between the core's characteristic dissipation time and the core's magnetic and hydrodynamic Reynolds numbers--dimensionless numbers that measure the ratio of advective transport to magnetic and viscous diffusion, respectively. The ohmic dissipation of the Karlsruhe dynamo experiment supports a simple dependence on the magnetic Reynolds number alone, indicating that flow turbulence in the experiment and in the Earth's core has little influence on its characteristic dissipation time. We use these results to predict moderate ohmic dissipation in the range of 0.2-0.5 TW, which removes the need for strong radioactive heating in the core and allows the age of the solid inner core to exceed 2.5 billion years.
When electrons are confined in two dimensions and subject to strong magnetic fields, the Coulomb interactions between them can become very strong, leading to the formation of correlated states of matter, such as the fractional quantum Hall liquid. In this strong quantum regime, electrons and magnetic flux quanta bind to form complex composite quasiparticles with fractional electronic charge; these are manifest in transport measurements of the Hall conductivity as rational fractions of the elementary conductance quantum. The experimental discovery of an anomalous integer quantum Hall effect in graphene has enabled the study of a correlated two-dimensional electronic system, in which the interacting electrons behave like massless chiral fermions. However, owing to the prevailing disorder, graphene has so far exhibited only weak signatures of correlated electron phenomena, despite intense experimental and theoretical efforts. Here we report the observation of the fractional quantum Hall effect in ultraclean, suspended graphene. In addition, we show that at low carrier density graphene becomes an insulator with a magnetic-field-tunable energy gap. These newly discovered quantum states offer the opportunity to study correlated Dirac fermions in graphene in the presence of large magnetic fields.
There is controversy as to whether homologues from the peripheral subunit binding domain family of small proteins fold 'downhill' (that is, non-cooperatively, in the absence of free-energy barriers between conformations) and whether they modulate their size for biological function. Sadqi et al. claim that Naf-BBL--a naphthylalanine-labelled, truncated version of this domain--folds in this way, on the grounds that they recorded a wide spread of melting temperatures of individual atoms measured by proton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) during their thermal denaturation. But their data are not of adequate quality to distinguish, within experimental error, between downhill folding and folding with a cooperative transition. Accordingly, their results offer no compelling evidence that Naf-BBL folds downhill, particularly as non-truncated, unmodified peripheral subunit binding domains seem to fold cooperatively.
More than a century after the introduction of incandescent lighting and half a century after the introduction of fluorescent lighting, solid-state light sources are revolutionizing an increasing number of applications. Whereas the efficiency of conventional incandescent and fluorescent lights is limited by fundamental factors that cannot be overcome, the efficiency of solid-state sources is limited only by human creativity and imagination. The high efficiency of solid-state sources already provides energy savings and environmental benefits in a number of applications. However, solid-state sources also offer controllability of their spectral power distribution, spatial distribution, color temperature, temporal modulation, and polarization properties. Such "smart" light sources can adjust to specific environments and requirements, a property that could result in tremendous benefits in lighting, automobiles, transportation, communication, imaging, agriculture, and medicine.
Electron correlations are known to play an important role in determining the unusual physical properties of a variety of compounds. Such properties include high-temperature superconductivity, heavy fermion behaviour and metal-to-insulator transitions. High-resolution photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) provides a means of directly probing the electronic states (particularly those near the Fermi level) in these materials, but the short photoelectron mean free paths (< or = 5 A) associated with the low excitation energies conventionally used (< or = 120 eV) make this a surface-sensitive technique. Now that high-resolution PES is possible at much higher energies, with mean free paths as long as 15 A (ref. 6), it should become feasible to probe the bulk electronic states in these materials. Here we demonstrate the power of this technique by applying it to the cerium compounds CeRu2Si2 and CeRu2. Previous PES studies of these compounds revealed very similar spectra for the Ce 4f electronic states, yet it is expected that such states should be different owing to their differing degrees of hybridization with other valence bands. Our determination of the bulk Ce 4f electronic states of these compounds resolves these differences.
Scanning tunneling microscopy and monoenergetic molecular beams have been used to obtain real-space atomic images of the competition between abstractive and dissociative chemisorption. The size distribution of Si-F adsorbates on the Si(111)-(7x7) surface was examined as a function of the incident translational energy of the F(2) molecules. For F(2) molecules with 0.03 electron volt of incident energy, the dominant adsorbate sites were isolated Si-F species. As an F(2) molecule with low translational energy collides with the surface, abstraction occurs and only one of the F atoms chemisorbs; the other is ejected into the gas phase. For F(2) molecules with 0.27 electron volt of incident energy, many adjacent Si-F adsorbates (dimer sites) were observed because F(2) molecules with high translational energy collide with the surface and chemisorb dissociatively so that both F atoms react to form adjacent Si-F adsorbates. For halogens with very high incident energy (0.5-electron volt Br(2)), dissociative chemisorption is the dominant adsorption mechanism and dimer sites account for nearly all adsorbates.
We used site-directed spin-labeling and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to characterize the conformational motion that couples energy expenditure to substrate translocation in the multidrug transporter MsbA. In liposomes, ligand-free MsbA samples conformations that depart from the crystal structures, including looser packing and water penetration along the periplasmic side. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding closes the substrate chamber to the cytoplasm while increasing hydration at the periplasmic side, consistent with an alternating access model. Accentuated by ATP hydrolysis, the changes in the chamber dielectric environment and its geometry provide the likely driving force for flipping amphipathic substrates and a potential exit pathway. These results establish the structural dynamic basis of the power stroke in multidrug-resistant ATP-binding cassette (MDR ABC) transporters.
Hydrogen bonds commonly lend robustness and directionality to molecular recognition processes and supramolecular structures. In particular, the two or three hydrogen bonds in Watson-Crick base pairs bind the double-stranded DNA helix and determine the complementarity of the pairing. Watson and Crick pointed out, however, that the possible tautomers of base pairs, in which hydrogen atoms become attached to the donor atom of the hydrogen bond, might disturb the genetic code, as the tautomer is capable of pairing with different partners. But the dynamics of hydrogen bonds in general, and of this tautomerization process in particular, are not well understood. Here we report observations of the femtosecond dynamics of tautomerization in model base pairs (7-azaindole dimers) containing two hydrogen bonds. Because of the femtosecond resolution of proton motions, we are able to examine the cooperativity of formation of the tautomer (in which the protons on each base are shifted sequentially to the other base), and to determine the characteristic timescales of the motions in a solvent-free environment. We find that the first step occurs on a timescale of a few hundred femtoseconds, whereas the second step, to form the full tautomer, is much slower, taking place within several picoseconds; the timescales are changed significantly by replacing hydrogen with deuterium. These results establish the molecular basis of the dynamics and the role of quantum tunnelling.
An unusual luminescent inorganic oxide, Sr2CeO4, was identified by parallel screening techniques from within a combinatorial library of more than 25,000 members prepared by automated thin-film synthesis. A bulk sample of single-phase Sr2CeO4 was prepared, and its structure, determined from powder x-ray diffraction data, reveals one-dimensional chains of edge-sharing CeO6 octahedra, with two terminal oxygen atoms per cerium center, that are isolated from one another by Sr2+ cations. The emission maximum at 485 nanometers appears blue-white and has a quantum yield of 0.48 +/- 0.02. The excited-state lifetime, electron spin resonance, magnetic susceptibility, and structural data all suggest that luminescence originates from a ligand-to-metal Ce4+ charge transfer.
High-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of the carbon nuclei in powdered amber, obtained by using the techniques of magic angle spinning and cross polarization, provide detailed information about the types of carbon functionalities. The entire spectrum of Baltic amber (succinite) is identical for several samples. Baltic amber shows minor differences from Sicilian amber and drastic differences from Burmese, Romanian, and Bohemian ambers.
A product isolated from thymine irradiated with ultraviolet light in frozen aqueous solution undergoes dehydration on heating with acids. As judged by elemental analysis, mass, ultraviolet, infrared, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra, the most probable structures for this compound and its dehydration product, respectively, are 5-hydroxy-6-4'-[5''-methylpyrimidin-2'-one]-dihydrothymine and 6-4'-[5'-methylpyrimidin-2'-one]-thymine. Apparently, this compound is a thymine-thymine adduct and presumably is formed through the rearrangement of an initial photoproduct. Both compounds are closely related to 6-4'-[pyrimidin-2'-one]-thymine which has been isolated from acid hydrolyzates of ultraviolet-irradiated DNA and supposedly is derived from cytosine-thymine adduct. Formation of such adducts between pyrimidine bases is apparently a common photoreaction and may be important to the study of the photochemistry and photobiology of nucleic acids.
The addition of a small number of lead atoms to a germanium(111) surface reduces the energy barrier for activated processes, and with a tunneling microscope it is possible to observe concerted atomic motions and metastable structures on this surface near room temperature. The formation and annihilation of these metastable structural surface excitations is associated with the shift in position of large numbers of germanium surface atoms along a specific row direction like beads on an abacus. The effect provides a mechanism for understanding the transport of atoms on a semiconductor surface.
Physical processes that could facilitate coherent control of light propagation are under active exploration. In addition to their fundamental interest, these efforts are stimulated by practical possibilities, such as the development of a quantum memory for photonic states. Controlled localization and storage of photonic pulses may also allow novel approaches to manipulating of light via enhanced nonlinear optical processes. Recently, electromagnetically induced transparency was used to reduce the group velocity of propagating light pulses and to reversibly map propagating light pulses into stationary spin excitations in atomic media. Here we describe and experimentally demonstrate a technique in which light propagating in a medium of Rb atoms is converted into an excitation with localized, stationary electromagnetic energy, which can be held and released after a controllable interval. Our method creates pulses of light with stationary envelopes bound to an atomic spin coherence, offering new possibilities for photon state manipulation and nonlinear optical processes at low light levels.
Owing to their scientific and technological importance, inorganic single crystals with highly reactive surfaces have long been studied. Unfortunately, surfaces with high reactivity usually diminish rapidly during the crystal growth process as a result of the minimization of surface energy. A typical example is titanium dioxide (TiO2), which has promising energy and environmental applications. Most available anatase TiO(2) crystals are dominated by the thermodynamically stable {101} facets (more than 94 per cent, according to the Wulff construction), rather than the much more reactive {001} facets. Here we demonstrate that for fluorine-terminated surfaces this relative stability is reversed: {001} is energetically preferable to {101}. We explored this effect systematically for a range of non-metallic adsorbate atoms by first-principle quantum chemical calculations. On the basis of theoretical predictions, we have synthesized uniform anatase TiO(2) single crystals with a high percentage (47 per cent) of {001} facets using hydrofluoric acid as a morphology controlling agent. Moreover, the fluorated surface of anatase single crystals can easily be cleaned using heat treatment to render a fluorine-free surface without altering the crystal structure and morphology.
Proton magnetic resonance spectra (220-megahertz field) of an isolated rabbit sciatic nerve in its native state have been observed and assigned to the extracellular water, intracellular water, and phospholipids of the nerve. This study indicates that the nerve fibers contain fluid-like hydrophobic regions, in agreement with the results of recent electron spin resonance spin-labeled studies of excitable membranes of nerve and muscle.
An attractive approach to controlling spin effects in semiconductor nanostructures for applications in electronics is the use of light to generate, manipulate, or read out spins. Here, we demonstrate spontaneous photoinduced polarization of manganese(II) spins in doped colloidal cadmium selenide quantum dots. Photoexcitation generates large dopant-carrier exchange fields, enhanced by strong spatial confinement, that lead to giant Zeeman splittings of the semiconductor band structure in the absence of applied magnetic fields. These internal exchange fields allow spontaneous magnetic saturation of the manganese(II) spins to be achieved at zero external magnetic field up to approximately 50 kelvin. Photomagnetic effects are observed all the way up to room temperature.
During the past decade, research into superconducting quantum bits (qubits) based on Josephson junctions has made rapid progress. Many foundational experiments have been performed, and superconducting qubits are now considered one of the most promising systems for quantum information processing. However, the experimentally reported coherence times are likely to be insufficient for future large-scale quantum computation. A natural solution to this problem is a dedicated engineered quantum memory based on atomic and molecular systems. The question of whether coherent quantum coupling is possible between such natural systems and a single macroscopic artificial atom has attracted considerable attention since the first demonstration of macroscopic quantum coherence in Josephson junction circuits. Here we report evidence of coherent strong coupling between a single macroscopic superconducting artificial atom (a flux qubit) and an ensemble of electron spins in the form of nitrogen-vacancy colour centres in diamond. Furthermore, we have observed coherent exchange of a single quantum of energy between a flux qubit and a macroscopic ensemble consisting of about 3 x 10(7) such colour centres. This provides a foundation for future quantum memories and hybrid devices coupling microwave and optical systems.
Picosecond and femtosecond spectroscopy allow the detailed study of carrier dynamics in nanostructured materials. In such experiments, a laser pulse normally excites several nanostructures at once. However, spectroscopic information may also be acquired using pulses from an electron beam in a modern electron microscope, exploiting a phenomenon called cathodoluminescence. This approach offers several advantages. The multimode imaging capabilities of the electron microscope enable the correlation of optical properties (via cathodoluminescence) with surface morphology (secondary electron mode) at the nanometre scale. The broad energy range of the electrons can excite wide-bandgap materials, such as diamond- or gallium-nitride-based structures that are not easily excited by conventional optical means. But perhaps most intriguingly, the small beam can probe a single selected nanostructure. Here we apply an original time-resolved cathodoluminescence set-up to describe carrier dynamics within single gallium-arsenide-based pyramidal nanostructures with a time resolution of 10 picoseconds and a spatial resolution of 50 nanometres. The behaviour of such charge carriers could be useful for evaluating elementary components in quantum computers, optical quantum gates or single photon sources for quantum cryptography.
Numerous transition metal-mediated reactions, including hydrogenations, hydrosilations, and alkane functionalizations, result in the cleavage of strong sigma bonds. Key intermediates in these reactions often involve coordination of the sigma bond of dihydrogen, silanes (Si-H), or alkanes (C-H) to the metal center without full scission of the bond. These sigma complexes have been characterized to varying degrees in solid state and solution. However, a sigma complex of the simplest hydrocarbon, methane, has eluded full solution characterization. Here, we report nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of a rhodium(I) sigma-methane complex obtained by protonation of a rhodium-methyl precursor in CDCl2F solvent at -110 degrees C. The sigma-methane complex is shown to be more stable than the corresponding rhodium(III) methyl hydride complex. Even at -110 degrees C, methane rapidly tumbles in the coordination sphere of rhodium, exchanging free and bound hydrogens. Kinetic studies reveal a half-life of about 83 minutes at -87 degrees C for dissociation of methane (free energy of activation is 14.5 kilocalories per mole).
The superposition of quantum states drives motion on the atomic and subatomic scales, with the energy spacing of the states dictating the speed of the motion. In the case of electrons residing in the outer (valence) shells of atoms and molecules which are separated by electronvolt energies, this means that valence electron motion occurs on a subfemtosecond to few-femtosecond timescale (1 fs = 10(-15) s). In the absence of complete measurements, the motion can be characterized in terms of a complex quantity, the density matrix. Here we report an attosecond pump-probe measurement of the density matrix of valence electrons in atomic krypton ions. We generate the ions with a controlled few-cycle laser field and then probe them through the spectrally resolved absorption of an attosecond extreme-ultraviolet pulse, which allows us to observe in real time the subfemtosecond motion of valence electrons over a multifemtosecond time span. We are able to completely characterize the quantum mechanical electron motion and determine its degree of coherence in the specimen of the ensemble. Although the present study uses a simple, prototypical open system, attosecond transient absorption spectroscopy should be applicable to molecules and solid-state materials to reveal the elementary electron motions that control physical, chemical and biological properties and processes.
When a metal undergoes a continuous quantum phase transition, non-Fermi-liquid behaviour arises near the critical point. All the low-energy degrees of freedom induced by quantum criticality are usually assumed to be spatially extended, corresponding to long-wavelength fluctuations of the order parameter. But this picture has been contradicted by the results of recent experiments on a prototype system: heavy fermion metals at a zero-temperature magnetic transition. In particular, neutron scattering from CeCu6-x Aux has revealed anomalous dynamics at atomic length scales, leading to much debate as to the fate of the local moments in the quantum-critical regime. Here we report our theoretical finding of a locally critical quantum phase transition in a model of heavy fermions. The dynamics at the critical point are in agreement with experiment. We propose local criticality to be a phenomenon of general relevance to strongly correlated metals.
In Ge and Si, and also in Ge-Si alloys (74), there is extensive evidence for the stable binding of electrons and holes into a cold plasma of constant density, which undergoes a phase separation. Liquid metallic drops 1 to 300 microm in size are formed, with lifetimes ranging from 0.1 to 600 microsec. For Ge a surprising amount is known: the phase diagram, the surface energy, the work function, the decay kinetics. Much less is known for Si. There is good agreement between theoretical and experimental values of the liquid density, the critical density, the critical temperature, and the binding energy. The stability of the liquid phase is strikingly dependent on band structure. The multivalley structure and mass anisotropy of Si, Ge, and Ge-Si, together with their indirect band gap, are no doubt responsible for the observed stability in these crystals. In the similar semiconductor gallium phosphide, drops have not yet been observed, most likely because the high impurity content traps the excitons. In gallium arsenide the existence of drops is controversial (75). Undoubtedly drops will be found to exist in other semiconductors, perhaps at even higher temperatures. This is an exciting field for the experimentalist; new phenomena are being rapidly discovered, usually before they are predicted. For the theorist, the electron-hole drop is of high intrinsic interest. It represents the first example of a quantum liquid of constant density in a periodic crystal lattice. A number of challenging experimental and theoretical problems remain.
Conventional protein structure determination from nuclear magnetic resonance data relies heavily on side-chain proton-to-proton distances. The necessary side-chain resonance assignment, however, is labor intensive and prone to error. Here we show that structures can be accurately determined without nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) information on the side chains for proteins up to 25 kilodaltons by incorporating backbone chemical shifts, residual dipolar couplings, and amide proton distances into the Rosetta protein structure modeling methodology. These data, which are too sparse for conventional methods, serve only to guide conformational search toward the lowest-energy conformations in the folding landscape; the details of the computed models are determined by the physical chemistry implicit in the Rosetta all-atom energy function. The new method is not hindered by the deuteration required to suppress nuclear relaxation processes for proteins greater than 15 kilodaltons and should enable routine NMR structure determination for larger proteins.
We report interband magneto-optical spectra for single-walled carbon nanotubes in high magnetic fields up to 45 tesla, confirming theoretical predictions that the band structure of a single-walled carbon nanotube is dependent on the magnetic flux phi threading the tube. We have observed field-induced optical anisotropy as well as red shifts and splittings of absorption and photoluminescence peaks. The amounts of shifts and splittings depend on the value of phi/phi(0) and are quantitatively consistent with theories based on the Aharonov-Bohm effect. These results represent evidence of the influence of the Aharonov-Bohm phase on the band gap of a solid.
One of the main unanswered questions in solar physics is why the Sun's outer atmosphere is hotter than its surface. Theory predicts abundant production of high-frequency (10-50 mHz) acoustic waves in subsurface layers of the Sun, and such waves are believed by many to constitute the dominant heating mechanism of the chromosphere (the lower part of the outer solar atmosphere) in non-magnetic regions. Such high-frequency waves are difficult to detect because of high-frequency disturbances in Earth's atmosphere (seeing) and other factors. Here we report the detection of high-frequency waves, and we use numerical simulations to show that the acoustic energy flux of these waves is too low, by a factor of at least ten, to balance the radiative losses in the solar chromosphere. Acoustic waves therefore cannot constitute the dominant heating mechanism of the solar chromosphere.
High-quality crystals of the organic molecular semiconductors tetracene and pentacene were used to prepare metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) structures exhibiting hole and electron mobilities exceeding 10(4) square centimeters per volt per second. The carrier concentration in the channel region of these ambipolar field-effect devices was controlled by the applied gate voltage. Well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations and quantized Hall plateaus were observed for two-dimensional carrier densities in the range of 10(11) per square centimeter. Fractional quantum Hall states were observed in tetracene crystals at temperatures as high as approximately 2 kelvin.
Photonic cavities that strongly confine light are finding applications in many areas of physics and engineering, including coherent electron-photon interactions, ultra-small filters, low-threshold lasers, photonic chips, nonlinear optics and quantum information processing. Critical for these applications is the realization of a cavity with both high quality factor, Q, and small modal volume, V. The ratio Q/V determines the strength of the various cavity interactions, and an ultra-small cavity enables large-scale integration and single-mode operation for a broad range of wavelengths. However, a high-Q cavity of optical wavelength size is difficult to fabricate, as radiation loss increases in inverse proportion to cavity size. With the exception of a few recent theoretical studies, definitive theories and experiments for creating high-Q nanocavities have not been extensively investigated. Here we use a silicon-based two-dimensional photonic-crystal slab to fabricate a nanocavity with Q = 45,000 and V = 7.0 x 10(-14) cm3; the value of Q/V is 10-100 times larger than in previous studies. Underlying this development is the realization that light should be confined gently in order to be confined strongly. Integration with other photonic elements is straightforward, and a large free spectral range of 100 nm has been demonstrated.
The phase diagram of hole-doped copper oxides shows four different electronic phases existing at zero temperature. Familiar among these are the Mott insulator, high-transition-temperature superconductor and metallic phases. A fourth phase, of unknown identity, occurs at light doping along the zero-temperature bound of the 'pseudogap' regime. This regime is rich in peculiar electronic phenomena, prompting numerous proposals that it contains some form of hidden electronic order. Here we present low-temperature electronic structure imaging studies of a lightly hole-doped copper oxide: Ca2-xNaxCuO2Cl2. Tunnelling spectroscopy (at energies |E| > 100 meV) reveals electron extraction probabilities greatly exceeding those for injection, as anticipated for a doped Mott insulator. However, for |E| < 100 meV, the spectrum exhibits a V-shaped energy gap centred on E = 0. States within this gap undergo intense spatial modulations, with the spatial correlations of a four CuO2-unit-cell square 'checkerboard', independent of energy. Intricate atomic-scale electronic structure variations also exist within the checkerboard. These data are consistent with an unanticipated crystalline electronic state, possibly the hidden electronic order, existing in the zero-temperature pseudogap regime of Ca2-xNaxCuO2Cl2.
Interference of atomic de Broglie waves tunneling from a vertical array of macroscopically populated traps has been observed. The traps were located in the antinodes of an optical standing wave and were loaded from a Bose-Einstein condensate. Tunneling was induced by acceleration due to gravity, and interference was observed as a train of falling pulses of atoms. In the limit of weak atomic interactions, the pulse frequency is determined by the gravitational potential energy difference between adjacent potential wells. The effect is closely related to the ac Josephson effect observed in superconducting electronic systems.
Reaction path methods provide a powerful tool for bridging the gap between electronic structure and chemical dynamics. Classical mechanical reaction paths may usually be understood in terms of the force field in the vicinity of a minimum energy path (MEP). When there is a significant component of hydrogenic motion along the MEP and a barrier much higher than the average energy of reactants, quantal tunneling paths must be considered, and these tend to be located on the corner-cutting side of the MEP. As the curvature of the MEP in mass-scaled coordinates is increased, the quantal reaction paths may deviate considerably from the classical ones, and the force field must be mapped out over a wider region, called the reaction swath. The required force fields may be represented by global or semiglobal analytic functions, or the dynamics may be computed "directly" from the electronic structure results without the intermediacy of potential energy functions. Applications to atom and diatom reactions in the gas phase and at gas-solid interfaces and to reactions of polyatomic molecules in the gas phase, in clusters, and in aqueous solution are discussed as examples.
Scanning probe microscopy is a versatile and powerful method that uses sharp tips to image, measure and manipulate matter at surfaces with atomic resolution. At cryogenic temperatures, scanning probe microscopy can even provide electron tunnelling spectra that serve as fingerprints of the vibrational properties of adsorbed molecules and of the electronic properties of magnetic impurity atoms, thereby allowing chemical identification. But in many instances, and particularly for insulating systems, determining the exact chemical composition of surfaces or nanostructures remains a considerable challenge. In principle, dynamic force microscopy should make it possible to overcome this problem: it can image insulator, semiconductor and metal surfaces with true atomic resolution, by detecting and precisely measuring the short-range forces that arise with the onset of chemical bonding between the tip and surface atoms and that depend sensitively on the chemical identity of the atoms involved. Here we report precise measurements of such short-range chemical forces, and show that their dependence on the force microscope tip used can be overcome through a normalization procedure. This allows us to use the chemical force measurements as the basis for atomic recognition, even at room temperature. We illustrate the performance of this approach by imaging the surface of a particularly challenging alloy system and successfully identifying the three constituent atomic species silicon, tin and lead, even though these exhibit very similar chemical properties and identical surface position preferences that render any discrimination attempt based on topographic measurements impossible.
Scanning tunneling spectroscopy of the high-Tc superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta reveals weak, incommensurate, spatial modulations in the tunneling conductance. Images of these energy-dependent modulations are Fourier analyzed to yield the dispersion of their wavevectors. Comparison of the dispersions with photoemission spectroscopy data indicates that quasiparticle interference, due to elastic scattering between characteristic regions of momentum-space, provides a consistent explanation for the conductance modulations, without appeal to another order parameter. These results refocus attention on quasiparticle scattering processes as potential explanations for other incommensurate phenomena in the cuprates. The momentum-resolved tunneling spectroscopy demonstrated here also provides a new technique with which to study quasiparticles in correlated materials.
Helical polyacetylene was synthesized under an asymmetric reaction field consisting of chiral nematic (N*) liquid crystals (LCs). The chiral nematic LC was prepared by adding a chiroptical binaphthol derivative as a chiral dopant to a mixture of two nematic LCs. Acetylene polymerizations were carried out using the catalyst titanium tetra-n-butoxide-triethylaluminum dissolved in the chiral nematic LC solvent. The polyacetylene film was shown by scanning electron microscopy to consist of clockwise or counterclockwise helical structure of fibrils. A Cotton effect was observed in the region of the pi --> pi* transition of the polyacetylene chain in circular dichroism spectra. The high electrical conductivities of approximately 1500 to 1800 siemens per centimeter after iodine doping and the chiral helicity of these films may be exploited in electromagnetic and optical applications.
The well-ordered aluminum oxide film formed by oxidation of the NiAl(110) surface is the most intensely studied metal surface oxide, but its structure was previously unknown. We determined the structure by extensive ab initio modeling and scanning tunneling microscopy experiments. Because the topmost aluminum atoms are pyramidally and tetrahedrally coordinated, the surface is different from all Al2O3 bulk phases. The film is a wide-gap insulator, although the overall stoichiometry of the film is not Al2O3 but Al10O13. We propose that the same building blocks can be found on the surfaces of bulk oxides, such as the reduced corundum (0001) surface.
A quantum critical point (QCP) develops in a material at absolute zero when a new form of order smoothly emerges in its ground state. QCPs are of great current interest because of their singular ability to influence the finite temperature properties of materials. Recently, heavy-fermion metals have played a key role in the study of antiferromagnetic QCPs. To accommodate the heavy electrons, the Fermi surface of the heavy-fermion paramagnet is larger than that of an antiferromagnet. An important unsolved question is whether the Fermi surface transformation at the QCP develops gradually, as expected if the magnetism is of spin-density-wave (SDW) type, or suddenly, as expected if the heavy electrons are abruptly localized by magnetism. Here we report measurements of the low-temperature Hall coefficient (R(H))--a measure of the Fermi surface volume--in the heavy-fermion metal YbRh2Si2 upon field-tuning it from an antiferromagnetic to a paramagnetic state. R(H) undergoes an increasingly rapid change near the QCP as the temperature is lowered, extrapolating to a sudden jump in the zero temperature limit. We interpret these results in terms of a collapse of the large Fermi surface and of the heavy-fermion state itself precisely at the QCP.
The performance of many semiconductor quantum-based structures is governed by the dynamics of charge carriers between a localized state and a band of electronic states. Using scanning tunneling spectroscopy, we studied the transport of inelastic tunneling electrons through a prototypical localized state: an isolated dangling-bond state on a Si(111) surface. From the saturation of the current at an energy resonant with this state, the hole capture rate by the dangling bond was determined. By further mapping the spatial extension of its wave function, the localized nature of the level was found to be consistent with the small magnitude of its cross section. This approach illustrates how the microscopic environment of a single defect critically affects its carrier dynamics.
Recent research has uncovered a fascinating quantum liquid made up solely of electrons confined to a plane surface. Found only at temperatures near absolute zero and in extremely strong magnetic fields, this liquid can flow without friction. The excited states of this liquid consist of peculiar particle-like objects that carry an exact fraction of an electron charge. Called quasiparticles, these excitations can themselves condense into new liquid states. Each such liquid is characterized by a fractional quantum number that is directly observable in a simple electrical measurement. This article attempts to convey the qualitative essence of this still unfolding phenomenon, known as the fractional quantum Hall effect.
The chain conformation of glassy poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) was characterized by two-dimensional double-quantum nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). In amorphous carbon-13-labeled PET, the statistics of the O-13CH2-13CH2-O torsion angle were determined, on the basis of the distinct shapes of the two-dimensional NMR patterns of trans and gauche conformations. In crystalline PET, the trans content is 100 percent, but in the amorphous PET it is only 14 percent (+/-5 percent). An average gauche torsion angle of 70 degrees (+/-9 degrees) was obtained. Implications for materials properties of polyesters are discussed.
The instability resulting from the relative motion of newly picked-up cometary photoions and the solar wind generates lower hybrid waves that are capable of accelerating electrons to the keV range of energies. These electrons may be responsible for the x-rays from comet C/Hyakutake 1996 B2 seen by the Rontgen X-ray Satellite. The inferred x-ray photon power depends on the electron energy, with keV electrons providing values of photon power two orders of magnitude greater than 100 eV electrons. These observations and in particular, spectral resolution of the x-rays, should provide more insight into the composition of the comet.
The drive to smaller and smaller computational devices demands control over the structure, composition, and magnetic properties of materials on a sub-100-nanometer scale. In his Perspective, Scholl highlights a report by Heinze et al., who have been able to image an antiferromagnetic Mn monolayer at atomic resolution using a technique called spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy. Because of its unrivaled resolution, this technique is likely to provide insights into magnetic interactions that are of fundamental importance to magnetic devices.
The relationship between macroscopic chirality and chirality on the molecular level was unequivocally established in 1951 through anomalous X-ray scattering. Although this technique became the definitive method for determining the absolute configuration of a molecule, one important limitation of the approach is that the molecule must contain 'heavy' atoms (for example, bromine). The direct determination of absolute configurations for a wider range of molecules has recently become possible by measuring a molecule's vibrational optical activity. Here we show that instrumental advances in Raman optical activity, combined with quantum chemical computations, make it possible to determine the absolute configuration of (R)-[2H1, 2H2, 2H3]-neopentane. This saturated hydrocarbon represents the archetype of all molecules that are chiral as a result of a dissymmetric mass distribution. It is chemically inert and cannot be derivatized to yield molecules that would reveal the absolute configuration of the parent compound. Diastereomeric interactions with other molecules, optical rotation, and electronic circular dichroism are, in contrast to the well-known case of bromochlorofluoromethane, not expected to be measurable. Vibronic effects in the vacuum ultraviolet circular dichroism might reveal that the molecule is chiral, but the presence of nine rotamers would make it extremely difficult to interpret the spectra, because the spatial arrangement of the rotamers' nuclei resembles that of enantiomers. The unequivocal spectroscopic determination of the absolute configuration of (R)-[2H1, 2H2, 2H3]-neopentane therefore presented a major challenge, one that was at the very limit of what is possible.
It is well known that electromagnetic radiation-radio waves-can in principle be used to communicate over interstellar distances. By contrast, sending physical artefacts has seemed extravagantly wasteful of energy, and imagining human travel between the stars even more so. The key consideration in earlier work, however, was the perceived need for haste. If extraterrestrial civilizations existed within a few tens of light years, radio could be used for two-way communication on timescales comparable to human lifetimes (or at least the longevities of human institutions). Here we show that if haste is unimportant, sending messages inscribed on some material can be strikingly more energy efficient than communicating by electromagnetic waves. Because messages require protection from cosmic radiation and small messages could be difficult to find among the material clutter near a recipient, 'inscribed matter' is most effective for long archival messages (as opposed to potentially short "we exist" announcements). The results suggest that our initial contact with extraterrestrial civilizations may be more likely to occur through physical artefacts-essentially messages in a bottle-than via electromagnetic communication.
A detailed experimental study of the water trimer is reported. A vibration-rotation-tunneling band of the perdeuterated cluster has been measured near 89.6 wave numbers by tunable far infrared laser absorption spectroscopy. The data indicate a chiral six-membered ring structure with rapid quantum tunneling occurring between the enantiomers. The observed vibration involves torsional motion of the water subunits about each hydrogen bond axis. It is speculated that larger water clusters would also exhibit transient chirality and that similar effects may be found in liquid water.
Conventional semiconductor devices use electric fields to control conductivity, a scalar quantity, for information processing. In magnetic materials, the direction of magnetization, a vector quantity, is of fundamental importance. In magnetic data storage, magnetization is manipulated with a current-generated magnetic field (Oersted-Ampere field), and spin current is being studied for use in non-volatile magnetic memories. To make control of magnetization fully compatible with semiconductor devices, it is highly desirable to control magnetization using electric fields. Conventionally, this is achieved by means of magnetostriction produced by mechanically generated strain through the use of piezoelectricity. Multiferroics have been widely studied in an alternative approach where ferroelectricity is combined with ferromagnetism. Magnetic-field control of electric polarization has been reported in these multiferroics using the magnetoelectric effect, but the inverse effect-direct electrical control of magnetization-has not so far been observed. Here we show that the manipulation of magnetization can be achieved solely by electric fields in a ferromagnetic semiconductor, (Ga,Mn)As. The magnetic anisotropy, which determines the magnetization direction, depends on the charge carrier (hole) concentration in (Ga,Mn)As. By applying an electric field using a metal-insulator-semiconductor structure, the hole concentration and, thereby, the magnetic anisotropy can be controlled, allowing manipulation of the magnetization direction.
Negative-chemical-ionization mass spectral screening of extracts of human seminal plasma has revealed a presence of a Cl7 ion cluster at a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 463 in a significant number of the samples examined (34 out of 123). Experiments with different gases used to generate the negative-chemical-ionization plasma indicated that the ion at m/z 463 was a chloride adduca of a Cl6 molecule with a mass of 428 daltons. Negative-chemical-ionization mass measurement with ions from the iodoform mass spectrum used as reference peaks gave a mass of 427.882 daltons; C9H15PCl6 has a molecular weight of 427.883. Extraction of polyurethane foam with toluene produced an extract that consistently gave a negative-chemical-ionization spectrum containing an intense Cl7ion at m/z463. The component producing ion was isolated, and its proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum confirmed that it was tris (1,3-dichloro-2-propyl)phosphate, a mutagenic flame retardant. The negative-chemical-ionization screening evidence suggests that this flame retardant or its isomer tris(2,3-dichloro-l-propyl)phosphate, or both, are absorbved into the body from formulations in which they are used as flame retardants. Remedial action seems indicated to reduce human exposure to these compunds.
The static structure of hemoglobin and its functional properties are very well characterized. It is still not known how energy is stored and used within the structure of the protein to promote function and functional diversity. An essential part of this question is understanding the mechanism through which the overall protein structure (quaternary structure) couples to the local environment about the oxygen binding sites. Time-resolved resonance Raman spectroscopy has been used to probe the vibrational degrees of the freedom of the binding site as a function of protein structure. Comparison of the spectra from both equilibrium and transient forms of deoxy hemoglobin from a variety of mammalian, reptilian, and fish hemoglobins reveals that for each quaternary structure there exist two tertiary states stabilized by the presence or absence of an iron-bound ligand. Pulse-probe Raman experiments show that for photodissociated, ligated hemoglobins the local tertiary structure relaxes at a solution-dependent rate extending from tens of nanoseconds to microseconds. In this local environment, the linkage between the iron and the proximal histidine proves to be the single observed structural feature that responds in a systematic and substantial manner to structural changes in the protein. The additional finding of a correlation between the frequency of the iron-proximal histidine stretching motion (nu Fe-His) and various parameters of ligand reactivity, including geminate recombination, implicates the associated localized structural element in the mechanism of protein control of ligand binding. On the basis of these and related finds, a model is presented to account for both coarse and fine control of ligand binding by the protein structure.
Detectors aboard the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory have observed an unexplained terrestrial phenomenon: brief, intense flashes of gamma rays. These flashes must originate in the atmosphere at altitudes above at least 30 kilometers in order to escape atmospheric absorption and reach the orbiting detectors. At least a dozen such events have been detected over the past 2 years. The photon spectra from the events are very hard (peaking in the high-energy portion of the spectrum) and are consistent with bremsstrahlung emission from energetic (million-electron volt) electrons. The most likely origin of these high-energy electrons, although speculative at this time, is a rare type of high-altitude electrical discharge above thunderstorm regions.
An understanding of the temporal evolution of isolated many-body quantum systems has long been elusive. Recently, meaningful experimental studies of the problem have become possible, stimulating theoretical interest. In generic isolated systems, non-equilibrium dynamics is expected to result in thermalization: a relaxation to states in which the values of macroscopic quantities are stationary, universal with respect to widely differing initial conditions, and predictable using statistical mechanics. However, it is not obvious what feature of many-body quantum mechanics makes quantum thermalization possible in a sense analogous to that in which dynamical chaos makes classical thermalization possible. For example, dynamical chaos itself cannot occur in an isolated quantum system, in which the time evolution is linear and the spectrum is discrete. Some recent studies even suggest that statistical mechanics may give incorrect predictions for the outcomes of relaxation in such systems. Here we demonstrate that a generic isolated quantum many-body system does relax to a state well described by the standard statistical-mechanical prescription. Moreover, we show that time evolution itself plays a merely auxiliary role in relaxation, and that thermalization instead happens at the level of individual eigenstates, as first proposed by Deutsch and Srednicki. A striking consequence of this eigenstate-thermalization scenario, confirmed for our system, is that knowledge of a single many-body eigenstate is sufficient to compute thermal averages-any eigenstate in the microcanonical energy window will do, because they all give the same result.
The M2 protein of influenza viruses forms an acid-activated tetrameric proton channel. We used solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to determine the structure and functional dynamics of the pH-sensing and proton-selective histidine-37 in M2 bound to a cholesterol-containing virus-envelope-mimetic membrane so as to better understand the proton conduction mechanism. In the high-pH closed state, the four histidines form an edge-face p-stacked structure, preventing the formation of a hydrogen-bonded water chain to conduct protons. In the low-pH conducting state, the imidazoliums hydrogen-bond extensively with water and undergo microsecond ring reorientations with an energy barrier greater than 59 kilojoules per mole. This barrier is consistent with the temperature dependence of proton conductivity, suggesting that histidine-37 dynamically shuttles protons into the virion. We propose a proton conduction mechanism in which ring-flip-assisted imidazole deprotonation is the rate-limiting step.
Space is not a boring static stage on which events unfold over time, but a dynamic entity with curvature, fluctuations, and a rich life of its own. Spectacular measurements of the cosmic microwave background, gravitational lensing, type Ia supernovae, large-scale structure, spectra of the Lyman alpha forest, stellar dynamics, and x-ray binaries are probing the properties of spacetime over 22 orders of magnitude in scale. Current measurements are consistent with an infinite flat everlasting universe containing about 30% cold dark matter, 65% dark energy, and at least two distinct populations of black holes.
A polarizable water pair potential was determined by fitting a potential form to microwave, terahertz, and mid-infrared (D2O)2 spectra through a rigorous calculation of the water dimer eigenstates. It accurately reproduces most ground state vibration-rotation-tunneling spectra and yields excellent second viral coefficients. The calculated dimer structure and dipole moment are very close to those determined from microwave spectroscopy and high-level ab initio calculations. The dimer binding energy and acceptor switching and donor-acceptor interchange tunneling barriers are in excellent agreement with recent ab initio theory, as are cyclic water trimer and tetramer structures and binding energies.
To study and control the behaviour of the spins of electrons that are moving through a metal or semiconductor is an outstanding challenge in the field of 'spintronics', where possibilities for new electronic applications based on the spin degree of freedom are currently being explored. Recently, electrical control of spin coherence and coherent spin precession during transport was studied by optical techniques in semiconductors. Here we report controlled spin precession of electrically injected and detected electrons in a diffusive metallic conductor, using tunnel barriers in combination with metallic ferromagnetic electrodes as spin injector and detector. The output voltage of our device is sensitive to the spin degree of freedom only, and its sign can be switched from positive to negative, depending on the relative magnetization of the ferromagnetic electrodes. We show that the spin direction can be controlled by inducing a coherent spin precession caused by an applied perpendicular magnetic field. By inducing an average precession angle of 180 degrees, we are able to reverse the sign of the output voltage.
Magnetars are a special class of slowly rotating (period approximately 5-12 s) neutron stars with extremely strong magnetic fields (>10(14 )G)--at least an order of magnitude larger than those of the 'normal' radio pulsars. The potential evolutionary links and differences between these two types of object are still unknown; recent studies, however, have provided circumstantial evidence connecting magnetars with very massive progenitor stars. Here we report the discovery of an infrared elliptical ring or shell surrounding the magnetar SGR 1900+14. The appearance and energetics of the ring are difficult to interpret within the framework of the progenitor's stellar mass loss or the subsequent evolution of the supernova remnant. We suggest instead that a dust-free cavity was produced in the magnetar environment by the giant flare emitted by the source in August 1998. Considering the total energy released in the flare, the theoretical dust-destruction radius matches well with the observed dimensions of the ring. We conclude that SGR 1900+14 is unambiguously associated with a cluster of massive stars, thereby solidifying the link between magnetars and massive stars.
Angles between two interatomic vectors are measured for structure elucidation in solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The angles can be determined directly by using the effects of dipole-dipole cross-correlated relaxation of double-quantum and zero-quantum coherences. The measured rates can be directly related to the angular geometry without need for calibration of a Karplus-type curve, as is the case for scalar coupling measurements, and depend only on the rotational correlation time of the molecule as an empirical parameter. This makes the determination of torsional angles independent from the measurement of coupling constants. The two interatomic vectors can in principle be arbitrarily far apart. The method was demonstrated on the measurement of the peptide backbone angle psi in the protein rhodniin, which is difficult to determine in solution by NMR spectroscopy.
A critical requirement for diverse applications in quantum information science is the capability to disseminate quantum resources over complex quantum networks. For example, the coherent distribution of entangled quantum states together with quantum memory (for storing the states) can enable scalable architectures for quantum computation, communication and metrology. Here we report observations of entanglement between two atomic ensembles located in distinct, spatially separated set-ups. Quantum interference in the detection of a photon emitted by one of the samples projects the otherwise independent ensembles into an entangled state with one joint excitation stored remotely in 10(5) atoms at each site. After a programmable delay, we confirm entanglement by mapping the state of the atoms to optical fields and measuring mutual coherences and photon statistics for these fields. We thereby determine a quantitative lower bound for the entanglement of the joint state of the ensembles. Our observations represent significant progress in the ability to distribute and store entangled quantum states.
The application of a sufficiently strong magnetic field to a superconductor will, in general, destroy the superconducting state. Two mechanisms are responsible for this. The first is the Zeeman effect, which breaks apart the paired electrons if they are in a spin-singlet (but not a spin-triplet) state. The second is the so-called 'orbital' effect, whereby the vortices penetrate into the superconductors and the energy gain due to the formation of the paired electrons is lost. For the case of layered, two-dimensional superconductors, such as the high-Tc copper oxides, the orbital effect is reduced when the applied magnetic field is parallel to the conducting layers. Here we report resistance and magnetic-torque experiments on single crystals of the quasi-two-dimensional organic conductor lambda-(BETS)2FeCl4, where BETS is bis(ethylenedithio)tetraselenafulvalene. We find that for magnetic fields applied exactly parallel to the conducting layers of the crystals, superconductivity is induced for fields above 17 T at a temperature of 0.1 K. The resulting phase diagram indicates that the transition temperature increases with magnetic field, that is, the superconducting state is further stabilized with magnetic field.
Fluxes of high energy electrons and protons are found to be highly concentrated near the magnetic equatorial plane from distances of ~ 30 to ~ 100 Jovian radii (R(J)). The 10-hour period of planetary rotation is observed as an intensity variation, which indicates that the equatorial zone of high particle fluxes is inclined with respect to the rotation axis of the planet. At radial distances [unknown] 20 R(J) the synchrotron-radiation-producing electrons with energies greater, similar 3 million electron volts rise steeply to a maximum intensity of ~ 5 x 10(8) electrons per square centimeter per second near the periapsis at 2.8 R(J). The flux of protons with energies greater, similar 30 million electron volts reaches a maximum intensity of ~ 4 x 10(6) protons per square centimeter per second at ~ 3.5 R(J) with the intensity decreasing inside this radial distance. Only for radial distances [unknown] 20 R(J) does the radiation behave in a manner which is similar to that at the earth. Burst of electrons with energies up to 30 million electron volts, each lasting about 2 days, were observed in interplanetary space beginning approximately 1 month before encounter. This radiation appears to have escaped from the Jovian bow shock or magnetosphere.
An exciton is an electron-hole bound pair in a semiconductor. In the low-density limit, it is a composite Bose quasi-particle, akin to the hydrogen atom. Just as in dilute atomic gases, reducing the temperature or increasing the exciton density increases the occupation numbers of the low-energy states leading to quantum degeneracy and eventually to Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC). Because the exciton mass is small--even smaller than the free electron mass--exciton BEC should occur at temperatures of about 1 K, many orders of magnitude higher than for atoms. However, it is in practice difficult to reach BEC conditions, as the temperature of excitons can considerably exceed that of the semiconductor lattice. The search for exciton BEC has concentrated on long-lived excitons: the exciton lifetime against electron-hole recombination therefore should exceed the characteristic timescale for the cooling of initially hot photo-generated excitons. Until now, all experiments on atom condensation were performed on atomic gases confined in the potential traps. Inspired by these experiments, and using specially designed semiconductor nanostructures, we have collected quasi-two-dimensional excitons in an in-plane potential trap. Our photoluminescence measurements show that the quasi-two-dimensional excitons indeed condense at the bottom of the traps, giving rise to a statistically degenerate Bose gas.
Semiconductors are ubiquitous in device electronics, because their charge distributions can be conveniently manipulated with voltages to perform logic operations. Achieving a similar level of control over the spin degrees of freedom, either from electrons or nuclei, could provide intriguing prospects for both information processing and the study of fundamental solid-state physics issues. Here we report procedures that carry out the controlled transfer of spin angular momentum between electrons-confined to two dimensions and subjected to a perpendicular magnetic field-and the nuclei of the host semiconductor, using gate voltages only. We show that the spin transfer rate can be enhanced near a ferromagnetic ground state of the electron system, and that the induced nuclear spin polarization can be subsequently stored and 'read out'. These techniques can also be combined into a spectroscopic tool to detect the low-energy collective excitations in the electron system that promote the spin transfer. The existence of such excitations is contingent on appropriate electron-electron correlations, and these can be tuned by changing, for example, the electron density via a gate voltage.
Quantum electrodynamics describes the interactions of electrons and photons. Electric charge (the gauge coupling constant) is energy dependent, and there is a previous claim that charge is affected by gravity (described by general relativity) with the implication that the charge is reduced at high energies. However, that claim has been very controversial and the matter has not been settled. Here I report an analysis (free from the earlier controversies) demonstrating that quantum gravity corrections to quantum electrodynamics have a quadratic energy dependence that result in the electric charge vanishing at high energies, a result known as asymptotic freedom.
Distribution of entangled states between distant locations is essential for quantum communication over large distances. But owing to unavoidable decoherence in the quantum communication channel, the quality of entangled states generally decreases exponentially with the channel length. Entanglement purification--a way to extract a subset of states of high entanglement and high purity from a large set of less entangled states--is thus needed to overcome decoherence. Besides its important application in quantum communication, entanglement purification also plays a crucial role in error correction for quantum computation, because it can significantly increase the quality of logic operations between different qubits. Here we demonstrate entanglement purification for general mixed states of polarization-entangled photons using only linear optics. Typically, one photon pair of fidelity 92% could be obtained from two pairs, each of fidelity 75%. In our experiments, decoherence is overcome to the extent that the technique would achieve tolerable error rates for quantum repeaters in long-distance quantum communication. Our results also imply that the requirement of high-accuracy logic operations in fault-tolerant quantum computation can be considerably relaxed.
Great spectral simplification can be obtained by spreading the conventional one-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum in two independent frequency dimensions. This so-called two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy removes spectral overlap, facilitates spectral assignment, and provides a wealth of additional information. For example, conformational information related to interproton distances is available from resonance intensities in certain types of two-dimensional experiments. Another method generates 1H NMR spectra of a preselected fragment of the molecule, suppressing resonances from other regions and greatly simplifying spectral appearance. Two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy can also be applied to the study of 13C and 15N, not only providing valuable connectivity information but also improving sensitivity of 13C and 15N detection by up to two orders of magnitude.
High-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy was used to study the superconducting energy gap and changes in the spectral function across the superconducting transition in the quasi-two-dimensional superconductor 2H-NbSe2. The momentum dependence of the superconducting gap was determined on different Fermi surface sheets. The results indicate Fermi surface sheet-dependent superconductivity in this low-transition temperature multiband system and provide a description consistent with thermodynamic measurements and the anomalous de Haas-van Alphen oscillations observed in the superconducting phase. The present data suggest the importance of Fermi surface sheet-dependent superconductivity in explaining exotic superconductivity in other multiband systems with complex Fermi surface topology, such as the borides and f-electron superconductors.
The structure of RuO(2)(110) and the mechanism for catalytic carbon monoxide oxidation on this surface were studied by low-energy electron diffraction, scanning tunneling microscopy, and density-functional calculations. The RuO(2)(110) surface exposes bridging oxygen atoms and ruthenium atoms not capped by oxygen. The latter act as coordinatively unsaturated sites-a hypothesis introduced long ago to account for the catalytic activity of oxide surfaces-onto which carbon monoxide can chemisorb and from where it can react with neighboring lattice-oxygen to carbon dioxide. Under steady-state conditions, the consumed lattice-oxygen is continuously restored by oxygen uptake from the gas phase. The results provide atomic-scale verification of a general mechanism originally proposed by Mars and van Krevelen in 1954 and are likely to be of general relevance for the mechanism of catalytic reactions at oxide surfaces.
Free magnetic moments usually manifest themselves in Curie laws, where weak external magnetic fields produce magnetizations that vary as the reciprocal of the temperature (1/T). For a variety of materials that do not display static magnetism, including doped semiconductors and certain rare-earth intermetallics, the 1/T law is replaced by a power law T(-alpha) with alpha < 1. Here we show that a much simpler material system-namely, the insulating magnetic salt LiHo(x)Y(1-x)F(4)-can also display such a power law. Moreover, by comparing the results of numerical simulations of this system with susceptibility and specific-heat data, we show that both energy-level splitting and quantum entanglement are crucial to describing its behaviour. The second of these quantum mechanical effects-entanglement, where the wavefunction of a system with several degrees of freedom cannot be written as a product of wavefunctions for each degree of freedom-becomes visible for remarkably small tunnelling terms, and is activated well before tunnelling has visible effects on the spectrum. This finding is significant because it shows that entanglement, rather than energy-level redistribution, can underlie the magnetic behaviour of a simple insulating quantum spin system.
Quantum teleportation involves the transportation of an unknown quantum state from one location to another, without physical transfer of the information carrier. Although quantum teleportation is a naturally bipartite process, it can be extended to a multipartite protocol known as a quantum teleportation network. In such a network, entanglement is shared between three or more parties. For the case of three parties (a tripartite network), teleportation of a quantum state can occur between any pair, but only with the assistance of the third party. Multipartite quantum protocols are expected to form fundamental components for larger-scale quantum communication and computation. Here we report the experimental realization of a tripartite quantum teleportation network for quantum states of continuous variables (electromagnetic field modes). We demonstrate teleportation of a coherent state between three different pairs in the network, unambiguously demonstrating its tripartite character.
Measurements of magnetic noise emanating from ferromagnets owing to domain motion were first carried out nearly 100 years ago, and have underpinned much science and technology. Antiferromagnets, which carry no net external magnetic dipole moment, yet have a periodic arrangement of the electron spins extending over macroscopic distances, should also display magnetic noise. However, this must be sampled at spatial wavelengths of the order of several interatomic spacings, rather than the macroscopic scales characteristic of ferromagnets. Here we present a direct measurement of the fluctuations in the nanometre-scale superstructure of spin- and charge-density waves associated with antiferromagnetism in elemental chromium. The technique used is X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy, where coherent X-ray diffraction produces a speckle pattern that serves as a 'fingerprint' of a particular magnetic domain configuration. The temporal evolution of the patterns corresponds to domain walls advancing and retreating over micrometre distances. This work demonstrates a useful measurement tool for antiferromagnetic domain wall engineering, but also reveals a fundamental finding about spin dynamics in the simplest antiferromagnet: although the domain wall motion is thermally activated at temperatures above 100 K, it is not so at lower temperatures, and indeed has a rate that saturates at a finite value-consistent with quantum fluctuations-on cooling below 40 K.
The H + H(2) exchange reaction constitutes an excellent benchmark with which to test dynamical theories against experiments. The H + D(2) (vibrational quantum number v = 0, rotational quantum number j = 0) reaction has been studied in crossed molecular beams at a collision energy of 1.28 electron volts, with the use of the technique of Rydberg atom time-of-flight spectroscopy. The experimental resolution achieved permits the determination of fully rovibrational state-resolved differential cross sections. The high-resolution data allow a detailed assessment of the applicability and quality of quasi-classical trajectory (QCT) and quantum mechanical (QM) calculations. The experimental results are in excellent agreement with the QM results and in slightly worse agreement with the QCT results. This theoretical reproduction of the experimental data was achieved without explicit consideration of geometric phase effects.
The electronic and geometric structures of surfaces are closely related to each other. Conventional surface science techniques can study one or the other, but not both at the same time. Recent developments in scanning tunneling microscopy have made it possible to study simultaneously the electronic and geometric structure of Si(111) and Si(001) surfaces. Surface states can be atomically resolved in space and energy; thus the electronic structure of single atoms on surfaces can be studied in detail. The various surface states observed on silicon surfaces are found to derive from different atomic-scale features in the surface geometric structure. Scanning tunneling microscopy has now bridged the gap between electronic and geometric structure, providing a unique opportunity to obtain a better understanding of many surface processes at the atomic level.
The original motivation to build a quantum computer came from Feynman, who imagined a machine capable of simulating generic quantum mechanical systems--a task that is believed to be intractable for classical computers. Such a machine could have far-reaching applications in the simulation of many-body quantum physics in condensed-matter, chemical and high-energy systems. Part of Feynman's challenge was met by Lloyd, who showed how to approximately decompose the time evolution operator of interacting quantum particles into a short sequence of elementary gates, suitable for operation on a quantum computer. However, this left open the problem of how to simulate the equilibrium and static properties of quantum systems. This requires the preparation of ground and Gibbs states on a quantum computer. For classical systems, this problem is solved by the ubiquitous Metropolis algorithm, a method that has basically acquired a monopoly on the simulation of interacting particles. Here we demonstrate how to implement a quantum version of the Metropolis algorithm. This algorithm permits sampling directly from the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian, and thus evades the sign problem present in classical simulations. A small-scale implementation of this algorithm should be achievable with today's technology.
In information processing, as in physics, our classical world view provides an incomplete approximation to an underlying quantum reality. Quantum effects like interference and entanglement play no direct role in conventional information processing, but they can--in principle now, but probably eventually in practice--be harnessed to break codes, create unbreakable codes, and speed up otherwise intractable computations.
The energy bandgap of an insulator is large enough to prevent electron excitation and electrical conduction. But in addition to charge, an electron also has spin, and the collective motion of spin can propagate-and so transfer a signal-in some insulators. This motion is called a spin wave and is usually excited using magnetic fields. Here we show that a spin wave in an insulator can be generated and detected using spin-Hall effects, which enable the direct conversion of an electric signal into a spin wave, and its subsequent transmission through (and recovery from) an insulator over macroscopic distances. First, we show evidence for the transfer of spin angular momentum between an insulator magnet Y(3)Fe(5)O(12) and a platinum film. This transfer allows direct conversion of an electric current in the platinum film to a spin wave in the Y(3)Fe(5)O(12) via spin-Hall effects. Second, making use of the transfer in a Pt/Y(3)Fe(5)O(12)/Pt system, we demonstrate that an electric current in one metal film induces voltage in the other, far distant, metal film. Specifically, the applied electric current is converted into spin angular momentum owing to the spin-Hall effect in the first platinum film; the angular momentum is then carried by a spin wave in the insulating Y(3)Fe(5)O(12) layer; at the distant platinum film, the spin angular momentum of the spin wave is converted back to an electric voltage. This effect can be switched on and off using a magnetic field. Weak spin damping in Y(3)Fe(5)O(12) is responsible for its transparency for the transmission of spin angular momentum. This hybrid electrical transmission method potentially offers a means of innovative signal delivery in electrical circuits and devices.
Transcriptional complexes that contain peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor coactivator (PGC)-1alpha control mitochondrial oxidative function to maintain energy homeostasis in response to nutrient and hormonal signals. An important component in the energy and nutrient pathways is mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a kinase that regulates cell growth, size and survival. However, it is unknown whether and how mTOR controls mitochondrial oxidative activities. Here we show that mTOR is necessary for the maintenance of mitochondrial oxidative function. In skeletal muscle tissues and cells, the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin decreased the gene expression of the mitochondrial transcriptional regulators PGC-1alpha, oestrogen-related receptor alpha and nuclear respiratory factors, resulting in a decrease in mitochondrial gene expression and oxygen consumption. Using computational genomics, we identified the transcription factor yin-yang 1 (YY1) as a common target of mTOR and PGC-1alpha. Knockdown of YY1 caused a significant decrease in mitochondrial gene expression and in respiration, and YY1 was required for rapamycin-dependent repression of those genes. Moreover, mTOR and raptor interacted with YY1, and inhibition of mTOR resulted in a failure of YY1 to interact with and be coactivated by PGC-1alpha. We have therefore identified a mechanism by which a nutrient sensor (mTOR) balances energy metabolism by means of the transcriptional control of mitochondrial oxidative function. These results have important implications for our understanding of how these pathways might be altered in metabolic diseases and cancer.
Vortices occur naturally in a wide range of gases and fluids, from macroscopic to microscopic scales. In Bose-Einstein condensates of dilute atomic gases, superfluid helium and superconductors, the existence of vortices is a consequence of the quantum nature of the system. Quantized vortices of supercurrent are generated by magnetic flux penetrating the material, and play a key role in determining the material properties and the performance of superconductor-based devices. At high temperatures the dynamics of such vortices are essentially classical, while at low temperatures previous experiments have suggested collective quantum dynamics. However, the question of whether vortex tunnelling occurs at low temperatures has been addressed only for large collections of vortices. Here we study the quantum dynamics of an individual vortex in a superconducting Josephson junction. By measuring the statistics of the vortex escape from a controllable pinning potential, we demonstrate the existence of quantized levels of the vortex energy within the trapping potential well and quantum tunnelling of the vortex through the pinning barrier.
By using laser methods to prepare specific quantum states of gas-phase nitric oxide molecules, we examined the role of vibrational motion in electron transfer to a molecule from a metal surface free from the complicating influence of solvation effects. The signature of the electron transfer process is a highly efficient multiquantum vibrational relaxation event, where the nitrogen oxide loses hundreds of kilojoules per mole of energy on a subpicosecond time scale. These results cannot be explained simply on the basis of Franck-Condon factors. The large-amplitude vibrational motion associated with molecules in high vibrational states strongly modulates the energetic driving force of the electron transfer reaction. These results show the importance of molecular vibration in promoting electron transfer reactions, a class of chemistry important to molecular electronics devices, solar energy conversion, and many biological processes.
The fluorescence emissions of chrysene, N-ethylcarbazole, and 1,6-diphenylhexatriene undergo large spectral shifts or changes in quantum yield, or both, upon their uptake from particulates by phospholipid vesicles. This membrane uptake of carcinogen and carcinogen-like molecules by model membranes does not result in any disruption of the lipid bilayers. The fluorescence emission of chrysene, when bound to silica, was found to be sensitive to the surface density of chrysene on the silica. These observations demonstrate the feasibility of using fluorescence spectroscopy to measure the rates of exchange of carcinogens from particulate matter to cell membranes and to characterize the surface distribution of chemical carcinogens on particulate matter. Comparison of the uptake rate of chrysene from the unperturbed crystal state, sonicated crystals, and the silica-adsorbed state demonstrated that the last condition results in the most rapid transport of chrysene into model membranes. This information should prove valuable in understanding the cocarcinogenic effects of particulates and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons.
Although the concept of aromaticity has long played an important role in carbon chemistry, it has been unclear how applicable the stabilizing framework is to the heaviest elements. Here we report the synthesis of dilithiotetraphenylplumbole by reduction of hexaphenylplumbole. X-ray crystallography revealed a planar structure with no alternation of carbon-carbon bond lengths in the five-membered ring core. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectra and relativistic theoretical calculations show considerable aromatic character in the molecule, thus extending aromaticity to carbon's heaviest congener.
Quantum computers hold great promise for solving interesting computational problems, but it remains a challenge to find efficient quantum circuits that can perform these complicated tasks. Here we show that finding optimal quantum circuits is essentially equivalent to finding the shortest path between two points in a certain curved geometry. By recasting the problem of finding quantum circuits as a geometric problem, we open up the possibility of using the mathematical techniques of Riemannian geometry to suggest new quantum algorithms or to prove limitations on the power of quantum computers.
Bacteriorhodopsin was selectively spin labeled at residues 72, 101, or 105 after replacement of the native amino acids by cysteine. Only the electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum of the label at 101 was time-dependent during the photocycle. The spectral change rose with the decay of the M intermediate and fell with recovery of the ground state. The transient signal is interpreted as the result of movement in the C-D or E-F interhelical loop, or in both, coincident with protonation changes at the key aspartate 96 residue. These results link the optically characterized intermediates with localized conformational changes in bacteriorhodopsin during the photocycle.
The bulk of the sun's radiation is in the visible and infrared. Solar radiation at these wavelengths controls the weather in the lowest levels of the earth's atmosphere. The rate at which this energy is emitted (the so-called solar constant) varies by a few tenths of 1 percent over a time scale of days. Longer period variations may exist, but have yet to be detected. Far more variable are the amounts of energy emitted as ultraviolet, extreme ultraviolet, and x-rays, and in the continuous outflow of ionized solar particles. The latter controls the properties of the space between the earth and the sun as well as those of the earth's magnetosphere. The ultraviolet and particle emissions control the properties of the earth's upper atmosphere, including the global wind circulation and changes therein associated with intense auroral storms. While considerable progress has been made in exploring the solar-terrestrial system since the advent of space research, many problems remain. These include the question of how magnetic energy is converted into ionized particle energy in the sun and in the earth's magnetosphere, the way in which solar and terrestrial magnetic fields join or merge, and how large electric fields are generated and sustained a few thousand kilometers above the earth's poles. Perhaps the most intriguing question concerns the possible relation between solar variability and the earth's weather and climate.
Optical spectroscopy of single impurity molecules in solids can be used as an exquisitely sensitive probe of the structure and dynamics of the specific local environment around the single molecule (the "nanoenvironment"). Recently observed effects such as spectral diffusion, perturbations by external fields, changes in molecular photophysics, shifts in vibrational modes, optical modification of the absorption spectrum, dynamics due to amorphous system physics, and magnetic resonance of a single molecular spin attest to the vitality of and growing interest in this new field, which may lead to optical storage on the single-molecule level.
An optical quantum computer, powerful enough to solve problems so far intractable using conventional digital logic, requires a large number of entangled photons. At present, entangled-light sources are optically driven with lasers, which are impractical for quantum computing owing to the bulk and complexity of the optics required for large-scale applications. Parametric down-conversion is the most widely used source of entangled light, and has been used to implement non-destructive quantum logic gates. However, these sources are Poissonian and probabilistically emit zero or multiple entangled photon pairs in most cycles, fundamentally limiting the success probability of quantum computational operations. These complications can be overcome by using an electrically driven on-demand source of entangled photon pairs, but so far such a source has not been produced. Here we report the realization of an electrically driven source of entangled photon pairs, consisting of a quantum dot embedded in a semiconductor light-emitting diode (LED) structure. We show that the device emits entangled photon pairs under d.c. and a.c. injection, the latter achieving an entanglement fidelity of up to 0.82. Entangled light with such high fidelity is sufficient for application in quantum relays, in core components of quantum computing such as teleportation, and in entanglement swapping. The a.c. operation of the entangled-light-emitting diode (ELED) indicates its potential function as an on-demand source without the need for a complicated laser driving system; consequently, the ELED is at present the best source on which to base future scalable quantum information applications.
Within the wr-orbital axis vector theory, the total rehybridization required for closure of the fullerenes is approximately conserved. This result allows the development of a structure-based index of strain in the fullerenes, and it is estimated that about 80 percent of the heat of formation of the carbon atoms in C60 may be attributed to a combination of v strain and steric inhibition of resonance. Application of this analysis to the geometries of structurally characterized organometallic derivatives of C60 and C70 shows that the reactivity exhibited by the fullerenes may be attributed to the relief of a combination of local and global strain energy. C60 is of ambiguous aromatic character with anomalous magnetic properties but with the reactivity of a continuous aromatic molecule, moderated only by the tremendous strain inherent in the spheroidal structure.
Room-temperature single-electron transistors are realized within individual metallic single-wall carbon nanotube molecules. The devices feature a short (down to approximately 20 nanometers) nanotube section that is created by inducing local barriers into the tube with an atomic force microscope. Coulomb charging is observed at room temperature, with an addition energy of 120 millielectron volts, which substantially exceeds the thermal energy. At low temperatures, we resolve the quantum energy levels corresponding to the small island. We observe unconventional power-law dependencies in the measured transport properties for which we suggest a resonant tunneling Luttinger-liquid mechanism.
Theories of motor control postulate that the brain uses internal models of the body to control movements accurately. Internal models are neural representations of how, for instance, the arm would respond to a neural command, given its current position and velocity. Previous studies have shown that the cerebellar cortex can acquire internal models through motor learning. Because the human cerebellum is involved in higher cognitive function as well as in motor control, we propose a coherent computational theory in which the phylogenetically newer part of the cerebellum similarly acquires internal models of objects in the external world. While human subjects learned to use a new tool (a computer mouse with a novel rotational transformation), cerebellar activity was measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging. As predicted by our theory, two types of activity were observed. One was spread over wide areas of the cerebellum and was precisely proportional to the error signal that guides the acquisition of internal models during learning. The other was confined to the area near the posterior superior fissure and remained even after learning, when the error levels had been equalized, thus probably reflecting an acquired internal model of the new tool.
An ion beam technique has been developed that combines some of the methods of mass spectrometry and molecular spectroscopy and is designed for the study of molecular ions at energy levels lying very close to the lowest dissociation limit. Microwave radiation is used to drive spectroscopic transitions, and electric field dissociation of the weakly bound levels provides a high degree of state selection for sensitive detection of the spectra. The analysis of the spectra requires unconventional approaches to the description of the long-range levels and their spectroscopic study and provides stringent tests of ab initio theories.
The solar wind, magnetosphere, and ionosphere form a single system driven by the transfer of energy and momentum from the solar wind to the magnetosphere and ionosphere. Variations in the solar wind can lead to disruptions of space- and ground-based systems caused by enhanced currents flowing into the ionosphere and increased radiation in the near-Earth environment. The coupling between the solar wind and the magnetosphere is mediated and controlled by the magnetic field in the solar wind through the process of magnetic reconnection. Understanding of the global behavior of this system has improved markedly in the recent past from coordinated observations with a constellation of satellite and ground instruments.
The spacecraft Voyager 1 is at a distance greater than 85 au from the Sun, in the vicinity of the termination shock that marks the abrupt slowing of the supersonic solar wind and the beginning of the extended and unexplored distant heliosphere. This shock is expected to accelerate 'anomalous cosmic rays', as well as to re-accelerate Galactic cosmic rays and low-energy particles from the inner Solar System. Here we report a significant increase in the numbers of energetic ions and electrons that persisted for seven months beginning in mid-2002. This increase differs from any previously observed in that there was a simultaneous increase in Galactic cosmic ray ions and electrons, anomalous cosmic rays and low-energy ions. The low-intensity level and spectral energy distribution of the anomalous cosmic rays, however, indicates that Voyager 1 still has not reached the termination shock. Rather, the observed increase is an expected precursor event. We argue that the radial anisotropy of the cosmic rays is expected to be small in the foreshock region, as is observed.
Single-domain microcrystals of LaC(2) encapsulated within nanoscale polyhedral carbon particles have been synthesized in a carbon arc. Typical particle sizes are on the order of 20 to 40 nanometers. The stoichiometry and phase of the La-containing crystals have been assigned from characteristic lattice spacings observed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). EDS spectra show that La and C are the only elements present. Characteristic interatomic distances of 3.39 and 2.78 angstroms identify the compound inside the nanoparticle cavities as alpha-LaC(2), the phase of LaC(2) that is stable at room temperature. Bulk alpha-LaC(2) is metallic and hydrolytic. Observation of crystals of pure encapsulated alpha-LaC(2) that were exposed to air for several days before analysis indicates that the LaC(2) is protected from degradation bythe carbon polyhedral shells of the nanoparticles. A high percentage of the carbon nanoparticles have encapsulated LaC(2) single crystals. These carbon-coated metal crystals form a new class of materials that can be protected in their pure or carbide forms and may have interesting and useful properties.
Scanning tunneling microscopy is based on the flow of an electrical current and thus cannot be used to directly image insulating material. It has been found, however, that a very thin film of water (about one monolayer) adsorbed to a surface exhibits a surprisingly high conductivity that is sufficient to allow scanning tunneling microscope imaging at currents below 1 picoampere. Hydrophilic insulators, such as glass and mica, can thus be imaged in humid air. The same is true for biological specimens deposited on such surfaces, as demonstrated by the scanning tunneling microscope imaging of plasmid DNA on mica.
The field of cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED), traditionally studied in atomic systems, has gained new momentum by recent reports of quantum optical experiments with solid-state semiconducting and superconducting systems. In cavity QED, the observation of the vacuum Rabi mode splitting is used to investigate the nature of matter-light interaction at a quantum-mechanical level. However, this effect can, at least in principle, be explained classically as the normal mode splitting of two coupled linear oscillators. It has been suggested that an observation of the scaling of the resonant atom-photon coupling strength in the Jaynes-Cummings energy ladder with the square root of photon number n is sufficient to prove that the system is quantum mechanical in nature. Here we report a direct spectroscopic observation of this characteristic quantum nonlinearity. Measuring the photonic degree of freedom of the coupled system, our measurements provide unambiguous spectroscopic evidence for the quantum nature of the resonant atom-field interaction in cavity QED. We explore atom-photon superposition states involving up to two photons, using a spectroscopic pump and probe technique. The experiments have been performed in a circuit QED set-up, in which very strong coupling is realized by the large dipole coupling strength and the long coherence time of a superconducting qubit embedded in a high-quality on-chip microwave cavity. Circuit QED systems also provide a natural quantum interface between flying qubits (photons) and stationary qubits for applications in quantum information processing and communication.
Energy transfer from light-harvesting carotenoids to chlorophyll is common in photosynthesis, but such antenna pigments have not been observed in retinal-based ion pumps and photoreceptors. Here we describe xanthorhodopsin, a proton-pumping retinal protein/carotenoid complex in the eubacterium Salinibacter ruber. The wavelength dependence of the rate of pumping and difference absorption spectra measured under a variety of conditions indicate that this protein contains two chromophores, retinal and the carotenoid salinixanthin, in a molar ratio of about 1:1. The two chromophores interact strongly, and light energy absorbed by the carotenoid is transferred to the retinal with a quantum efficiency of approximately 40%. The antenna carotenoid extends the wavelength range of the collection of light for uphill transmembrane proton transport.
Competition between electronic ground states near a quantum critical point (QCP)--the location of a zero-temperature phase transition driven solely by quantum-mechanical fluctuations--is expected to lead to unconventional behaviour in low-dimensional systems. New electronic phases of matter have been predicted to occur in the vicinity of a QCP by two-dimensional theories, and explanations based on these ideas have been proposed for significant unsolved problems in condensed-matter physics, such as non-Fermi-liquid behaviour and high-temperature superconductivity. But the real materials to which these ideas have been applied are usually rendered three-dimensional by a finite electronic coupling between their component layers; a two-dimensional QCP has not been experimentally observed in any bulk three-dimensional system, and mechanisms for dimensional reduction have remained the subject of theoretical conjecture. Here we show evidence that the Bose-Einstein condensate of spin triplets in the three-dimensional Mott insulator BaCuSi2O6 (refs 12-16) provides an experimentally verifiable example of dimensional reduction at a QCP. The interplay of correlations on a geometrically frustrated lattice causes the individual two-dimensional layers of spin-(1/2) Cu2+ pairs (spin dimers) to become decoupled at the QCP, giving rise to a two-dimensional QCP characterized by linear power law scaling distinctly different from that of its three-dimensional counterpart. Thus the very notion of dimensionality can be said to acquire an 'emergent' nature: although the individual particles move on a three-dimensional lattice, their collective behaviour occurs in lower-dimensional space.
The radiation environment inside Spacelab 1 was measured by a set of passive radiation detectors distributed throughout the volume inside the module, in the access tunnel, and outside on the pallet.  Measurements of the low-LET (linear energy transfer) component obtained from the thermoluminescence detectors ranged from 102 to 190 millirads, yielding an average low-LET dose rate of 11.2 millirads per day inside the module, about twice the low-LET dose rate measured on previous flights of the space shuttle.  Because of the higher inclination of the orbit (57 degrees versus 28.5 degrees for previous shuttle flights), substantial fluxes of highly ionizing HZE particles (high charge and energy galactic cosmic rays were observed, yielding an overall average mission dose-equivalent of about 150 millirems, more than three times higher than measured on previous shuttle missions.
The identification of galaxies at extreme distances provides the most direct information about the earliest phases of galaxy formation. But at redshifts z > 5 even the most luminous galaxies appear faint; the interpretation of low signal-to-noise ratio data is difficult and misidentifications do occur. Here we report optical and near-infrared observations of the source STIS123627+621755, which was previously suggested to be at a redshift of 6.68 (ref. 1). At that redshift, and with the reported spectral energy distribution, the galaxy should be essentially invisible at wavelengths less than 9,300 A, because the intervening intergalactic medium absorbs almost all light energetic enough to ionize neutral hydrogen--that is, with wavelengths less than the redshifted Lyman limit of lambda = (1 + z) x 912A. At near-infrared wavelengths, however, the galaxy should be relatively bright. Here we report a detection of the galaxy at 6,700 A and a non-detection at a wavelength of 1.2 microm, contrary to expectations for z approximately 6.68. The data conservatively require that STIS123627+621755 has a redshift z < 6.
We found monochromatic electron photoemission from large-area self-assembled monolayers of a functionalized diamondoid, [121]tetramantane-6-thiol. Photoelectron spectra of the diamondoid monolayers exhibited a peak at the low-kinetic energy threshold; up to 68% of all emitted electrons were emitted within this single energy peak. The intensity of the emission peak is indicative of diamondoids being negative electron affinity materials. With an energy distribution width of less than 0.5 electron volts, this source of monochromatic electrons may find application in technologies such as electron microscopy, electron beam lithography, and field-emission flat-panel displays.
Liquids are expected to crystallize at low temperature. The only exception is helium, which can remain liquid at 0 K, owing to quantum fluctuations. Similarly, the atomic magnetic moments (spins) in a magnet are expected to order at a temperature scale set by the Curie-Weiss temperature theta(CW) (ref. 3). Geometrically frustrated magnets represent an exception. In these systems, the pairwise spin interactions cannot be simultaneously minimized because of the lattice symmetry. This can stabilize a liquid-like state of short-range-ordered fluctuating moments well below theta(CW) (refs 5-7). Here we use neutron scattering to observe the spin liquid state in a geometrically frustrated system, Tb(2)Ti(2)O(7), under conditions of high pressure (approximately 9 GPa) and low temperature (approximately 1 K). This compound is a three-dimensional magnet with theta(CW) = -19 K, where the negative value indicates antiferromagnetic interactions. At ambient pressure Tb(2)Ti(2)O(7) remains in a spin liquid state down to at least 70 mK (ref. 8). But we find that, under high pressure, the spins start to order or 'crystallize' below 2.1 K, with antiferromagnetic order coexisting with liquid-like fluctuations. These results indicate that a spin liquid/solid mixture can be induced by pressure in geometrically frustrated systems.
Pyrolysis of DNA into a chemical ionization source yields protonated bases and other base-containing ions. Kinetic energy spectra allow the characterization of the bases 5-methylcytosine and 1-methyladenine from underivatized salmon sperm DNA. Isomeric bases are distinguishable with this technique.
The high-energy density behavior of carbon, particularly in the vicinity of the melt boundary, is of broad scientific interest and of particular interest to those studying planetary astrophysics and inertial confinement fusion. Previous experimental data in the several hundred gigapascal pressure range, particularly near the melt boundary, have only been able to provide data with accuracy capable of qualitative comparison with theory. Here we present shock-wave experiments on carbon (using a magnetically driven flyer-plate technique with an order of magnitude improvement in accuracy) that enable quantitative comparison with theory. This work provides evidence for the existence of a diamond-bc8-liquid triple point on the melt boundary.
Coronal magnetic fields are dynamic, and field lines may misalign, reassemble, and release energy by means of magnetic reconnection. Giant releases may generate solar flares and coronal mass ejections and, on a smaller scale, produce x-ray jets. Hinode observations of polar coronal holes reveal that x-ray jets have two distinct velocities: one near the Alfven speed ( approximately 800 kilometers per second) and another near the sound speed (200 kilometers per second). Many more jets were seen than have been reported previously; we detected an average of 10 events per hour up to these speeds, whereas previous observations documented only a handful per day with lower average speeds of 200 kilometers per second. The x-ray jets are about 2 x 10(3) to 2 x 10(4) kilometers wide and 1 x 10(5) kilometers long and last from 100 to 2500 seconds. The large number of events, coupled with the high velocities of the apparent outflows, indicates that the jets may contribute to the high-speed solar wind.
Surface steps act as confining barriers for electrons in metal-surface states. Thus, narrow terraces and small single-atom-high metal islands act as low-dimensional, electron-confining structures. In sufficiently small structures, quantum-size effects are observable even at room temperature. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy is used to image the probability amplitude distributions and discrete spectra of the confined states. Examination of the electronic structure of the steps provides evidence for electron-density smoothing and the formation of step-edge states. Estimates of the electron-confining barriers are obtained.
We report the generation and observation of coherent temporal oscillations between the macroscopic quantum states of a Josephson tunnel junction by applying microwaves with frequencies close to the level separation. Coherent temporal oscillations of excited state populations were observed by monitoring the junction's tunneling probability as a function of time. From the data, the lower limit of phase decoherence time was estimated to be about 5 microseconds.
The quantum mechanical three-body problem is one of the fundamental challenges of few-body physics. When the two-body interactions become resonant, an infinite series of universal three-body bound states is predicted to occur, whose properties are determined by the strength of the two-body interactions. We used radio-frequency fields to associate Efimov trimers consisting of three distinguishable fermions. The measurements of their binding energy are consistent with theoretical predictions that include nonuniversal corrections.
The question of how the observed evolution of organized structures from initial chaos in the expanding universe can be reconciled with the laws of statistical mechanics is studied, with emphasis on effects of the expansion and gravity. Some major sources of entropy increase are listed. An expanding "causal" region is defined in which the entropy, though increasing, tends to fall further and further behind its maximum possible value, thus allowing for the development of order. The related questions of whether entropy will continue increasing without limit in the future, and whether such increase in the form of Hawking radiation or radiation from positronium might enable life to maintain itself permanently, are considered. Attempts to find a scheme for preserving life based on solid structures fail because events such as quantum tunneling recurrently disorganize matter on a very long but fixed time scale, whereas all energy sources slow down progressively in an expanding universe. However, there remains hope that other modes of life capable of maintaining themselves permanently can be found.
Transport of fermions, particles with half-integer spin, is central to many fields of physics. Electron transport runs modern technology, defining states of matter such as superconductors and insulators, and electron spin is being explored as a new carrier of information. Neutrino transport energizes supernova explosions following the collapse of a dying star, and hydrodynamic transport of the quark-gluon plasma governed the expansion of the early Universe. However, our understanding of non-equilibrium dynamics in such strongly interacting fermionic matter is still limited. Ultracold gases of fermionic atoms realize a pristine model for such systems and can be studied in real time with the precision of atomic physics. Even above the superfluid transition, such gases flow as an almost perfect fluid with very low viscosity when interactions are tuned to a scattering resonance. In this hydrodynamic regime, collective density excitations are weakly damped. Here we experimentally investigate spin excitations in a Fermi gas of (6)Li atoms, finding that, in contrast, they are maximally damped. A spin current is induced by spatially separating two spin components and observing their evolution in an external trapping potential. We demonstrate that interactions can be strong enough to reverse spin currents, with components of opposite spin reflecting off each other. Near equilibrium, we obtain the spin drag coefficient, the spin diffusivity and the spin susceptibility as a function of temperature on resonance and show that they obey universal laws at high temperatures. In the degenerate regime, the spin diffusivity approaches a value set by [planck]/m, the quantum limit of diffusion, where [planck]/m is Planck's constant divided by 2p and m the atomic mass. For repulsive interactions, our measurements seem to exclude a metastable ferromagnetic state.
The parent compounds of the copper oxide high-transition-temperature (high-Tc) superconductors are unusual insulators (so-called Mott insulators). Superconductivity arises when they are 'doped' away from stoichiometry. For the compound Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x, doping is achieved by adding extra oxygen atoms, which introduce positive charge carriers ('holes') into the CuO2 planes where the superconductivity is believed to originate. Aside from providing the charge carriers, the role of the oxygen dopants is not well understood, nor is it clear how the charge carriers are distributed on the planes. Many models of high-Tc superconductivity accordingly assume that the introduced carriers are distributed uniformly, leading to an electronically homogeneous system as in ordinary metals. Here we report the presence of an electronic inhomogeneity in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x, on the basis of observations using scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy. The inhomogeneity is manifested as spatial variations in both the local density of states spectrum and the superconducting energy gap. These variations are correlated spatially and vary on the surprisingly short length scale of approximately 14 A. Our analysis suggests that this inhomogeneity is a consequence of proximity to a Mott insulator resulting in poor screening of the charge potentials associated with the oxygen ions left in the BiO plane after doping, and is indicative of the local nature of the superconducting state.
Although the nuclear properties of the late actinides (plutonium, americium and curium) are fully understood and widely applied to energy generation, their solid-state properties do not fit within standard models and are the subject of active research. Plutonium displays phases with enormous volume differences, and both its Pauli-like magnetic susceptibility and resistivity are an order of magnitude larger than those of simple metals. Curium is also highly resistive, but its susceptibility is Curie-like at high temperatures and orders antiferromagnetically at low temperatures. The anomalous properties of the late actinides stem from the competition between itinerancy and localization of their f-shell electrons, which makes these elements strongly correlated materials. A central problem in this field is to understand the mechanism by which these conflicting tendencies are resolved in such materials. Here we identify the electronic mechanisms responsible for the anomalous behaviour of late actinides, revisiting the concept of valence using a theoretical approach that treats magnetism, Kondo screening, atomic multiplet effects and crystal field splitting on the same footing. We find that the ground state in plutonium is a quantum superposition of two distinct atomic valences, whereas curium settles into a magnetically ordered single valence state at low temperatures. The f(7) configuration of curium is contrasted with the multiple valences of the plutonium ground state, which we characterize by a valence histogram. The balance between the Kondo screening and magnetism is controlled by the competition between spin-orbit coupling, the strength of atomic multiplets and the degree of itinerancy. Our approach highlights the electronic origin of the bonding anomalies in plutonium, and can be applied to predict generalized valences and the presence or absence of magnetism in other compounds starting from first principles.
We report the realization of a Bose-Einstein condensate of metastable atoms (helium in the lowest triplet state). The excitation energy of each atom with respect to the ground state is 20 electron volts, but inelastic processes that would destroy the sample are suppressed strongly enough in a spin-polarized sample to allow condensation. Our detection scheme takes advantage of the metastability to achieve detection of individual atoms as well as of the decay products of inelastic processes. This detection opens the way toward new studies in mesoscopic quantum statistical physics, as well as in atomic quantum optics.
We observed ring expansion of 1-methylcyclobutylfluorocarbene at 8 kelvin, a reaction that involves carbon tunneling. The measured rate constants were 4.0 x 10(-6) per second in nitrogen and 4 x 10(-5) per second in argon. Calculations indicated that at this temperature the reaction proceeds from a single quantum state of the reactant so that the computed rate constant has achieved a temperature-independent limit. According to calculations, the tunneling contribution to the rate is 152 orders of magnitude greater than the contribution from passage over the barrier. We discuss environmental effects of the solid-state inert-gas matrix on the reaction rate.
We measured rate constants of thermal, interfacial electron transfer through oligophenylenevinylene bridges between a gold electrode and a tethered redox species in contact with an aqueous electrolyte using the indirect laser-induced temperature jump technique. Analysis of the distance dependence indicates that, unlike other bridges studied to date, the rate constants are not limited by electronic coupling for bridges up to 28 angstroms long. The energy levels of the bridges relative to those of the redox species rule out hopping through the bridge. We conclude that, out to 28 angstroms, the transfer is limited by structural reorganization and that electron tunneling occurs in less than 20 picoseconds, suggesting that oligophenylenevinylene bridges could be useful for wiring molecular electronic elements.
The recent development of tunable far-infrared lasers and other high-resolution spectroscopic probes of weakly bound clusters is having a significant impact on our understanding of intermolecular forces and on the complex quantum tunneling dynamics that occur in hydrogen-bonded systems. Far-infrared studies of a variety of interactions are discussed, including several prototypical water-hydrophobe complexes, the water trimer, and the ammonia dimer. Particular attention is paid to the inversion of spectroscopic data to yield detailed intermolecular potential energy surfaces. Investigations of nonpairwise additivity are also described.
Magnetars are young neutron stars with very strong magnetic fields of the order of 10(14)-10(15) G. They are detected in our Galaxy either as soft gamma-ray repeaters or anomalous X-ray pulsars. Soft gamma-ray repeaters are a rare type of gamma-ray transient sources that are occasionally detected as bursters in the high-energy sky. No optical counterpart to the gamma-ray flares or the quiescent source has yet been identified. Here we report multi-wavelength observations of a puzzling source, SWIFT J195509+261406. We detected more than 40 flaring episodes in the optical band over a time span of three days, and a faint infrared flare 11 days later, after which the source returned to quiescence. Our radio observations confirm a Galactic nature and establish a lower distance limit of approximately 3.7 kpc. We suggest that SWIFT J195509+261406 could be an isolated magnetar whose bursting activity has been detected at optical wavelengths, and for which the long-term X-ray emission is short-lived. In this case, a new manifestation of magnetar activity has been recorded and we can consider SWIFT J195509+261406 to be a link between the 'persistent' soft gamma-ray repeaters/anomalous X-ray pulsars and dim isolated neutron stars.
The coalescence of supermassive black holes--a natural outcome when galaxies merge--should produce gravitational waves and would likely be associated with energetic electromagnetic events. We have studied the coalescence of such binary black holes within an external magnetic field produced by the expected circumbinary disk surrounding them. Solving the Einstein equations to describe black holes interacting with surrounding plasma, we present numerical evidence for possible jets driven by these systems. Extending the process described by Blandford and Znajek for a single, spinning black hole, the picture that emerges suggests that the electromagnetic field extracts energy from the orbiting black holes, which ultimately merge and settle into the standard Blandford-Znajek scenario. Emissions along these jets could potentially be observable at large distances.
We report the direct observation of quantum dynamical tunneling of atoms between separated momentum regions in phase space. We study how the tunneling oscillations are affected as a quantum symmetry is broken and as the initial atomic state is changed. We also provide evidence that the tunneling rate is greatly enhanced by the presence of chaos in the classical dynamics. This tunneling phenomenon represents a dramatic manifestation of underlying classical chaos in a quantum system.
Observations of distant galaxies are important both for understanding how galaxies form and for probing the physical conditions of the Universe at early times. It is, however, very difficult to identify galaxies at redshifts z > 5, because they are so faint and have few spectral characteristics. We previously reported the probable identification of a galaxy at z = 6.68, based on one line and an apparent break in the spectrum just shortwards of that, which we interpreted as Lyman alpha emission and the Lyman alpha break, where photons with shorter wavelengths are absorbed by the intervening neutral hydrogen gas. Here we present optical photometry that shows moderate detections of light in the B- and V-band images, which are inconsistent with the expected absence of flux shortwards of the Lyman alpha break for alpha galaxy at z > 5, and inconsistent with the previous flux measurement. Moreover, the spectral energy distribution for this object cannot readily be fitted by any known galaxy spectral template at any redshift, so the redshift is undetermined.
A tunable Kondo effect has been realized in small quantum dots. A dot can be switched from a Kondo system to a non-Kondo system as the number of electrons on the dot is changed from odd to even. The Kondo temperature can be tuned by means of a gate voltage as a single-particle energy state nears the Fermi energy. Measurements of the temperature and magnetic field dependence of a Coulomb-blockaded dot show good agreement with predictions of both equilibrium and nonequilibrium Kondo effects.
Gaining insight into the nature and dynamics of the transition state is the essence of mechanistic investigations of chemical reactions, yet the fleeting configuration when existing chemical bonds dissociate while new ones form is extremely difficult to examine directly. Adiabatic potential-energy surfaces--usually derived using quantum chemical methods that assume mutually independent nuclear and electronic motion--quantify the fundamental forces between atoms involved in reaction and thus provide accurate descriptions of a reacting system as it moves through its transition state. This approach, widely tested for gas-phase reactions, is now also commonly applied to chemical reactions at metal surfaces. There is, however, some evidence calling into question the correctness of this theoretical approach for surface reactions: electronic excitation upon highly exothermic chemisorption has been observed, and indirect evidence suggests that large-amplitude vibrations of reactant molecules can excite electrons at metal surfaces. Here we report the detection of 'hot' electrons leaving a metal surface as vibrationally highly excited NO molecules collide with it. Electron emission only occurs once the vibrational energy exceeds the surface work function, and is at least 10,000 times more efficient than the emissions seen in similar systems where large-amplitude vibrations were not involved. These observations unambiguously demonstrate the direct conversion of vibrational to electronic excitation, thus questioning one of the basic assumptions currently used in theoretical approaches to describing bond-dissociation at metal surfaces.
Free radicals, hydrogen atoms, and electrons produced in rigid organic glasses at sufficiently low temperatures have lifetimes of minutes to years. They can be studied by their electron spin resonance spectra and, in the case of electrons, by their optical spectra, recombination luminescence, and electrical conductivity. The decay kinetics of these reaction intermediates serve to distinguish those trapped as geminate pairs or in spurs of high concentration from those formed with random distributions. Electron spin resonance studies of relaxation times and of the spectra of radical pairs provide further evidence on geometrical distributions. The decay rates of radicals combining with reactive geminate partners are dependent on the size and shape of the radical, the temperature, and the nature of the matrix. Decay is much slower in deuterated matrices than in protiated matrices. The factors that control the physical trapping of electrons in organic glasses are under intensive investigation. There is evidence that many electrons trapped relatively weakly during irradiations at 4 degrees K deepen their traps by orientation of dipoles when the matrix is warmed; that most electrons are trapped in the field of the geminate positive ion; that in some matrices the traps have a bound excited state to which the electron can be promoted without detrapping; and that trapped electrons can tunnel to solute molecules with a higher electron affinity than the trap depth.
The symbiotic interaction of Rhizobium meliloti and alfalfa results in the formation of nitrogen-fixing root nodules. Rhizobium meliloti nodABC genes are required for the early host responses of cortical cell divisions and root hair curling. The induction of nodABC expression by alfalfa exudates demonstrates host-symbiont signaling at an early stage in nodule development. The inducer molecule for nodABC expression was isolated from plant exudate by constructing a nodABC-lacZ fusion to monitor the inducing activity. From ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra, proton nuclear magnetic resonance, and mass spectrometry, the inducer was determined to be 3',4', 5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone (luteolin). Luteolin is a normal secondary plant metabolite found throughout the plant kingdom that may serve to control nodABC expression during nodule development. This regulatory role for a flavone contrasts with the function of some flavonoids as defense compounds.
Rapid progress in science on nanoscopic scales has promoted increasing interest in techniques of ultrahigh-resolution optical microscopy. The diffraction limit can be surpassed by illuminating an object in the near field through a sub-wavelength aperture at the end of a sharp metallic probe. Proposed modifications of this technique involve replacing the physical aperture by a nanoscopic active light source. Advances in the spatial and spectral detection of individual fluorescent molecules, using near-field and far-field methods, suggest the possibility of using a single molecule as the illumination source. Here we present optical images taken with a single molecule as a point-like source of illumination, by combining fluorescence excitation spectroscopy with shear-force microscopy. Our single-molecule probe has potential for achieving molecular resolution in optical microscopy; it should also facilitate controlled studies of nanometre-scale phenomena (such as resonant energy transfer) with improved lateral and axial spatial resolution.
Experiments, employing crossed molecular beams, with vibrational state resolution have been performed on the simplest four-atom reaction, OH + D2 --> HOD + D. In good agreement with the most recent quantum scattering predictions, mode-specific reaction dynamics is observed, with vibration in the newly formed oxygen-deuterium bond preferentially excited to v = 2. This demonstrates that quantum theoretical calculations, which in the past decade have achieved remarkable accuracy for three-atom reactions involving three dimensions, have progressed to the point where it is now possible to accurately predict energy disposal in four-atom reactions involving six dimensions.
Power is supplied to a planet's magnetosphere from the kinetic energy of planetary spin and the energy flux of the impinging solar wind. A fraction of this power is available to drive numerous observable phenomena, such as polar auroras and planetary radio emissions. In this report our present understanding of these power transfer mechanisms is applied to Uranus to make specific predictions of the detectability of radio and auroral emissions by the planetary radio astronomy (PRA) and ultraviolet spectrometer (UVS) instruments aboard the Voyager spacecraft before its encounter with Uranus at the end of January 1986. The power available for these two phenomena is (among other factors) a function of the magnetic moment of Uranus. The date of earliest detectability also depends on whether the predominant power source for the magnetosphere is planetary spin or solar wind. The magnetic moment of Uranus is derived for each power source as a function of the date of first detection of radio emissions by the PRA instrument or auroral emissions by the UVS instrument. If we accept the interpretation of ultraviolet observations now available from the Earth-orbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite, Uranus has a surface magnetic field of at least 0.6 gauss, and more probably several gauss, making it the largest or second-largest planetary magnetic field in the solar system.
Covalent bonding is commonly described by Lewis's theory, with an electron pair shared between two atoms constituting one full bond. Beginning with the valence bond description for the hydrogen molecule, quantum chemists have further explored the fundamental nature of the chemical bond for atoms throughout the periodic table, confirming that most molecules are indeed held together by one electron pair for each bond. But more complex binding may occur when large numbers of atomic orbitals can participate in bond formation. Such behaviour is common with transition metals. When involving heavy actinide elements, metal-metal bonds might prove particularly complicated. To date, evidence for actinide-actinide bonds is restricted to the matrix-isolation of uranium hydrides, including H2U-UH2, and the gas-phase detection and preliminary theoretical study of the uranium molecule, U2. Here we report quantum chemical calculations on U2, showing that, although the strength of the U2 bond is comparable to that of other multiple bonds between transition metals, the bonding pattern is unique. We find that the molecule contains three electron-pair bonds and four one-electron bonds (that is, 10 bonding electrons, corresponding to a quintuple bond), and two ferromagnetically coupled electrons localized on one U atom each-so all known covalent bonding types are contributing.
As a result of quantum-confinement effects, the emission colour of semiconductor nanocrystals can be modified dramatically by simply changing their size. Such spectral tunability, together with large photoluminescence quantum yields and high photostability, make nanocrystals attractive for use in a variety of light-emitting technologies--for example, displays, fluorescence tagging, solid-state lighting and lasers. An important limitation for such applications, however, is the difficulty of achieving electrical pumping, largely due to the presence of an insulating organic capping layer on the nanocrystals. Here, we describe an approach for indirect injection of electron-hole pairs (the electron-hole radiative recombination gives rise to light emission) into nanocrystals by non-contact, non-radiative energy transfer from a proximal quantum well that can in principle be pumped either electrically or optically. Our theoretical and experimental results indicate that this transfer is fast enough to compete with electron-hole recombination in the quantum well, and results in greater than 50 per cent energy-transfer efficiencies in the tested structures. Furthermore, the measured energy-transfer rates are sufficiently large to provide pumping in the stimulated emission regime, indicating the feasibility of nanocrystal-based optical amplifiers and lasers based on this approach.
We used high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to reveal the Fermi surface and key transport parameters of the metallic state of the layered colossal magnetoresistive oxide La1.2Sr1.8Mn2O7. With these parameters, the calculated in-plane conductivity is nearly one order of magnitude larger than the measured direct current conductivity. This discrepancy can be accounted for by including the pseudogap, which removes at least 90% of the spectral weight at the Fermi energy. Key to the pseudogap and to many other properties are the parallel straight Fermi surface sections, which are highly susceptible to nesting instabilities. These nesting instabilities produce nanoscale fluctuating charge/orbital modulations, which cooperate with Jahn-Teller distortions and compete with the electron itinerancy favored by double exchange.
The solar wind blows an immense magnetic bubble, the heliosphere, in the local interstellar medium (mostly neutral gas) flowing by the Sun. Recent measurements by Voyager 2 across the termination shock, where the solar wind is slowed to subsonic speeds before entering the heliosheath, found that the shocked solar wind plasma contains only approximately 20 per cent of the energy released by the termination shock, whereas energetic particles above approximately 28 keV contain only approximately 10 per cent; approximately 70 per cent of the energy is unaccounted for, leading to speculation that the unmeasured pickup ions or energetic particles below 28 keV contain the missing energy. Here we report the detection and mapping of heliosheath energetic ( approximately 4-20 keV) neutral atoms produced by charge exchange of suprathermal ions with interstellar neutral atoms. The energetic neutral atoms come from a source approximately 60 degrees wide in longitude straddling the direction of the local interstellar medium. Their energy spectra resemble those of solar wind pickup ions, but with a knee at approximately 11 keV instead of approximately 4 keV, indicating that their parent ions are pickup ions energized by the termination shock. These termination-shock-energized pickup ions contain the missing approximately 70 per cent of the energy dissipated in the termination shock, and they dominate the pressure in the heliosheath.
Reversibility is a common theme in respiratory and photosynthetic systems that couple electron transfer with a transmembrane proton gradient driving ATP production. This includes the intensely studied cytochrome bc1, which catalyses electron transfer between quinone and cytochrome c. To understand how efficient reversible energy coupling works, here we have progressively inactivated individual cofactors comprising cytochrome bc1. We have resolved millisecond reversibility in all electron-tunnelling steps and coupled proton exchanges, including charge-separating hydroquinone-quinone catalysis at the Q(o) site, which shows that redox equilibria are relevant on a catalytic timescale. Such rapid reversibility renders popular models based on a semiquinone in Q(o) site catalysis prone to short-circuit failure. Two mechanisms allow reversible function and safely relegate short-circuits to long-distance electron tunnelling on a timescale of seconds: conformational gating of semiquinone for both forward and reverse electron transfer, or concerted two-electron quinone redox chemistry that avoids the semiquinone intermediate altogether.
We report on the epitaxial growth of a group-IV ferromagnetic semiconductor, Mn(x)Ge(1-x), in which the Curie temperature is found to increase linearly with manganese (Mn) concentration from 25 to 116 kelvin. The p-type semiconducting character and hole-mediated exchange permit control of ferromagnetic order through application of a +/-0.5-volt gate voltage, a value compatible with present microelectronic technology. Total-energy calculations within density-functional theory show that the magnetically ordered phase arises from a long-range ferromagnetic interaction that dominates a short-range antiferromagnetic interaction. Calculated spin interactions and percolation theory predict transition temperatures larger than measured, consistent with the observed suppression of magnetically active Mn atoms and hole concentration.
Removing electrons from the CuO2 plane of cuprates alters the electronic correlations sufficiently to produce high-temperature superconductivity. Associated with these changes are spectral-weight transfers from the high-energy states of the insulator to low energies. In theory, these should be detectable as an imbalance between the tunneling rate for electron injection and extraction-a tunneling asymmetry. We introduce atomic-resolution tunneling-asymmetry imaging, finding virtually identical phenomena in two lightly hole-doped cuprates: Ca(1.88)Na(0.12)CuO(2)Cl2 and Bi2Sr2Dy(0.2)Ca(0.8)Cu2O(8+delta). Intense spatial variations in tunneling asymmetry occur primarily at the planar oxygen sites; their spatial arrangement forms a Cu-O-Cu bond-centered electronic pattern without long-range order but with 4a(0)-wide unidirectional electronic domains dispersed throughout (a(0): the Cu-O-Cu distance). The emerging picture is then of a partial hole localization within an intrinsic electronic glass evolving, at higher hole densities, into complete delocalization and highest-temperature superconductivity.
We have measured the quantum yield for exciting the motion of a single Co atom in CoCu(n) linear molecules constructed on a Cu(111) surface. The Co atom switched between two lattice positions during electron excitation from the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope. The tip location with highest probability for inducing motion was consistent with the position of an active state identified through electronic structure calculations. Atom motion within the molecule decreased with increased molecular length and reflected the corresponding variation in electronic structure.
Molecular recognition by proteins is fundamental to almost every biological process, particularly the protein associations underlying cellular signal transduction. Understanding the basis for protein-protein interactions requires the full characterization of the thermodynamics of their association. Historically it has been virtually impossible to experimentally estimate changes in protein conformational entropy, a potentially important component of the free energy of protein association. However, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy has emerged as a powerful tool for characterizing the dynamics of proteins. Here we employ changes in conformational dynamics as a proxy for corresponding changes in conformational entropy. We find that the change in internal dynamics of the protein calmodulin varies significantly on binding a variety of target domains. Surprisingly, the apparent change in the corresponding conformational entropy is linearly related to the change in the overall binding entropy. This indicates that changes in protein conformational entropy can contribute significantly to the free energy of protein-ligand association.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) has been used extensively to study the structure of antibody combining sites. In recent studies we have observed the proton resonance spectra of the Fab fragment of a monoclonal anti-spin-label antibody derived from a hybridoma grown on various specifically deuterated amino acids. The broadening of the proton resonance signals by the paramagnetic hapten, together with selective deuteration, has allowed the identification of most of the amino acids in the combining-site region of this antibody and has also provided estimates of distances between amino-acid protons and the unpaired electron. Here we show how recombination of specifically deuterated heavy and light chains permits the assignment of single amino-acid proton resonance signals to either the heavy or light chain. In addition, the spectra of such recombinants demonstrate that their combining-site structures must be almost identical to the native structure.
The ability to manipulate nanoscopic matter precisely is critical for the development of active nanosystems. Optical tweezers are excellent tools for transporting particles ranging in size from several micrometres to a few hundred nanometres. Manipulation of dielectric objects with much smaller diameters, however, requires stronger optical confinement and higher intensities than can be provided by these diffraction-limited systems. Here we present an approach to optofluidic transport that overcomes these limitations, using sub-wavelength liquid-core slot waveguides. The technique simultaneously makes use of near-field optical forces to confine matter inside the waveguide and scattering/adsorption forces to transport it. The ability of the slot waveguide to condense the accessible electromagnetic energy to scales as small as 60 nm allows us also to overcome the fundamental diffraction problem. We apply the approach here to the trapping and transport of 75-nm dielectric nanoparticles and lambda-DNA molecules. Because trapping occurs along a line, rather than at a point as with traditional point traps, the method provides the ability to handle extended biomolecules directly. We also carry out a detailed numerical analysis that relates the near-field optical forces to release kinetics. We believe that the architecture demonstrated here will help to bridge the gap between optical manipulation and nanofluidics.
In experiments on resonant tunneling through a "quantum antidot" (a potential hill) in the quantum Hall (QH) regime, periodic conductance peaks were observed as a function of both magnetic field and back gate voltage. A combination of the two periods constitutes a measurement of the charge of the tunneling particles and implies that charge deficiency on the antidot is quantized in units of the charge of quasi-particles of the surrounding QH condensate. The experimentally determined value of the electron charge e is 1.57 x 10(-19) coulomb = (0.98 +/- 0.03) e for the states v = 1 and v = 2 of the integer QH effect, and the quasi-particle charge is 5.20 x 10(-20) coulomb = (0.325 +/- 0.01)e for the state v = (1/3) of the fractional QH effect.
Photometry and spectroscopy of the object Cha Halpha 1, located in the Chamaeleon I star-forming cloud, show that it is a approximately 10(6)-year-old brown dwarf with spectral type M7.5 to M8 and 0.04 +/- 0.01 solar masses. Quiescent x-ray emission was detected in a 36-kilosecond observation with 31.4 +/- 7.7 x-ray photons, obtained with the Rontgen Satellite (ROSAT), with 9final sigma detection significance. This corresponds to an x-ray luminosity of 2.57 x 10(28) ergs per second and an x-ray to bolometric luminosity ratio of 10(-3.44). These are typical values for late M-type stars. Because the interior of brown dwarfs may be similar to that of convective late-type stars, which are well-known x-ray sources, x-ray emission from brown dwarfs may indicate magnetic activity.
A fundamental step towards atomic- or molecular-scale spintronic devices has recently been made by demonstrating that the spin of an individual atom deposited on a surface, or of a small paramagnetic molecule embedded in a nanojunction, can be externally controlled. An appealing next step is the extension of such a capability to the field of information storage, by taking advantage of the magnetic bistability and rich quantum behaviour of single-molecule magnets (SMMs). Recently, a proof of concept that the magnetic memory effect is retained when SMMs are chemically anchored to a metallic surface was provided. However, control of the nanoscale organization of these complex systems is required for SMMs to be integrated into molecular spintronic devices. Here we show that a preferential orientation of Fe(4) complexes on a gold surface can be achieved by chemical tailoring. As a result, the most striking quantum feature of SMMs-their stepped hysteresis loop, which results from resonant quantum tunnelling of the magnetization-can be clearly detected using synchrotron-based spectroscopic techniques. With the aid of multiple theoretical approaches, we relate the angular dependence of the quantum tunnelling resonances to the adsorption geometry, and demonstrate that molecules predominantly lie with their easy axes close to the surface normal. Our findings prove that the quantum spin dynamics can be observed in SMMs chemically grafted to surfaces, and offer a tool to reveal the organization of matter at the nanoscale.
Nanoscale resonators that oscillate at high frequencies are useful in many measurement applications. We studied a high-quality mechanical resonator made from a suspended carbon nanotube driven into motion by applying a periodic radio frequency potential using a nearby antenna. Single-electron charge fluctuations created periodic modulations of the mechanical resonance frequency. A quality factor exceeding 10(5) allows the detection of a shift in resonance frequency caused by the addition of a single-electron charge on the nanotube. Additional evidence for the strong coupling of mechanical motion and electron tunneling is provided by an energy transfer to the electrons causing mechanical damping and unusual nonlinear behavior. We also discovered that a direct current through the nanotube spontaneously drives the mechanical resonator, exerting a force that is coherent with the high-frequency resonant mechanical motion.
Advances in transition state theory and computer simulations are providing new insights into the sources of enzyme catalysis. Both lowering of the activation free energy and changes in the generalized transmission coefficient (recrossing of the transition state, tunneling, and nonequilibrium contributions) can play a role. A framework for understanding these effects is presented, and the contributions of the different factors, as illustrated by specific enzymes, are identified and quantified by computer simulations. The resulting understanding of enzyme catalysis is used to comment on alternative proposals of how enzymes work.
Human skin is an almost perfect emitter of infrared radiation in the spectral region beyond 3 microns. This energy may be recorded as a thermogram to yield a quantitative temperature map of the skin. If the nude subject has remained quiet in a cool room for 10 to 15 minutes prior to thermography, the skin temperatures are determined largely by the vascularity of the skin itself and by the heat conducted from within the body. Since, under these conditions, the contrasts which appear arise essentially from the internal sources of heat, the resulting thermograms yield information concerning certain pathological conditions within the body (16).
The nature and length scales of charge screening in complex oxides are fundamental to a wide range of systems, spanning ceramic voltage-dependent resistors (varistors), oxide tunnel junctions and charge ordering in mixed-valence compounds. There are wide variations in the degree of charge disproportionation, length scale, and orientation in the mixed-valence compounds: these have been the subject of intense theoretical study, but little is known about the microscopic electronic structure. Here we have fabricated an idealized structure to examine these issues by growing atomically abrupt layers of LaTi(3+)O(3) embedded in SrTi(4+)O(3). Using an atomic-scale electron beam, we have observed the spatial distribution of the extra electron on the titanium sites. This distribution results in metallic conductivity, even though the superlattice structure is based on two insulators. Despite the chemical abruptness of the interfaces, we find that a minimum thickness of five LaTiO(3) layers is required for the centre titanium site to recover bulk-like electronic properties. This represents a framework within which the short-length-scale electronic response can be probed and incorporated in thin-film oxide heterostructures.
Polarity discontinuities at the interfaces between different crystalline materials (heterointerfaces) can lead to nontrivial local atomic and electronic structure, owing to the presence of dangling bonds and incomplete atomic coordinations. These discontinuities often arise in naturally layered oxide structures, such as the superconducting copper oxides and ferroelectric titanates, as well as in artificial thin film oxide heterostructures such as manganite tunnel junctions. If polarity discontinuities can be atomically controlled, unusual charge states that are inaccessible in bulk materials could be realized. Here we have examined a model interface between two insulating perovskite oxides--LaAlO3 and SrTiO3--in which we control the termination layer at the interface on an atomic scale. In the simple ionic limit, this interface presents an extra half electron or hole per two-dimensional unit cell, depending on the structure of the interface. The hole-doped interface is found to be insulating, whereas the electron-doped interface is conducting, with extremely high carrier mobility exceeding 10,000 cm2 V(-1) s(-1). At low temperature, dramatic magnetoresistance oscillations periodic with the inverse magnetic field are observed, indicating quantum transport. These results present a broad opportunity to tailor low-dimensional charge states by atomically engineered oxide heteroepitaxy.
Synthetic phylloquinone was resolved into cis and trans isomers by thin-layer chromatography. The two isomers had identical ultraviolet spectra characteristic of vitamin K(1) and were differentiated by nuclear-magnetic-resonance spectroscopy on the basis of the displacement of the peak corresponding to the olefinic methyl group in the naphthoquinone side chain. Studies on the restoration of electron transport coupled to phosphorylation in irradiated preparations of Mycobacterium phlei showed that only the trans isomer was active with substrates linked to nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide. The purified trans phylloquinone was enzymatically converted to the cis isomer. Under similar conditions, cis vitamin K(1) gave rise to the trans-naphthoquinone. The natural naphthoquinone of M. phlei vitamin MK(9)(II-H) was similarly resolved into cis and trans isomers.
Single-electron circuits of the future, consisting of a network of quantum dots, will require a mechanism to transport electrons from one functional part of the circuit to another. For example, in a quantum computer decoherence and circuit complexity can be reduced by separating quantum bit (qubit) manipulation from measurement and by providing a means of transporting electrons between the corresponding parts of the circuit. Highly controlled tunnelling between neighbouring dots has been demonstrated, and our ability to manipulate electrons in single- and double-dot systems is improving rapidly. For distances greater than a few hundred nanometres, neither free propagation nor tunnelling is viable while maintaining confinement of single electrons. Here we show how a single electron may be captured in a surface acoustic wave minimum and transferred from one quantum dot to a second, unoccupied, dot along a long, empty channel. The transfer direction may be reversed and the same electron moved back and forth more than sixty times-a cumulative distance of 0.25 mm-without error. Such on-chip transfer extends communication between quantum dots to a range that may allow the integration of discrete quantum information processing components and devices.
The proton is the primary building block of the visible Universe, but many of its properties-such as its charge radius and its anomalous magnetic moment-are not well understood. The root-mean-square charge radius, r(p), has been determined with an accuracy of 2 per cent (at best) by electron-proton scattering experiments. The present most accurate value of r(p) (with an uncertainty of 1 per cent) is given by the CODATA compilation of physical constants. This value is based mainly on precision spectroscopy of atomic hydrogen and calculations of bound-state quantum electrodynamics (QED; refs 8, 9). The accuracy of r(p) as deduced from electron-proton scattering limits the testing of bound-state QED in atomic hydrogen as well as the determination of the Rydberg constant (currently the most accurately measured fundamental physical constant). An attractive means to improve the accuracy in the measurement of r(p) is provided by muonic hydrogen (a proton orbited by a negative muon); its much smaller Bohr radius compared to ordinary atomic hydrogen causes enhancement of effects related to the finite size of the proton. In particular, the Lamb shift (the energy difference between the 2S(1/2) and 2P(1/2) states) is affected by as much as 2 per cent. Here we use pulsed laser spectroscopy to measure a muonic Lamb shift of 49,881.88(76) GHz. On the basis of present calculations of fine and hyperfine splittings and QED terms, we find r(p) = 0.84184(67) fm, which differs by 5.0 standard deviations from the CODATA value of 0.8768(69) fm. Our result implies that either the Rydberg constant has to be shifted by -110 kHz/c (4.9 standard deviations), or the calculations of the QED effects in atomic hydrogen or muonic hydrogen atoms are insufficient.
The photocatalytic splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen using solar energy is a potentially clean and renewable source for hydrogen fuel. The first photocatalysts suitable for water splitting, or for activating hydrogen production from carbohydrate compounds made by plants from water and carbon dioxide, were developed several decades ago. But these catalysts operate with ultraviolet light, which accounts for only 4% of the incoming solar energy and thus renders the overall process impractical. For this reason, considerable efforts have been invested in developing photocatalysts capable of using the less energetic but more abundant visible light, which accounts for about 43% of the incoming solar energy. However, systems that are sufficiently stable and efficient for practical use have not yet been realized. Here we show that doping of indium-tantalum-oxide with nickel yields a series of photocatalysts, In(1-x)Ni(x)TaO(4) (x = 0-0.2), which induces direct splitting of water into stoichiometric amounts of oxygen and hydrogen under visible light irradiation with a quantum yield of about 0.66%. Our findings suggest that the use of solar energy for photocatalytic water splitting might provide a viable source for 'clean' hydrogen fuel, once the catalytic efficiency of the semiconductor system has been improved by increasing its surface area and suitable modifications of the surface sites.
Although disk accretion onto compact objects-white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes-is central to much of high-energy astrophysics, the mechanisms that enable this process have remained observationally difficult to determine. Accretion disks must transfer angular momentum in order for matter to travel radially inward onto the compact object. Internal viscosity from magnetic processes and disk winds can both in principle transfer angular momentum, but hitherto we lacked evidence that either occurs. Here we report that an X-ray-absorbing wind discovered in an observation of the stellar-mass black hole binary GRO J1655 - 40 (ref. 6) must be powered by a magnetic process that can also drive accretion through the disk. Detailed spectral analysis and modelling of the wind shows that it can only be powered by pressure generated by magnetic viscosity internal to the disk or magnetocentrifugal forces. This result demonstrates that disk accretion onto black holes is a fundamentally magnetic process.
In the interlayer theory of high-temperature superconductivity, the interlayer pair tunneling energy (similar to the Josephson or Lawrence-Doniach energy) is the motivation for superconductivity. This connection requires two experimentally verifiable identities: the coherent normal-state conductance must be smaller than the "Josephson" coupling energy, and the Josephson coupling energy must be equal to the condensation energy of the superconductor. The first condition is well satisfied in the only case that is relevant, (La, Sr)2CuO4, but the second condition has been questioned. It is satisfied for all dopings in (La,Sr)2CuO4 and also in optimally doped Hg(Ba)2CuO5, which was measured recently, but seems to be strongly violated in measurements on single crystals of Tl2Ba2CuO6.
Magnetic reconnection has a crucial role in a variety of plasma environments in providing a mechanism for the fast release of stored magnetic energy. During reconnection the plasma forms a 'magnetic nozzle', like the nozzle of a hose, and the rate is controlled by how fast plasma can flow out of the nozzle. But the traditional picture of reconnection has been unable to explain satisfactorily the short timescales associated with the energy release, because the flow is mediated by heavy ions with a slow resultant velocity. Recent theoretical work has suggested that the energy release is instead mediated by electrons in waves called 'whistlers', which move much faster for a given perturbation of the magnetic field because of their smaller mass. Moreover, the whistler velocity and associated plasma velocity both increase as the 'nozzle' becomes narrower. A narrower nozzle therefore no longer reduces the total plasma flow-the outflow is independent of the size of the nozzle. Here we report observations demonstrating that reconnection in the magnetosphere is driven by whistlers, in good agreement with the theoretical predictions.
The magnon pairing mechanism is derived to explain the high-temperature superconductivity of both the La2-xSrxCu(1)O(4) and Y(1)Ba(2)Cu(3)O(7) systems. Critical features include (i) a one- or two-dimensional lattice of linear Cu-O-Cu bonds that contribute to large antiferromagnetic (superexchange) coupling of the Cu(II)(d(9)) orbitals; (ii) holes in the oxygen ppi bands [rather than Cu(III)(d(8))] leading to high mobility hole conduction; and (iii) strong ferromagnetic coupling between oxygen ppi holes and adjacent Cu(II)(d(9)) electrons. The ferromagnetic coupling of the conduction electrons with copper d spins induces the attractive interaction responsible for the superconductivity, leading to triplet-coupled pairs called "tripgems." The disordered Heisenberg lattice of antiferromagnetically coupled copper d spins serves a role analogous to the phonons in a conventional system. This leads to a maximum transition temperature of about 200 K. For La(1.85)Sr(0.15)Cu(1)O(4), the energy gap is in excellent agreement with experiment. For Y(1)Ba(2)Cu(3)O(7), we find that both the CuO sheets and the CuO chains can contribute to the supercurrent.
The dynamic back-action caused by electromagnetic forces (radiation pressure) in optical and microwave cavities is of growing interest. Back-action cooling, for example, is being pursued as a means of achieving the quantum ground state of macroscopic mechanical oscillators. Work in the optical domain has revolved around millimetre- or micrometre-scale structures using the radiation pressure force. By comparison, in microwave devices, low-loss superconducting structures have been used for gradient-force-mediated coupling to a nanomechanical oscillator of picogram mass. Here we describe measurements of an optical system consisting of a pair of specially patterned nanoscale beams in which optical and mechanical energies are simultaneously localized to a cubic-micron-scale volume, and for which large per-photon optical gradient forces are realized. The resulting scale of the per-photon force and the mass of the structure enable the exploration of cavity optomechanical regimes in which, for example, the mechanical rigidity of the structure is dominantly provided by the internal light field itself. In addition to precision measurement and sensitive force detection, nano-optomechanics may find application in reconfigurable and tunable photonic systems, light-based radio-frequency communication and the generation of giant optical nonlinearities for wavelength conversion and optical buffering.
The lethal effect of ultrasound (US) on mammalian cells has received relatively little attention. Understandably, potential genetic aspects of US have been of prime concern to physicians who use US as a diagnostic tool; at the average power densities involved (<<1 W cm(-2)) little, if any cell killing is to be expected. There have been sporadic attempts to use higher intensities ( approximately 1 W cm(-2)) as a treatment modality in cancer therapy, but those experiments seem to have been based on inadequate cellular studies. The effects of US usually were evaluated in terms of morphological criteria rather than on quantitative determination of the loss of viability as measured by colony formation. There are few reports of the effects of US on survival of mammalian cells, and none specifically examine hyperthermic interaction. With the increased interest in hyperthermia for tumour therapy, attention has been directed towards the use of ultrasound to achieve tumour heating. In preliminary experiments in which US was used to heat the EMT6 sarcoma and KHJJ carcinoma in mice, we found a high percentage of tumour cures with short (approximately 30 min) treatments at temperatures (43-44 degrees C) where in vitro results of hyperthermia-induced cell killing would not have led to a prediction of any cures. We therefore initiated an investigation of the effects of US on survival of Chinese hamster cells to see if direct cell killing by US could explain our in vivo results, or, as in the case of radiofrequency (RF) electromagnetic heating, we would be forced to invoke host response(8). In particular, we examined the thermal and non-thermal components of cellular inactivation by US. We report here that there is a definite non-thermal cytotoxic effect of US. Its relative contribution to cell killing is a highly nonlinear function of the temperature of the cellular milieu. The survival curves show clearly that, beyond an initial threshold, small changes in temperature and/or US intensity can give rise to impressive changes in survival values. The threshold nature of the data strongly suggests that by means of overlapping beams, ultrasound energy could be delivered to tumour tissue to achieve massive cell killings while sparing normal tissue outside the tumour volume to a degree far exceeding that of conventional techniques.
Interface-selective probing of magnetism is a key issue for the design and realization of spin-electronic junction devices. Here, magnetization-induced second-harmonic generation was used to probe the local magnetic properties at the interface of the perovskite ferromagnet La(0.6)Sr(0.4)MnO3 with nonmagnetic insulating layers, as used in spin-tunnel junctions. We show that by grading the doping profile on an atomic scale at the interface, robust ferromagnetism can be realized around room temperature. The results should lead to improvements in the performance of spin-tunnel junctions.
Electromagnetically induced transparency is a quantum interference effect observed in atoms and molecules, in which the optical response of an atomic medium is controlled by an electromagnetic field. We demonstrated a form of induced transparency enabled by radiation-pressure coupling of an optical and a mechanical mode. A control optical beam tuned to a sideband transition of a micro-optomechanical system leads to destructive interference for the excitation of an intracavity probe field, inducing a tunable transparency window for the probe beam. Optomechanically induced transparency may be used for slowing and on-chip storage of light pulses via microfabricated optomechanical arrays.
High-resolution proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of low- and high-density lipoproteins from human serum closely resemble those of dispersions of lipoprotein lipids in water. Linewidths of hydrocarbon proton absorptions are not increased in the lipoproteins. In contrast, apolar binding of lysolecithin on serum albumin causes extensive line-broadening and an upfield chemical shift of the hydrocarbon proton resonances of lysolecithin. The results are consistent with a predominantly micellar structure for the lipoproteins rather than with extensive hydrophobic association of lipid and protein.
The realization of all-optical switching, modulating and computing devices is an important goal in modern optical technology. Nonlinear optical materials with large third-order nonlinear susceptibilities (chi(3)) are indispensable for such devices, because the magnitude of this quantity dominates the device performance. A key strategy in the development of new materials with large nonlinear susceptibilities is the exploration of quasi-one-dimensional systems, or 'quantum wires'--the quantum confinement of electron-hole motion in one-dimensional space can enhance chi(3). Two types of chemically synthesized quantum wires have been extensively studied: the band insulators of silicon polymers, and Peierls insulators of pi-conjugated polymers and platinum halides. In these systems, chi(3) values of 10(-12) to 10(-7) e.s.u. (electrostatic system of units) have been reported. Here we demonstrate an anomalous enhancement of the third-order nonlinear susceptibility in a different category of quantum wires: one-dimensional Mott insulators of 3d transition-metal oxides and halides. By analysing the electroreflectance spectra of these compounds, we measure chi(3) values in the range 10(-8) to 10(-5) e.s.u. The anomalous enhancement results from a large dipole moment between the lowest two excited states of these systems.
Both P(n), and S(n), phases recorded at distances greater than 3000 kilometers in the western Pacific have substantial amounts of energy at high frequencies, in sorne instances as high as 12 hertz for P(n) and 15 hertz for S(n), A comparison of P(n) and S(n) spectra reveals generally higher energy levels and higher proportions of high-frequency to low-frequency energy for S(n) than for P(n). Estimates of the effective quality factor, Q, indicate that the efficiency of S(n) propagation may be two or three times that of P(n). First arrivals of Pn and Sn have apparent velocities in agreement with values for the uppermost mantle, whereas maximum-energy arrivals have apparent velocities in agreement with values for the lower crust.
The ability to manipulate and monitor a single-electron spin using electron spin resonance is a long-sought goal. Such control would be invaluable for nanoscopic spin electronics, quantum information processing using individual electron spin qubits and magnetic resonance imaging of single molecules. There have been several examples of magnetic resonance detection of a single-electron spin in solids. Spin resonance of a nitrogen-vacancy defect centre in diamond has been detected optically, and spin precession of a localized electron spin on a surface was detected using scanning tunnelling microscopy. Spins in semiconductors are particularly attractive for study because of their very long decoherence times. Here we demonstrate electrical sensing of the magnetic resonance spin-flips of a single electron paramagnetic spin centre, formed by a defect in the gate oxide of a standard silicon transistor. The spin orientation is converted to electric charge, which we measure as a change in the source/drain channel current. Our set-up may facilitate the direct study of the physics of spin decoherence, and has the practical advantage of being composed of test transistors in a conventional, commercial, silicon integrated circuit. It is well known from the rich literature of magnetic resonance studies that there sometimes exist structural paramagnetic defects near the Si/SiO2 interface. For a small transistor, there might be only one isolated trap state that is within a tunnelling distance of the channel, and that has a charging energy close to the Fermi level.
We observed coherent proton tunneling in the cyclic network of four hydrogen bonds in calix[4]arene. The tunneling frequency of 35 megahertz was revealed by a peak in the magnetic field dependence of the proton spin-lattice relaxation rate measured with field-cycling nuclear magnetic resonance in the solid state at temperatures below 80 kelvin. The amplitude of the coherent tunneling peak grows with temperature according to a Boltzmann law with energy D/kB = (125 +/- 10) kelvin (where kB is Boltzmann's constant). The tunneling peak can be interpreted in the context of level crossings in the region where the tunneling frequency matches the proton Larmor frequency. The tunneling spectrum reveals fine structure that we attribute to coupling between the hydrogen bonds in the network. The characteristics of the tunneling peak are interpreted in the context of the potential energy surface experienced by the hydrogen atoms in the network.
Parallel processes for patterning densely packed nanometre-scale structures are critical for many diverse areas of nanotechnology. Thin films of diblock copolymers can self-assemble into ordered periodic structures at the molecular scale (approximately 5 to 50 nm), and have been used as templates to fabricate quantum dots, nanowires, magnetic storage media, nanopores and silicon capacitors. Unfortunately, perfect periodic domain ordering can only be achieved over micrometre-scale areas at best and defects exist at the edges of grain boundaries. These limitations preclude the use of block-copolymer lithography for many advanced applications. Graphoepitaxy, in-plane electric fields, temperature gradients, and directional solidification have also been demonstrated to induce orientation or long-range order with varying degrees of success. Here we demonstrate the integration of thin films of block copolymer with advanced lithographic techniques to induce epitaxial self-assembly of domains. The resulting patterns are defect-free, are oriented and registered with the underlying substrate and can be created over arbitrarily large areas. These structures are determined by the size and quality of the lithographically defined surface pattern rather than by the inherent limitations of the self-assembly process. Our results illustrate how hybrid strategies to nanofabrication allow for molecular level control in existing manufacturing processes.
Isolated neutron stars are highly magnetized, fast-rotating objects that form as an end point of stellar evolution. They are directly observable in X-ray emission, because of their high surface temperatures. Features in their X-ray spectra could in principle reveal the presence of atmospheres, or be used to estimate the strength of their magnetic fields through the cyclotron process, as is done for X-ray binaries. Almost all isolated neutron star spectra observed so far appear as featureless thermal continua. The only exception is 1E1207.4-5209 (refs 7-9), where two deep absorption features have been detected, but with insufficient definition to permit unambiguous interpretation. Here we report a long X-ray observation of the same object in which the star's spectrum shows three distinct features, regularly spaced at 0.7, 1.4 and 2.1 keV, plus a fourth feature of lower significance, at 2.8 keV. These features vary in phase with the star's rotation. The logical interpretation is that they are features from resonant cyclotron absorption, which allows us to calculate a magnetic field strength of 8 x 10(10) G, assuming the absorption arises from electrons.
Highly luminescent semiconductor quantum dots (zinc sulfide-capped cadmium selenide) have been covalently coupled to biomolecules for use in ultrasensitive biological detection. In comparison with organic dyes such as rhodamine, this class of luminescent labels is 20 times as bright, 100 times as stable against photobleaching, and one-third as wide in spectral linewidth. These nanometer-sized conjugates are water-soluble and biocompatible. Quantum dots that were labeled with the protein transferrin underwent receptor-mediated endocytosis in cultured HeLa cells, and those dots that were labeled with immunomolecules recognized specific antibodies or antigens.
The Voyager 2 cosmic ray system (CRS) measured significant fluxes of energetic [>/=1 megaelectron volt (MeV)] trapped electrons and protons in the magnetosphere of Neptune. The intensities are maximum near a magnetic L shell of 7, decreasing closer to the planet because of absorption by satellites and rings. In the region of the inner satellites of Neptune, the radiation belts have a complicated structure, which provides some constraints on the magnetic field geometry of the inner magnetosphere. Electron phase-space densities have a positive radial gradient, indicating that they diffuse inward from a source in the outer magnetosphere. Electron spectra from 1 to 5 MeV are generally well represented by power laws with indices near 6, which harden in the region of peak flux to power law indices of 4 to 5. Protons have significantly lower fluxes than electrons throughout the magnetosphere, with large anisotropies due to radial intensity gradients. The radiation belts resemble those of Uranus to the extent allowed by the different locations of the satellites, which limit the flux at each planet.
Quantum phase transitions arise in many-body systems because of competing interactions that promote rivaling ground states. Recent years have seen the identification of continuous quantum phase transitions, or quantum critical points, in a host of antiferromagnetic heavy-fermion compounds. Studies of the interplay between the various effects have revealed new classes of quantum critical points and are uncovering a plethora of new quantum phases. At the same time, quantum criticality has provided fresh insights into the electronic, magnetic, and superconducting properties of the heavy-fermion metals. We review these developments, discuss the open issues, and outline some directions for future research.
At sufficiently low temperatures, condensed-matter systems tend to develop order. A notable exception to this behaviour is the case of quantum spin liquids, in which quantum fluctuations prevent a transition to an ordered state down to the lowest temperatures. There have now been tentative observations of such states in some two-dimensional organic compounds, yet quantum spin liquids remain elusive in microscopic two-dimensional models that are relevant to experiments. Here we show, by means of large-scale quantum Monte Carlo simulations of correlated fermions on a honeycomb lattice (a structure realized in, for example, graphene), that a quantum spin liquid emerges between the state described by massless Dirac fermions and an antiferromagnetically ordered Mott insulator. This unexpected quantum-disordered state is found to be a short-range resonating valence-bond liquid, akin to the one proposed for high-temperature superconductors: the possibility of unconventional superconductivity through doping therefore arises in our system. We foresee the experimental realization of this model system using ultra-cold atoms, or group IV elements arranged in honeycomb lattices.
Planetary nebulae are one of the few classes of celestial objects that are active in every part of the electromagnetic spectrum. These fluorescing and often dusty expanding gaseous envelopes were recently found to be quite complex in their dynamics and morphology, but refined theoretical models can account for these discoveries. Great progress was also made in understanding the mechanisms that shape the nebulae and the spectra of their central stars. In addition, applications for planetary nebulae have been worked out; for example, they have been used as standard candles for long-range distances and as tracers of the enigmatic dark matter.
The logic underlying the coherent nature of quantum information processing often deviates from intuitive reasoning, leading to surprising effects. Counterfactual computation constitutes a striking example: the potential outcome of a quantum computation can be inferred, even if the computer is not run. Relying on similar arguments to interaction-free measurements (or quantum interrogation), counterfactual computation is accomplished by putting the computer in a superposition of 'running' and 'not running' states, and then interfering the two histories. Conditional on the as-yet-unknown outcome of the computation, it is sometimes possible to counterfactually infer information about the solution. Here we demonstrate counterfactual computation, implementing Grover's search algorithm with an all-optical approach. It was believed that the overall probability of such counterfactual inference is intrinsically limited, so that it could not perform better on average than random guesses. However, using a novel 'chained' version of the quantum Zeno effect, we show how to boost the counterfactual inference probability to unity, thereby beating the random guessing limit. Our methods are general and apply to any physical system, as illustrated by a discussion of trapped-ion systems. Finally, we briefly show that, in certain circumstances, counterfactual computation can eliminate errors induced by decoherence.
Quasicrystalline structures may have optical bandgap properties-frequency ranges in which the propagation of light is forbidden-that make them well-suited to the scientific and technological applications for which photonic crystals are normally considered. Such quasicrystals can be constructed from two or more types of dielectric material arranged in a quasiperiodic pattern whose rotational symmetry is forbidden for periodic crystals (such as five-fold symmetry in the plane and icosahedral symmetry in three dimensions). Because quasicrystals have higher point group symmetry than ordinary crystals, their gap centre frequencies are closer and the gaps widths are more uniform-optimal conditions for forming a complete bandgap that is more closely spherically symmetric. Although previous studies have focused on one-dimensional and two-dimensional quasicrystals, where exact (one-dimensional) or approximate (two-dimensional) band structures can be calculated numerically, analogous calculations for the three-dimensional case are computationally challenging and have not yet been performed. Here we circumvent the computational problem by doing an experiment. Using stereolithography, we construct a photonic quasicrystal with centimetre-scale cells and perform microwave transmission measurements. We show that three-dimensional icosahedral quasicrystals exhibit sizeable stop gaps and, despite their quasiperiodicity, yield uncomplicated spectra that allow us to experimentally determine the faces of their effective Brillouin zones. Our studies confirm that they are excellent candidates for photonic bandgap materials.
Self-assembly of molecules on surfaces is a route toward not only creating structures, but also engineering chemical reactivity afforded by the intermolecular interactions. Dimethyldisulfide (CH3SSCH3) molecules self-assemble into linear chains on single-crystal gold surfaces. Injecting low-energy electrons into individual molecules in the self-assembled structures with the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope led to a propagating chemical reaction along the molecular chain as sulfur-sulfur bonds were broken and then reformed to produce new CH3SSCH3 molecules. Theoretical and experimental evidence supports a mechanism involving electron attachment followed by dissociation of a CH3SSCH3 molecule and initiation of a chain reaction by one or both of the resulting CH3S intermediates.
The application of single molecules as templates for nanodevices is a promising direction for nanotechnology. We used a pair of suspended DNA molecules as templates for superconducting two-nanowire devices. Because the resulting wires are very thin, comparable to the DNA molecules themselves, they are susceptible to thermal fluctuations typical for one-dimensional superconductors and exhibit a nonzero resistance over a broad temperature range. We observed resistance oscillations in these two-nanowire structures that are different from the usual Little-Parks oscillations. Here, we provide a quantitative explanation for the observed quantum interference phenomenon, which takes into account strong phase gradients created in the leads by the applied magnetic field.
Large dynamic nuclear polarization signal enhancements (up to a factor of 100) were obtained in the solid-state magic-angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of arginine and the protein T4 lysozyme in frozen glycerol-water solutions with the use of dynamic nuclear polarization. Polarization was transferred from the unpaired electrons of nitroxide free radicals to nuclear spins through microwave irradiation near the electron paramagnetic resonance frequency. This approach may be a generally applicable signal enhancement scheme for the high-resolution solid-state NMR spectroscopy of biomolecules.
Sound production is one of the most energetically costly activities in animals. Minimizing contraction costs is one means of achieving the activation rates necessary for sound production (20-550 Hz) (refs 1-3) without exceeding energy supplies. Rattlesnakes produce a sustained, high-frequency warning sound by extremely rapid contraction of their tailshaker muscles (20-90 Hz) (refs 4,5). The ATP cost per twitch is only 0.015 micromol ATP per g muscle per twitch during rattling, as measured by in vivo magnetic resonance. The reduced volume density of myofibre (32%) in tailshaker muscle is consistent with contraction cost being minimized (crossbridge cycling), in contrast to the contractile costs of vertebrate locomotory and asynchronous insect flight muscle. Thus tailshaker muscle is an example of sound-producing muscle designed for 'high frequency, minimal cost'. The high rates of rattling are achieved by minimizing contractile use of ATP, which reduces the cost per twitch to among the lowest found for striated muscle.
The promise of single Cooper-pair quantum circuits based on tunnel junctions for metrology and quantum information applications is severely limited by the influence of offset charges: random, slowly drifting microscopic charges inherent in many solid-state systems. By shunting a small junction with the Josephson kinetic inductance of a series array of large-capacitance tunnel junctions, thereby ensuring that all superconducting islands are connected to the circuit by at least one large junction, we have realized a new superconducting artificial atom that is totally insensitive to offset charges. Yet its energy levels manifest the anharmonic structure associated with single Cooper-pair effects, a useful component for solid-state quantum computation.
Recent advances in strategies for synthesizing nanoparticles--such as semiconductor quantum dots, magnets and noble-metal clusters--have enabled the precise control of composition, size, shape, crystal structure, and surface chemistry. The distinct properties of the resulting nanometre-scale building blocks can be harnessed in assemblies with new collective properties, which can be further engineered by controlling interparticle spacing and by material processing. Our study is motivated by the emerging concept of metamaterials-materials with properties arising from the controlled interaction of the different nanocrystals in an assembly. Previous multi-component nanocrystal assemblies have usually resulted in amorphous or short-range-ordered materials because of non-directional forces or insufficient mobility during assembly. Here we report the self-assembly of PbSe semiconductor quantum dots and Fe2O3 magnetic nanocrystals into precisely ordered three-dimensional superlattices. The use of specific size ratios directs the assembly of the magnetic and semiconducting nanoparticles into AB13 or AB2 superlattices with potentially tunable optical and magnetic properties. This synthesis concept could ultimately enable the fine-tuning of material responses to magnetic, electrical, optical and mechanical stimuli.
Quasars are thought to be powered by supermassive black holes accreting surrounding gas. Central to this picture is a putative accretion disk which is believed to be the source of the majority of the radiative output. It is well known, however, that the most extensively studied disk model-an optically thick disk which is heated locally by the dissipation of gravitational binding energy-is apparently contradicted by observations in a few major respects. In particular, the model predicts a specific blue spectral shape asymptotically from the visible to the near-infrared, but this is not generally seen in the visible wavelength region where the disk spectrum is observable. A crucial difficulty has been that, towards the infrared, the disk spectrum starts to be hidden under strong, hot dust emission from much larger but hitherto unresolved scales, and thus has essentially been impossible to observe. Here we report observations of polarized light interior to the dust-emitting region that enable us to uncover this near-infrared disk spectrum in several quasars. The revealed spectra show that the near-infrared disk spectrum is indeed as blue as predicted. This indicates that, at least for the outer near-infrared-emitting radii, the standard picture of the locally heated disk is approximately correct.
Much of modern condensed matter physics is understood in terms of elementary excitations, or quasiparticles--fundamental quanta of energy and momentum. Various strongly interacting atomic systems are successfully treated as a collection of quasiparticles with weak or no interactions. However, there are interesting limitations to this description: in some systems the very existence of quasiparticles cannot be taken for granted. Like unstable elementary particles, quasiparticles cannot survive beyond a threshold where certain decay channels become allowed by conservation laws; their spectrum terminates at this threshold. Such quasiparticle breakdown was first predicted for an exotic state of matter--super-fluid 4He at temperatures close to absolute zero, a quantum Bose liquid where zero-point atomic motion precludes crystallization. Here we show, using neutron scattering, that quasiparticle breakdown can also occur in a quantum magnet and, by implication, in other systems with Bose quasiparticles. We have measured spin excitations in a two-dimensional quantum magnet, piperazinium hexachlorodicuprate (PHCC), in which spin-1/2 copper ions form a non-magnetic quantum spin liquid, and find remarkable similarities with excitations in superfluid 4He. We observe a threshold momentum beyond which the quasiparticle peak merges with the two-quasiparticle continuum. It then acquires a finite energy width and becomes indistinguishable from a leading-edge singularity, so that excited states are no longer quasiparticles but occupy a wide band of energy. Our findings have important ramifications for understanding excitations with gapped spectra in many condensed matter systems, ranging from band insulators to high-transition-temperature superconductors.
Shor's quantum factoring algorithm finds the prime factors of a large number exponentially faster than any other known method, a task that lies at the heart of modern information security, particularly on the Internet. This algorithm requires a quantum computer, a device that harnesses the massive parallelism afforded by quantum superposition and entanglement of quantum bits (or qubits). We report the demonstration of a compiled version of Shor's algorithm on an integrated waveguide silica-on-silicon chip that guides four single-photon qubits through the computation to factor 15.
We demonstrate the ability to measure the energy required to flip the spin of single adsorbed atoms. A low-temperature, high-magnetic field scanning tunneling microscope was used to measure the spin excitation spectra of individual manganese atoms adsorbed on Al2O3 islands on a NiAl surface. We find pronounced variations of the spin-flip spectra for manganese atoms in different local environments.
Three-dimensional topological insulators are a new state of quantum matter with a bulk gap and odd number of relativistic Dirac fermions on the surface. By investigating the surface state of Bi2Te3 with angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, we demonstrate that the surface state consists of a single nondegenerate Dirac cone. Furthermore, with appropriate hole doping, the Fermi level can be tuned to intersect only the surface states, indicating a full energy gap for the bulk states. Our results establish that Bi2Te3 is a simple model system for the three-dimensional topological insulator with a single Dirac cone on the surface. The large bulk gap of Bi2Te3 also points to promising potential for high-temperature spintronics applications.
We report the experimental demonstration of an electrically driven, single-mode, low threshold current (approximately 260 microA) photonic band gap laser operating at room temperature. The electrical current pulse is injected through a sub-micrometer-sized semiconductor wire at the center of the mode with minimal degradation of the quality factor. The actual mode of interest operates in a nondegenerate monopole mode, as evidenced through the comparison of the measurement with the computation based on the actual fabricated structural parameters. As a small step toward a thresholdless laser or a single photon source, this wavelength-size photonic crystal laser may be of interest to photonic crystals, cavity quantum electrodynamics, and quantum information communities.
Spin-orbit (SO) coupling--the interaction between a quantum particle's spin and its momentum--is ubiquitous in physical systems. In condensed matter systems, SO coupling is crucial for the spin-Hall effect and topological insulators; it contributes to the electronic properties of materials such as GaAs, and is important for spintronic devices. Quantum many-body systems of ultracold atoms can be precisely controlled experimentally, and would therefore seem to provide an ideal platform on which to study SO coupling. Although an atom's intrinsic SO coupling affects its electronic structure, it does not lead to coupling between the spin and the centre-of-mass motion of the atom. Here, we engineer SO coupling (with equal Rashba and Dresselhaus strengths) in a neutral atomic Bose-Einstein condensate by dressing two atomic spin states with a pair of lasers. Such coupling has not been realized previously for ultracold atomic gases, or indeed any bosonic system. Furthermore, in the presence of the laser coupling, the interactions between the two dressed atomic spin states are modified, driving a quantum phase transition from a spatially spin-mixed state (lasers off) to a phase-separated state (above a critical laser intensity). We develop a many-body theory that provides quantitative agreement with the observed location of the transition. The engineered SO coupling--equally applicable for bosons and fermions--sets the stage for the realization of topological insulators in fermionic neutral atom systems.
Amino acids are produced under possible primitive Earth conditions by irradiation of gas mixtures with long-wavelength ultraviolet light, representing the most abundant useful energy source for prebiological organic synthesis. Hydrogen sulfide is the initial photon acceptor in this work; superthermal atomic hydrogen photodissociation products appear to initiate reactions leading to amino acid synthesis with an overall quantum yield on the order of 5X10(-5).
The collision-energy dependence of the state-resolved differential cross section at a specific backward-scattering angle for the reaction H + D2 --> D + HD is measured with the D-atom Rydberg "tagging" time-of-flight technique. The reaction was modeled theoretically with converged quantum scattering calculations that provided physical interpretation of the observations. Oscillations in the differential cross sections in the backward-scattering direction are clearly observed and are attributed to the transition-state structures that originate from the interferences of different quantized transition-state pathways.
The Casimir force is the attraction between uncharged metallic surfaces as a result of quantum mechanical vacuum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field. We demonstrate the Casimir effect in microelectromechanical systems using a micromachined torsional device. Attraction between a polysilicon plate and a spherical metallic surface results in a torque that rotates the plate about two thin torsional rods. The dependence of the rotation angle on the separation between the surfaces is in agreement with calculations of the Casimir force. Our results show that quantum electrodynamical effects play a significant role in such microelectromechanical systems when the separation between components is in the nanometer range.
The literature describing the energy needs for a communications channel has been dominated by analyses of linear electromagnetic transmission, often without awareness that this is a special case. This case leads to the conclusion that an amount of energy equal to kTln 2, where kT is the thermal noise per unit bandwidth, is needed to transmit a bit, and more if quantized channels are used with photon energies hnu > kT. Alternative communication methods are proposed to show that there is no unavoidable minimal energy requirement per transmitted bit. These methods are invoked as part of an analysis of ultimate limits and not as practical procedures.
Researchers interested in high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy have long sought higher magnetic fields to enhance resolution and simplify spectra. Magnets with substantially larger fields than those available in the best commercial spectrometers are available, but the inhomogeneity is unacceptable for high-resolution spectra. A detection method (termed HOMOGENIZED) is presented that removes inhomogeneity while retaining chemical shift differences and J couplings. With existing inhomogeneous magnets, this method could nearly double the largest resonance frequency available for high-resolution NMR. The HOMOGENIZED sequence is based on observations of intermolecular zero-quantum coherences between a solute molecule and solvent molecules that are micrometers away; as long as the field is homogeneous over this short distance, sharp resonances are recovered without echoes. Experimental demonstrations and a detailed density matrix theory to explain the effect are presented.
Electron paramagnetic resonance imaging was demonstrated on two plant species, Apium graveolens and Coleus blumei. This was accomplished by soaking stems of these plants in the paramagnetic nitroxide imaging agent 4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl. The experiments were accomplished at L-band frequency (1.4 to 1.9 gigahertz) with single-turn, flat-loop surface coils. One-dimensional imaging spectra were diagnostic of capillary structure and long-term stability.
Electromagnetic fields, with the noise on one quadrature component reduced to below the quantum mechanical zero-point fluctuation level and the noise on the other quadrature component enhanced to above it, are currently of great interest in quantum optics because of their potential applications to various precision measurements. Such squeezed states of light are usually produced by imposing nonlinear unitary evolution on coherent (or vacuum) states. On the other hand, squeezed states with reduced photon number noise and enhanced phase noise are generated directly by a constant current-driven semiconductor laser. This is the simplest scheme for the generation of nonclassical light, and so far it has yielded the largest quantum noise reduction. The mutual coupling between a lasing junction and an external electrical circuit provides opportunities for exploring the macroscopic and microscopic quantum effects in open systems.
In the high-latitude regions of Earth, aurorae are the often-spectacular visual manifestation of the interaction between electrically charged particles (electrons, protons or ions) with the neutral upper atmosphere, as they precipitate along magnetic field lines. More generally, auroral emissions in planetary atmospheres "are those that result from the impact of particles other than photoelectrons" (ref. 1). Auroral activity has been found on all four giant planets possessing a magnetic field (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune), as well as on Venus, which has no magnetic field. On the nightside of Venus, atomic O emissions at 130.4 nm and 135.6 nm appear in bright patches of varying sizes and intensities, which are believed to be produced by electrons with energy <300 eV (ref. 7). Here we report the discovery of an aurora in the martian atmosphere, using the ultraviolet spectrometer SPICAM on board Mars Express. It corresponds to a distinct type of aurora not seen before in the Solar System: it is unlike aurorae at Earth and the giant planets, which lie at the foot of the intrinsic magnetic field lines near the magnetic poles, and unlike venusian auroras, which are diffuse, sometimes spreading over the entire disk. Instead, the martian aurora is a highly concentrated and localized emission controlled by magnetic field anomalies in the martian crust.
We directly imaged electrical spin injection and accumulation in the gallium arsenide channel of lateral spin-transport devices, which have ferromagnetic source and drain tunnel-barrier contacts. The emission of spins from the source was observed, and a region of spin accumulation was imaged near the ferromagnetic drain contact. Both injected and accumulated spins have the same orientation (antiparallel to the contact magnetization), and we show that the accumulated spin polarization flows away from the drain (against the net electron current), indicating that electron spins are polarized by reflection from the ferromagnetic drain contact. The electrical conductance can be modulated by controlling the spin orientation of optically injected electrons flowing through the drain.
The Dirac equation successfully merges quantum mechanics with special relativity. It provides a natural description of the electron spin, predicts the existence of antimatter and is able to reproduce accurately the spectrum of the hydrogen atom. The realm of the Dirac equation-relativistic quantum mechanics-is considered to be the natural transition to quantum field theory. However, the Dirac equation also predicts some peculiar effects, such as Klein's paradox and 'Zitterbewegung', an unexpected quivering motion of a free relativistic quantum particle. These and other predicted phenomena are key fundamental examples for understanding relativistic quantum effects, but are difficult to observe in real particles. In recent years, there has been increased interest in simulations of relativistic quantum effects using different physical set-ups, in which parameter tunability allows access to different physical regimes. Here we perform a proof-of-principle quantum simulation of the one-dimensional Dirac equation using a single trapped ion set to behave as a free relativistic quantum particle. We measure the particle position as a function of time and study Zitterbewegung for different initial superpositions of positive- and negative-energy spinor states, as well as the crossover from relativistic to non-relativistic dynamics. The high level of control of trapped-ion experimental parameters makes it possible to simulate textbook examples of relativistic quantum physics.
When confined to two dimensions and exposed to a strong magnetic field, electrons screen the Coulomb interaction in a topological fashion; they capture an even number of quantum vortices and transform into particles called 'composite fermions' (refs 1-3). The fractional quantum Hall effect occurs in such a system when the ratio (or 'filling factor, nu) of the number of electrons and the degeneracy of their spin-split energy states (the Landau levels) takes on particular values. The Landau level filling nu = 1/2 corresponds to a metallic state in which the composite fermions form a gapless Fermi sea. But for nu = 5/2, a fractional quantum Hall effect is observed instead; this unexpected result is the subject of considerable debate and controversy. Here we investigate the difference between these states by considering the theoretical problem of two composite fermions on top of a fully polarized Fermi sea of composite fermions. We find that they undergo Cooper pairing to form a p-wave bound state at nu = 5/2, but not at nu = 1/2. In effect, the repulsive Coulomb interaction between electrons is overscreened in the nu = 5/2 state by the formation of composite fermions, resulting in a weak, attractive interaction.
A wide variety of positioning and ranging procedures are based on repeatedly sending electromagnetic pulses through space and measuring their time of arrival. The accuracy of such procedures is classically limited by the available power and bandwidth. Quantum entanglement and squeezing have been exploited in the context of interferometry, frequency measurements, lithography and algorithms. Here we report that quantum entanglement and squeezing can also be employed to overcome the classical limits in procedures such as positioning systems, clock synchronization and ranging. Our use of frequency-entangled pulses to construct quantum versions of these protocols results in enhanced accuracy compared with their classical analogues. We describe in detail the problem of establishing a position with respect to a fixed array of reference points.
Nanocrystal quantum dots have favourable light-emitting properties. They show photoluminescence with high quantum yields, and their emission colours depend on the nanocrystal size--owing to the quantum-confinement effect--and are therefore tunable. However, nanocrystals are difficult to use in optical amplification and lasing. Because of an almost exact balance between absorption and stimulated emission in nanoparticles excited with single electron-hole pairs (excitons), optical gain can only occur in nanocrystals that contain at least two excitons. A complication associated with this multiexcitonic nature of light amplification is fast optical-gain decay induced by non-radiative Auger recombination, a process in which one exciton recombines by transferring its energy to another. Here we demonstrate a practical approach for obtaining optical gain in the single-exciton regime that eliminates the problem of Auger decay. Specifically, we develop core/shell hetero-nanocrystals engineered in such a way as to spatially separate electrons and holes between the core and the shell (type-II heterostructures). The resulting imbalance between negative and positive charges produces a strong local electric field, which induces a giant ( approximately 100 meV or greater) transient Stark shift of the absorption spectrum with respect to the luminescence line of singly excited nanocrystals. This effect breaks the exact balance between absorption and stimulated emission, and allows us to demonstrate optical amplification due to single excitons.
The electronic structure of heavy-fermion compounds arises from the interaction of nearly localized 4f- or 5f-shell electrons (with atomic magnetic moments) with the free-electron-like itinerant conduction-band electrons. In actinide or rare-earth heavy-fermion materials, this interaction yields itinerant electrons having an effective mass about 100 times (or more) the bare electron mass. Moreover, the itinerant electrons in UPd2Al3 are found to be superconducting well below the magnetic ordering temperature of this compound, whereas magnetism generally suppresses superconductivity in conventional metals. Here we report the detection of a dispersive excitation of the ordered f-electron moments, which shows a strong interaction with the heavy superconducting electrons. This 'magnetic exciton' is a localized excitation which moves through the lattice as a result of exchange forces between the magnetic moments. By combining this observation with previous tunnelling measurements on this material, we argue that these magnetic excitons may produce effective interactions between the itinerant electrons, and so be responsible for superconductivity in a manner analogous to the role played by phonons in conventional superconductors.
The thermal conductance of a single channel is limited by its unique quantum value G(Q), as was shown theoretically in 1983. This result closely resembles the well-known quantization of electrical conductance in ballistic one-dimensional conductors. Interestingly, all particles-irrespective of whether they are bosons or fermions-have the same quantized thermal conductance when they are confined within dimensions that are small compared to their characteristic wavelength. The single-mode heat conductance is particularly relevant in nanostructures. Quantized heat transport through submicrometre dielectric wires by phonons has been observed, and it has been predicted to influence cooling of electrons in metals at very low temperatures due to electromagnetic radiation. Here we report experimental results showing that at low temperatures heat is transferred by photon radiation, when electron-phonon as well as normal electronic heat conduction is frozen out. We study heat exchange between two small pieces of normal metal, connected to each other only via superconducting leads, which are ideal insulators against conventional thermal conduction. Each superconducting lead is interrupted by a switch of electromagnetic (photon) radiation in the form of a DC-SQUID (a superconducting loop with two Josephson tunnel junctions). We find that the thermal conductance between the two metal islands mediated by photons indeed approaches the expected quantum limit of G(Q) at low temperatures. Our observation has practical implications-for example, for the performance and design of ultra-sensitive bolometers (detectors of far-infrared light) and electronic micro-refrigerators, whose operation is largely dependent on weak thermal coupling between the device and its environment.
With only a few exceptions that are well understood, conventional superconductivity does not coexist with long-range magnetic order (for example, ref. 1). Unconventional superconductivity, on the other hand, develops near a phase boundary separating magnetically ordered and magnetically disordered phases. A maximum in the superconducting transition temperature T(c) develops where this boundary extrapolates to zero Kelvin, suggesting that fluctuations associated with this magnetic quantum-critical point are essential for unconventional superconductivity. Invariably, though, unconventional superconductivity masks the magnetic phase boundary when T < T(c), preventing proof of a magnetic quantum-critical point. Here we report specific-heat measurements of the pressure-tuned unconventional superconductor CeRhIn5 in which we find a line of quantum-phase transitions induced inside the superconducting state by an applied magnetic field. This quantum-critical line separates a phase of coexisting antiferromagnetism and superconductivity from a purely unconventional superconducting phase, and terminates at a quantum tetracritical point where the magnetic field completely suppresses superconductivity. The T --> 0 K magnetic field-pressure phase diagram of CeRhIn5 is well described with a theoretical model developed to explain field-induced magnetism in the high-T(c) copper oxides, but in which a clear delineation of quantum-phase boundaries has not been possible. These experiments establish a common relationship among hidden magnetism, quantum criticality and unconventional superconductivity in copper oxides and heavy-electron systems such as CeRhIn5.
Control over physical systems at the quantum level is important in fields as diverse as metrology, information processing, simulation and chemistry. For trapped atomic ions, the quantized motional and internal degrees of freedom can be coherently manipulated with laser light. Similar control is difficult to achieve with radio-frequency or microwave radiation: the essential coupling between internal degrees of freedom and motion requires significant field changes over the extent of the atoms' motion, but such changes are negligible at these frequencies for freely propagating fields. An exception is in the near field of microwave currents in structures smaller than the free-space wavelength, where stronger gradients can be generated. Here we first manipulate coherently (on timescales of 20 nanoseconds) the internal quantum states of ions held in a microfabricated trap. The controlling magnetic fields are generated by microwave currents in electrodes that are integrated into the trap structure. We also generate entanglement between the internal degrees of freedom of two atoms with a gate operation suitable for general quantum computation; the entangled state has a fidelity of 0.76(3), where the uncertainty denotes standard error of the mean. Our approach, which involves integrating the quantum control mechanism into the trapping device in a scalable manner, could be applied to quantum information processing, simulation and spectroscopy.
Heat flow between a large thermal 'bath' and a smaller system brings them progressively closer to thermal equilibrium while increasing their entropy. Fluctuations involving a small fraction of a statistical ensemble of systems interacting with the bath result in deviations from this trend. In this respect, quantum and classical thermodynamics are in agreement. Here we predict a different trend in a purely quantum mechanical setting: disturbances of thermal equilibrium between two-level systems (TLSs) and a bath, caused by frequent, brief quantum non-demolition measurements of the TLS energy states. By making the measurements increasingly frequent, we encounter first the anti-Zeno regime and then the Zeno regime (namely where the TLSs' relaxation respectively speeds up and slows down). The corresponding entropy and temperature of both the system and the bath are then found to either decrease or increase depending only on the rate of observation, contrary to the standard thermodynamical rules that hold for memory-less (Markov) baths. From a practical viewpoint, these anomalies may offer the possibility of very fast control of heat and entropy in quantum systems, allowing cooling and state purification over an interval much shorter than the time needed for thermal equilibration or for a feedback control loop.
Perhaps the most anticipated, yet experimentally elusive, macroscopic quantum phenomenon is spin tunnelling in a ferromagnet, which may be formulated in terms of domain wall tunnelling. One approach to identifying such a process is to focus on mesoscopic systems where the number of domain walls is finite and the motion of a single wall has measurable consequences. Research of this type includes magnetotransport measurements on thin ferromagnetic wires, and magnetization experiments on single particles, nanomagnet ensembles and rare-earth multilayers. A second method is to investigate macroscopic disordered ferromagnets, whose dynamics are dominated by domain wall motion, and search the associated relaxation-time distribution functions for the signature of quantum effects. But whereas the classical, thermal processes that operate in these experiments are easily regulated via temperature, the quantum processes have so far not been tunable, making difficult a definitive interpretation of the results in terms of tunnelling. Here we describe a disordered magnetic system for which it is possible to adjust the quantum tunnelling probabilities. For this material, we can model both the classical, thermally activated response at high temperatures and the athermal, tunnelling behaviour at low temperatures within a unified framework, where the domain wall is described as a particle with a fixed mass. We show that it is possible to tune the quantum tunnelling processes by adjusting the 'mass' of this particle with an external magnetic field.
To characterize the mechanism by which receptors propagate conformational changes across membranes, nitroxide spin labels were attached at strategic positions in the bacterial aspartate receptor. By collecting the electron paramagnetic resonance spectra of these labeled receptors in the presence and absence of the ligand aspartate, ligand binding was shown to generate an approximately 1 angstrom intrasubunit piston-type movement of one transmembrane helix downward relative to the other transmembrane helix. The receptor-associated phosphorylation cascade proteins CheA and CheW did not alter the ligand-induced movement. Because the piston movement is very small, the ability of receptors to produce large outcomes in response to stimuli is caused by the ability of the receptor-coupled enzymes to detect small changes in the conformation of the receptor.
The fast reaction of the actin-based cytoskeleton in motile cells after stimulation with a chemoattractant requires a signal-transduction chain that creates a very specific environment at distinct regions beneath the plasma membrane. Dictyostelium hisactophilin, a unique actin-binding protein, is a submembranous pH sensor that signals slight changes of the H+ concentration to actin by inducing actin polymerization and binding to microfilaments only at pH values below seven. It has a relative molecular mass of 13.5K and its most unusual feature is the presence of 31 histidine residues among its total of 118 amino acids. The transduction of an external signal from the plasma membrane to the cytoskeleton is poorly understood. Here we report the protein's structure in solution determined by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The nuclear Overhauser effect intensities of the three-dimensional nuclear Overhauser spectra were used directly in the calculations. The overall folding of histactophilin is similar to that of interleukin-1 beta and fibroblast growth factor, but the primary amino-acid sequence of hisactophilin is unrelated to these two proteins.
Superconducting circuits are macroscopic in size but have generic quantum properties such as quantized energy levels, superposition of states, and entanglement, all of which are more commonly associated with atoms. Superconducting quantum bits (qubits) form the key component of these circuits. Their quantum state is manipulated by using electromagnetic pulses to control the magnetic flux, the electric charge or the phase difference across a Josephson junction (a device with nonlinear inductance and no energy dissipation). As such, superconducting qubits are not only of considerable fundamental interest but also might ultimately form the primitive building blocks of quantum computers.
Laser cooling and electromagnetic traps have led to a revolution in atomic physics, yielding dramatic discoveries ranging from Bose-Einstein condensation to the quantum control of single atoms. Of particular interest, because they can be used in the quantum control of one atom by another, are excited Rydberg states, where wavefunctions are expanded from their ground-state extents of less than 0.1 nm to several nanometres and even beyond; this allows atoms far enough apart to be non-interacting in their ground states to strongly interact in their excited states. For eventual application of such states, a solid-state implementation is very desirable. Here we demonstrate the coherent control of impurity wavefunctions in the most ubiquitous donor in a semiconductor, namely phosphorus-doped silicon. In our experiments, we use a free-electron laser to stimulate and observe photon echoes, the orbital analogue of the Hahn spin echo, and Rabi oscillations familiar from magnetic resonance spectroscopy. As well as extending atomic physicists' explorations of quantum phenomena to the solid state, our work adds coherent terahertz radiation, as a particularly precise regulator of orbitals in solids, to the list of controls, such as pressure and chemical composition, already familiar to materials scientists.
The manufacture of high-performance, conjugated polymer transistor circuits on flexible plastic substrates requires patterning techniques that are capable of defining critical features with submicrometer resolution. We used solid-state embossing to produce polymer field-effect transistors with submicrometer critical features in planar and vertical configurations. Embossing is used for the controlled microcutting of vertical sidewalls into polymer multilayer structures without smearing. Vertical-channel polymer field-effect transistors on flexible poly(ethylene terephthalate) substrates were fabricated, in which the critical channel length of 0.7 to 0.9 micrometers was defined by the thickness of a spin-coated insulator layer. Gate electrodes were self-aligned to minimize overlap capacitance by inkjet printing that used the embossed grooves to define a surface-energy pattern.
The strength of the interlayer Josephson tunneling in layered superconductors is an essential test of the interlayer tunneling model as a mechanism for superconductivity, as well as a useful phenomenological parameter. A scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) microscope was used to image interlayer Josephson vortices in Tl2Ba2CuO6+delta and to obtain a direct measure of the interlayer tunneling in a high-transition temperature superconductor with a single copper oxide plane per unit cell. The measured interlayer penetration depth, lambdac, is approximately 20 micrometers, about 20 times the penetration depth required by the interlayer tunneling model.
Fireflies communicate with each other by emitting yellow-green to yellow-orange brilliant light. The bioluminescence reaction, which uses luciferin, Mg-ATP and molecular oxygen to yield an electronically excited oxyluciferin species, is carried out by the enzyme luciferase. Visible light is emitted during relaxation of excited oxyluciferin to its ground state. The high quantum yield of the luciferin/luciferase reaction and the change in bioluminescence colour caused by subtle structural differences in luciferase have attracted much research interest. In fact, a single amino acid substitution in luciferase changes the emission colour from yellow-green to red. Although the crystal structure of luciferase from the North American firefly (Photinus pyralis) has been described, the detailed mechanism for the bioluminescence colour change is still unclear. Here we report the crystal structures of wild-type and red mutant (S286N) luciferases from the Japanese Genji-botaru (Luciola cruciata) in complex with a high-energy intermediate analogue, 5'-O-[N-(dehydroluciferyl)-sulfamoyl]adenosine (DLSA). Comparing these structures to those of the wild-type luciferase complexed with AMP plus oxyluciferin (products) reveals a significant conformational change in the wild-type enzyme but not in the red mutant. This conformational change involves movement of the hydrophobic side chain of Ile 288 towards the benzothiazole ring of DLSA. Our results indicate that the degree of molecular rigidity of the excited state of oxyluciferin, which is controlled by a transient movement of Ile 288, determines the colour of bioluminescence during the emission reaction.
Sodium cobaltate (Na(x)CoO2) has emerged as a material of exceptional scientific interest due to the potential for thermoelectric applications, and because the strong interplay between the magnetic and superconducting properties has led to close comparisons with the physics of the superconducting copper oxides. The density x of the sodium in the intercalation layers can be altered electrochemically, directly changing the number of conduction electrons on the triangular Co layers. Recent electron diffraction measurements reveal a kaleidoscope of Na+ ion patterns as a function of concentration. Here we use single-crystal neutron diffraction supported by numerical simulations to determine the long-range three-dimensional superstructures of these ions. We show that the sodium ordering and its associated distortion field are governed by pure electrostatics, and that the organizational principle is the stabilization of charge droplets that order long range at some simple fractional fillings. Our results provide a good starting point to understand the electronic properties in terms of a Hubbard hamiltonian that takes into account the electrostatic potential from the Na superstructures. The resulting depth of potential wells in the Co layer is greater than the single-particle hopping kinetic energy and as a consequence, holes preferentially occupy the lowest potential regions. Thus we conclude that the Na+ ion patterning has a decisive role in the transport and magnetic properties.
The Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) has obtained all-sky images of energetic neutral atoms emitted from the heliosheath, located between the solar wind termination shock and the local interstellar medium (LISM). These flux maps reveal distinct nonthermal (0.2 to 6 kilo-electron volts) heliosheath proton populations with spectral signatures ordered predominantly by ecliptic latitude. The maps show a globally distributed population of termination-shock-heated protons and a superimposed ribbonlike feature that forms a circular arc in the sky centered on ecliptic coordinate (longitude lambda, latitude beta) = (221 degrees, 39 degrees), probably near the direction of the LISM magnetic field. Over the IBEX energy range, the ribbon's nonthermal ion pressure multiplied by its radial thickness is in the range of 70 to 100 picodynes per square centimeter AU (AU, astronomical unit), which is significantly larger than the 30 to 60 picodynes per square centimeter AU of the globally distributed population.
Recent table-top optical interferometry experiments and advances in gravitational-wave detectors have demonstrated the capability of optical interferometry to detect displacements with high sensitivity. Operation at higher powers will be crucial for further sensitivity enhancement, but dynamical effects caused by radiation pressure on the interferometer mirrors must be taken into account, and the appearance of optomechanical instabilities may jeopardize the stable operation of the next generation of interferometers. These instabilities are the result of a nonlinear coupling between the motion of the mirrors and the optical field, which modifies the effective dynamics of the mirror. Such 'optical spring' effects have already been demonstrated for the mechanical damping of an electromagnetic waveguide with a moving wall, the resonance frequency of a specially designed flexure oscillator, and the optomechanical instability of a silica microtoroidal resonator. Here we present an experiment where a micromechanical resonator is used as a mirror in a very high-finesse optical cavity, and its displacements are monitored with unprecedented sensitivity. By detuning the laser frequency with respect to the cavity resonance, we have observed a drastic cooling of the microresonator by intracavity radiation pressure, down to an effective temperature of 10 kelvin. For opposite detuning, efficient heating is observed, as well as a radiation-pressure-induced instability of the resonator. Further experimental progress and cryogenic operation may lead to the experimental observation of the quantum ground state of a micromechanical resonator, either by passive or active cooling techniques.
Computational studies of basic chemical processes not only provide numbers for comparison with experiment or for use in modeling complex chemical phenomena such as combustion, but also provide insight into the fundamental factors that govern molecular structure and change which cannot be obtained from experiment alone. We summarize the results of three case studies, on HCO, OH + H(2), and O + C(2)H(2), which illustrate the range of problems that can be addressed by using modern theoretical techniques. In all cases, the potential energy surfaces were characterized by using ab initio electronic structure methods. Collisions between molecules leading to reaction or energy transer were described with quantum dynamical methods (HCO), classical trajectory techniques (HCO and OH + H(2)), and statistical methods (HCO, OH + H(2), and O + C(2)H(2)). We can anticipate dramatic increases in the scope of this work as new generations of computers are introduced and as new chemistry software is developed to exploit these computers.
Investigation of the magnetic and transport properties of single-walled small-diameter carbon nanotubes embedded in a zeolite matrix revealed that at temperatures below 20 kelvin, 4 angstrom tubes exhibit superconducting behavior manifest as an anisotropic Meissner effect, with a superconducting gap and fluctuation supercurrent. The measured superconducting characteristics display smooth temperature variations owing to one-dimensional fluctuations, with a mean-field superconducting transition temperature of 15 kelvin. Statistical mechanic calculations based on the Ginzburg-Landau free-energy functional yield predictions that are in excellent agreement with the experiments.
The dynamics and spectroscopy of silicon nanocrystals that emit at visible wavelengths were analyzed. Size-selective precipitation and size-exclusion chromatography cleanly separate the silicon nanocrystals from larger crystallites and aggregates and provide direct evidence for quantum confinement in luminescence. Measured quantum yields are as high as 50 percent at low temperature, principally as a result of efficient oxide passivation. Despite a 0.9-electron-volt shift of the band gap to higher energy, the nanocrystals behave fundamentally as indirect gap materials with low oscillator strength.
Bose-Einstein condensation is one of the most fascinating phenomena predicted by quantum mechanics. It involves the formation of a collective quantum state composed of identical particles with integer angular momentum (bosons), if the particle density exceeds a critical value. To achieve Bose-Einstein condensation, one can either decrease the temperature or increase the density of bosons. It has been predicted that a quasi-equilibrium system of bosons could undergo Bose-Einstein condensation even at relatively high temperatures, if the flow rate of energy pumped into the system exceeds a critical value. Here we report the observation of Bose-Einstein condensation in a gas of magnons at room temperature. Magnons are the quanta of magnetic excitations in a magnetically ordered ensemble of magnetic moments. In thermal equilibrium, they can be described by Bose-Einstein statistics with zero chemical potential and a temperature-dependent density. In the experiments presented here, we show that by using a technique of microwave pumping it is possible to excite additional magnons and to create a gas of quasi-equilibrium magnons with a non-zero chemical potential. With increasing pumping intensity, the chemical potential reaches the energy of the lowest magnon state, and a Bose condensate of magnons is formed.
Theoretical and experimental support is presented for the hypothesis that many organic compounds may form under conditions of thermodynamic equilibrium. This possibility must be considered along with special effects of selective catalysts, radiation, and degradation from biological matter, in explaining the origin of organic compounds in carbonaceous chondrites. Similar considerations may apply to solar nebulas and planetary atmospheres. The equilibrium distribution of organic compounds at temperatures between 300 degrees K and 1000 degrees K and pressures of 10-(6) to 50 atm for the C-H-O system have been computed. At moderate temperatures and low pressures, conditions where graphite production is inhibited, aromatic compounds may form even in the presence of large excesses of hydrogen. Such conditions exist in the solar nebula and in the atmospheres of some of the major planets. Equilibrium concentrations of a large number of compounds at 1000 degrees K with nitrogen, sulfur, and chlorine added to the system have also been determined. In some cases, a limited equilibrium method is employed in which those few compounds which form with the most difficulty are excluded from the computations, while representatives of all other families of compounds are included. This approach is shown to be useful in the interpretation of certain experimental data in which complete equilibrium has not been attained. We have also found that gases, activated to the plasma state by a high-energy radio frequency field, recombine on cooling to yield product mixtures which are in qualitative agreement with those predicted by the equilibrium computations. We believe that such products can be profitably studied as if at a metastable limited equilibrium.
Energy is required to heat the outer solar atmosphere to millions of degrees (refs 1, 2) and to accelerate the solar wind to hundreds of kilometres per second (refs 2-6). Alfven waves (travelling oscillations of ions and magnetic field) have been invoked as a possible mechanism to transport magneto-convective energy upwards along the Sun's magnetic field lines into the corona. Previous observations of Alfvenic waves in the corona revealed amplitudes far too small (0.5 km s(-1)) to supply the energy flux (100-200 W m(-2)) required to drive the fast solar wind or balance the radiative losses of the quiet corona. Here we report observations of the transition region (between the chromosphere and the corona) and of the corona that reveal how Alfvenic motions permeate the dynamic and finely structured outer solar atmosphere. The ubiquitous outward-propagating Alfvenic motions observed have amplitudes of the order of 20 km s(-1) and periods of the order of 100-500 s throughout the quiescent atmosphere (compatible with recent investigations), and are energetic enough to accelerate the fast solar wind and heat the quiet corona.
The ability to cool and slow atoms with light for subsequent trapping allows investigations of the properties and interactions of the trapped atoms in unprecedented detail. By contrast, the complex structure of molecules prohibits this type of manipulation, but magnetic trapping of calcium hydride molecules thermalized in ultra-cold buffer gas and optical trapping of caesium dimers generated from ultra-cold caesium atoms have been reported. However, these methods depend on the target molecules being paramagnetic or able to form through the association of atoms amenable to laser cooling, respectively, thus restricting the range of species that can be studied. Here we describe the slowing of an adiabatically cooled beam of deuterated ammonia molecules by time-varying inhomogeneous electric fields and subsequent loading into an electrostatic trap. We are able to trap state-selected ammonia molecules with a density of 10(6) cm(-3) in a volume of 0.25 cm3 at temperatures below 0.35 K. We observe pronounced density oscillations caused by the rapid switching of the electric fields during loading of the trap. Our findings illustrate that polar molecules can be efficiently cooled and trapped, thus providing an opportunity to study collisions and collective quantum effects in a wide range of ultra-cold molecular systems.
Entanglement is the quintessential quantum phenomenon. It is a necessary ingredient in most emerging quantum technologies, including quantum repeaters, quantum information processing and the strongest forms of quantum cryptography. Spin ensembles, such as those used in liquid-state nuclear magnetic resonance, have been important for the development of quantum control methods. However, these demonstrations contain no entanglement and ultimately constitute classical simulations of quantum algorithms. Here we report the on-demand generation of entanglement between an ensemble of electron and nuclear spins in isotopically engineered, phosphorus-doped silicon. We combined high-field (3.4 T), low-temperature (2.9 K) electron spin resonance with hyperpolarization of the (31)P nuclear spin to obtain an initial state of sufficient purity to create a non-classical, inseparable state. The state was verified using density matrix tomography based on geometric phase gates, and had a fidelity of 98% relative to the ideal state at this field and temperature. The entanglement operation was performed simultaneously, with high fidelity, on 10(10) spin pairs; this fulfils one of the essential requirements for a silicon-based quantum information processor.
The ability to use environmental stimuli to predict impending harm is critical for survival. Such predictions should be available as early as they are reliable. In pavlovian conditioning, chains of successively earlier predictors are studied in terms of higher-order relationships, and have inspired computational theories such as temporal difference learning. However, there is at present no adequate neurobiological account of how this learning occurs. Here, in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of higher-order aversive conditioning, we describe a key computational strategy that humans use to learn predictions about pain. We show that neural activity in the ventral striatum and the anterior insula displays a marked correspondence to the signals for sequential learning predicted by temporal difference models. This result reveals a flexible aversive learning process ideally suited to the changing and uncertain nature of real-world environments. Taken with existing data on reward learning, our results suggest a critical role for the ventral striatum in integrating complex appetitive and aversive predictions to coordinate behaviour.
Auroras are caused by accelerated charged particles precipitating along magnetic field lines into a planetary atmosphere, the auroral brightness being roughly proportional to the precipitating particle energy flux. The Analyzer of Space Plasma and Energetic Atoms experiment on the Mars Express spacecraft has made a detailed study of acceleration processes on the nightside of Mars. We observed accelerated electrons and ions in the deep nightside high-altitude region of Mars that map geographically to interface/cleft regions associated with martian crustal magnetization regions. By integrating electron and ion acceleration energy down to the upper atmosphere, we saw energy fluxes in the range of 1 to 50 milliwatts per square meter per second. These conditions are similar to those producing bright discrete auroras above Earth. Discrete auroras at Mars are therefore expected to be associated with plasma acceleration in diverging magnetic flux tubes above crustal magnetization regions, the auroras being distributed geographically in a complex pattern by the many multipole magnetic field lines extending into space.
Quantum simulators are controllable quantum systems that can be used to simulate other quantum systems. Being able to tackle problems that are intractable on classical computers, quantum simulators would provide a means of exploring new physical phenomena. We present an overview of how quantum simulators may become a reality in the near future as the required technologies are now within reach. Quantum simulators, relying on the coherent control of neutral atoms, ions, photons, or electrons, would allow studying problems in various fields including condensed-matter physics, high-energy physics, cosmology, atomic physics, and quantum chemistry.
Control of spontaneously emitted light lies at the heart of quantum optics. It is essential for diverse applications ranging from miniature lasers and light-emitting diodes, to single-photon sources for quantum information, and to solar energy harvesting. To explore such new quantum optics applications, a suitably tailored dielectric environment is required in which the vacuum fluctuations that control spontaneous emission can be manipulated. Photonic crystals provide such an environment: they strongly modify the vacuum fluctuations, causing the decay of emitted light to be accelerated or slowed down, to reveal unusual statistics, or to be completely inhibited in the ideal case of a photonic bandgap. Here we study spontaneous emission from semiconductor quantum dots embedded in inverse opal photonic crystals. We show that the spectral distribution and time-dependent decay of light emitted from excitons confined in the quantum dots are controlled by the host photonic crystal. Modified emission is observed over large frequency bandwidths of 10%, orders of magnitude larger than reported for resonant optical microcavities. Both inhibited and enhanced decay rates are observed depending on the optical emission frequency, and they are controlled by the crystals' lattice parameter. Our experimental results provide a basis for all-solid-state dynamic control of optical quantum systems.
Magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy systems use coils, either singly or as arrays, to intercept radio-frequency (RF) magnetic flux from regions of interest, often deep within the body. Here, we show that a new magnetic material offers novel possibilities for guiding RF flux to the receiver coil, permitting a clear image to be obtained where none might otherwise be detectable. The new material contains microstructure designed according to concepts taken from the field of photonic band gap materials. In the RF range, it has a magnetic permeability that can be produced to specification while exhibiting negligible direct-current magnetism. The latter property is vital to avoid perturbing the static and audio-frequency magnetic fields needed to obtain image and spectral data. The concept offers a new paradigm for the manipulation of RF flux in all nuclear magnetic resonance systems.
The randomness of dopant atom distributions in cuprate high-critical temperature superconductors has long been suspected to cause nanoscale electronic disorder. In the superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta, we identified populations of atomic-scale impurity states whose spatial densities follow closely those of the oxygen dopant atoms. We found that the impurity-state locations are strongly correlated with all manifestations of the nanoscale electronic disorder. This disorder occurs via an unanticipated mechanism exhibiting high-energy spectral weight shifts, with associated strong superconducting coherence peak suppression but very weak scattering of low-energy quasi-particles.
Among vertebrates, only microchiropteran bats, cetaceans and some rodents are known to produce and detect ultrasounds (frequencies greater than 20 kHz) for the purpose of communication and/or echolocation, suggesting that this capacity might be restricted to mammals. Amphibians, reptiles and most birds generally have limited hearing capacity, with the ability to detect and produce sounds below approximately 12 kHz. Here we report evidence of ultrasonic communication in an amphibian, the concave-eared torrent frog (Amolops tormotus) from Huangshan Hot Springs, China. Males of A. tormotus produce diverse bird-like melodic calls with pronounced frequency modulations that often contain spectral energy in the ultrasonic range. To determine whether A. tormotus communicates using ultrasound to avoid masking by the wideband background noise of local fast-flowing streams, or whether the ultrasound is simply a by-product of the sound-production mechanism, we conducted acoustic playback experiments in the frogs' natural habitat. We found that the audible as well as the ultrasonic components of an A. tormotus call can evoke male vocal responses. Electrophysiological recordings from the auditory midbrain confirmed the ultrasonic hearing capacity of these frogs and that of a sympatric species facing similar environmental constraints. This extraordinary upward extension into the ultrasonic range of both the harmonic content of the advertisement calls and the frog's hearing sensitivity is likely to have co-evolved in response to the intense, predominantly low-frequency ambient noise from local streams. Because amphibians are a distinct evolutionary lineage from microchiropterans and cetaceans (which have evolved ultrasonic hearing to minimize congestion in the frequency bands used for sound communication and to increase hunting efficacy in darkness), ultrasonic perception in these animals represents a new example of independent evolution.
Products of unfavorable chemical equilibria are not readily observed because their high energy and increased reactivity result in low concentrations. Biological macromolecules use binding forces to access unfavorable equilibria and stabilize reactive intermediates by isolating them from the medium. In a similar vein, we describe here a synthetic receptor that allows direct observation of labile tetrahedral intermediates: hemiaminals formed in the reaction of an aldehyde carbonyl group with amines. The receptor encapsulates alkyl-substituted primary amines, then orients them toward a covalently tethered aldehyde function. The hemiaminal intermediates appear at high concentration, confined from the bulk solution and observable at ambient temperature by conventional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
A new magnetic material with appreciable optical transmission in the visible region at room temperature has been isolated as a gamma-Fe(2)O(3)/polymer nanocomposite. The synthesis is carried out in an ion-exchange resin at 60 degrees C. Magnetization and susceptibility data demonstrate loading-dependent saturation moments as high as 46 electromagnetic units per gram and superparamagnetism for lower loadings where particle sizes are less than 100 angstroms. Optical absorption studies show that the small-particle form of gamma-Fe(2)O(3) is considerably more transparent to visible light than the single-crystal form. The difference in absorption ranges from nearly an order of magnitude in the "red" spectral region to a factor of 3 at 5400 angstroms. The magnetization of the nanocomposite is greater by more than an order of magnitude than those of the strongest room-temperature transparent magnets, FeBO(3) and FeF(3).
An angle-resolved photoemission study is reported on Ca2CuO2Cl2, a parent compound of high-Tc superconductors. Analysis of the electron occupation probability, n(k), from the spectra shows a steep drop in spectral intensity across a contour that is close to the Fermi surface predicted by the band calculation. This analysis reveals a Fermi surface remnant, even though Ca2CuO2Cl2 is a Mott insulator. The lowest energy peak exhibits a dispersion with approximately the &cjs3539;coskxa - coskya&cjs3539; form along this remnant Fermi surface. Together with the data from Dy-doped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta, these results suggest that this d-wave-like dispersion of the insulator is the underlying reason for the pseudo gap in the underdoped regime.
The toxicity of A1 that has been mobilized in soil, streams, and lakes through acid deposition primarily has been attributed to mononuclear A1 species. Polynuclear A1 species are more toxic than mononuclear species, but they have not been considered to be significant in the environment. Aluminum-27 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of forested spodosol soil horizon samples show the presence of polynuclear A1O(4)A1(12)(OH)(24)(H(2)O)(12)(7+). The AlO(4)A1(12)(OH)(24)(H(2)O)(12)(7+) species accounted for 30 percent of the aqueous A1 observable by NMR, and this could make a significant contribution to the toxicity of the A1 in these soils.
One-dimensional quantum fluids are conventionally described by using an effective hydrodynamic approach known as Luttinger liquid theory. As the principal simplification, a generic spectrum of the constituent particles is replaced by a linear one, which leads to a linear hydrodynamic theory. We show that to describe the measurable dynamic response functions one needs to take into account the nonlinearity of the generic spectrum and thus of the resulting quantum hydrodynamic theory. This nonlinearity leads, for example, to a qualitative change in the behavior of the spectral function. The universal theory developed in this article is applicable to a wide class of one-dimensional fermionic, bosonic, and spin systems.
A long-term spectral variability study of 3C 273 on data obtained by BeppoSAX allows us to decouple the beamed nonthermal (jet) and unbeamed thermal (accretion flow) radiation produced in the inner region of a radio-loud active galactic nucleus. Jet power, when compared with unbeamed radiation, increases with energy. The thermal component is generally overwhelmed by the nonthermal radiation, by a factor of 1.2 to 3 in the 2- to 10-keV range and up to a factor of 7 above 20 keV. In only one case, the accretion flow overcomes the jet, allowing the K(alpha) iron line to emerge clearly over the continuum.
Insertion of a thin nonmagnetic copper Cu(001) layer between the tunnel barrier and the ferromagnetic electrode of a magnetic tunnel junction is shown to result in the oscillation of the tunnel magnetoresistance as a function of the Cu layer thickness. The effect is interpreted in terms of the formation of spin-polarized resonant tunneling. The amplitude of the oscillation is so large that even the sign of the tunnel magnetoresistance alternates. The oscillation period depends on the applied bias voltage, reflecting the energy band structure of Cu. The results are encouraging for the development of spin-dependent resonant tunneling devices.
Entanglement is one of the key resources required for quantum computation, so the experimental creation and measurement of entangled states is of crucial importance for various physical implementations of quantum computers. In superconducting devices, two-qubit entangled states have been demonstrated and used to show violations of Bell's inequality and to implement simple quantum algorithms. Unlike the two-qubit case, where all maximally entangled two-qubit states are equivalent up to local changes of basis, three qubits can be entangled in two fundamentally different ways. These are typified by the states |GHZ>= (|000+ |111>)/ sqrt [2] and |W>= (|001> + |010> + |100>)/ sqrt [3]. Here we demonstrate the operation of three coupled superconducting phase qubits and use them to create and measure |GHZ> and |W>states. The states are fully characterized using quantum state tomography and are shown to satisfy entanglement witnesses, confirming that they are indeed examples of three-qubit entanglement and are not separable into mixtures of two-qubit entanglement.
The concept of quantum criticality is proving to be central to attempts to understand the physics of strongly correlated electrons. Here, we argue that observations on the itinerant metamagnet Sr3Ru2O7 represent good evidence for a new class of quantum critical point, arising when the critical end point terminating a line of first-order transitions is depressed toward zero temperature. This is of interest both in its own right and because of the convenience of having a quantum critical point for which the tuning parameter is the magnetic field. The relationship between the resultant critical fluctuations and novel behavior very near the critical field is discussed.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is one of the most versatile experimental methods in chemistry, physics and biology, providing insight into the structure and dynamics of matter at the molecular scale. Its imaging variant-magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-is widely used to examine the anatomy, physiology and metabolism of the human body. NMR signal detection is traditionally based on Faraday induction in one or multiple radio-frequency resonators that are brought into close proximity with the sample. Alternative principles involving structured-material flux guides, superconducting quantum interference devices, atomic magnetometers, Hall probes or magnetoresistive elements have been explored. However, a common feature of all NMR implementations until now is that they rely on close coupling between the detector and the object under investigation. Here we show that NMR can also be excited and detected by long-range interaction, relying on travelling radio-frequency waves sent and received by an antenna. One benefit of this approach is more uniform coverage of samples that are larger than the wavelength of the NMR signal-an important current issue in MRI of humans at very high magnetic fields. By allowing a significant distance between the probe and the sample, travelling-wave interaction also introduces new possibilities in the design of NMR experiments and systems.
Quantum computers require the storage of quantum information in a set of two-level systems (called qubits), the processing of this information using quantum gates and a means of final readout. So far, only a few systems have been identified as potentially viable quantum computer models--accurate quantum control of the coherent evolution is required in order to realize gate operations, while at the same time decoherence must be avoided. Examples include quantum optical systems (such as those utilizing trapped ions or neutral atoms, cavity quantum electrodynamics and nuclear magnetic resonance) and solid state systems (using nuclear spins, quantum dots and Josephson junctions). The most advanced candidates are the quantum optical and nuclear magnetic resonance systems, and we expect that they will allow quantum computing with about ten qubits within the next few years. This is still far from the numbers required for useful applications: for example, the factorization of a 200-digit number requires about 3,500 qubits, rising to 100,000 if error correction is implemented. Scalability of proposed quantum computer architectures to many qubits is thus of central importance. Here we propose a model for an ion trap quantum computer that combines scalability (a feature usually associated with solid state proposals) with the advantages of quantum optical systems (in particular, quantum control and long decoherence times).
The realization of an entangled photon source will be of great importance in quantum information--for example, for quantum key distribution and quantum computation--and Stevenson et al. have described such a source. However, we show here that first, their source is not entangled; second, they use inappropriate entanglement indicators that rely on assumptions invalidated by their data; and third, their source has insignificant entanglement even after simulating subtraction of the significant quantity of background noise. We therefore find that the standard of proof required for a semiconductor source of triggered entangled photon pairs has not been met by Stevenson et al..
Magnetic interactions and magnetic impurities are destructive to superconductivity in conventional superconductors. By contrast, in some unconventional macroscopic quantum systems (such as superfluid 3He and superconducting UGe2), the superconductivity (or superfluidity) is actually mediated by magnetic interactions. A magnetic mechanism has also been proposed for high-temperature superconductivity. Within this context, the fact that magnetic Ni impurity atoms have a weaker effect on superconductivity than non-magnetic Zn atoms in the high-Tc superconductors has been put forward as evidence supporting a magnetic mechanism. Here we use scanning tunnelling microscopy to determine directly the influence of individual Ni atoms on the local electronic structure of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta. At each Ni site we observe two d-wave impurity states of apparently opposite spin polarization, whose existence indicates that Ni retains a magnetic moment in the superconducting state. However, analysis of the impurity-state energies shows that quasiparticle scattering at Ni is predominantly non-magnetic. Furthermore, we show that the superconducting energy gap and correlations are unimpaired at Ni. This is in strong contrast to the effects of non-magnetic Zn impurities, which locally destroy superconductivity. These results are consistent with predictions for impurity atom phenomena derived from a magnetic mechanism.
We measured the phase evolution of electrons as they traverse a quantum dot (QD) formed in a two-dimensional electron gas that serves as a localized spin. The traversal phase, determined by embedding the QD in a double path electron interferometer and measuring the quantum interference of the electron wave functions manifested by conductance oscillation as a function of a weak magnetic field, evolved by pi radians, a range twice as large as theoretically predicted. As the correlation weakened, a gradual transition to the familiar phase evolution of a QD was observed. The specific phase evolution observed is highly sensitive to the onset of Kondo correlation, possibly serving as an alternative fingerprint of the Kondo effect.
We report a class of molecules with extremely low ionization enthalpies, one member of which has been determined to have a gas-phase ionization energy (onset, 3.51 electron volts) lower than that of the cesium atom (which has the lowest gas-phase ionization energy of the elements) or of any other known closed-shell molecule or neutral transient species reported. The molecules are dimetal complexes with the general formula M2(hpp)4 (where M is Cr, Mo, or W, and hpp is the anion of 1,3,4,6,7,8-hexahydro-2H-pyrimido[1,2-a]pyrimidine), structurally characterized in the solid state, spectroscopically characterized in the gas phase, and modeled with theoretical computations. The low-energy ionization of each molecule corresponds to the removal of an electron from the delta bonding orbital of the quadruple metal-metal bond, and a strong interaction of this orbital with a filled orbital on the hpp ligands largely accounts for the low ionization energies.
Spin-transfer in nanometre-scale magnetic devices results from the torque on a ferromagnet owing to its interaction with a spin-polarized current and the electrons' spin angular momentum. Experiments have detected either a reversal or high-frequency (GHz) steady-state precession of the magnetization in giant magnetoresistance spin valves and magnetic tunnel junctions with current densities of more than 10(7) A cm(-2). Spin-transfer devices may enable high-density, low-power magnetic random access memory or direct-current-driven nanometre-sized microwave oscillators. Here we show that the magnetization oscillations induced by spin-transfer in two 80-nm-diameter giant-magnetoresistance point contacts in close proximity to each other can phase-lock into a single resonance over a frequency range from approximately <10 to >24 GHz for contact spacings of less than about approximately 200 nm. The output power from these contact pairs with small spacing is approximately twice the total power from more widely spaced (approximately 400 nm and greater) contact pairs that undergo separate resonances, indicating that the closely spaced pairs are phase-locked with zero phase shift. Phase-locking may enable control of large arrays of coupled spin-transfer devices with increased power output for microwave oscillator applications.
Femtosecond synchrotron pulses were generated directly from an electron storage ring. An ultrashort laser pulse was used to modulate the energy of electrons within a 100-femtosecond slice of the stored 30-picosecond electron bunch. The energy-modulated electrons were spatially separated from the long bunch and used to generate approximately 300-femtosecond synchrotron pulses at a bend-magnet beamline, with a spectral range from infrared to x-ray wavelengths. The same technique can be used to generate approximately 100-femtosecond x-ray pulses of substantially higher flux and brightness with an undulator. Such synchrotron-based femtosecond x-ray sources offer the possibility of applying x-ray techniques on an ultrafast time scale to investigate structural dynamics in condensed matter.
The Ulysses spacecraft made the first exploration of the region of Jupiter's magnetosphere at high Jovigraphic latitudes ( approximately 37 degrees south) on the dusk side and reached higher magnetic latitudes ( approximately 49 degrees north) on the day side than any previous mission to Jupiter. The cosmic and solar particle investigations (COSPIN) instrumentation achieved a remarkably well integrated set of observations of energetic charged particles in the energy ranges of approximately 1 to 170 megaelectron volts for electrons and 0.3 to 20 megaelectron volts for protons and heavier nuclei. The new findings include (i) an apparent polar cap region in the northern hemisphere in which energetic charged particles following Jovian magnetic field lines may have direct access to the interplanetary medium, (ii) high-energy electron bursts (rise times </= 1 minute and energies extending to > approximately 17 megaelectron volts) on the dusk side that are apparently associated with field-aligned currents and radio burst emissions, (iii) persistence of the global 10-hour relativistic electron "clock" phenomenon throughout Jupiter's magnetosphere, (iv) on the basis of charged-particle measurements, apparent dragging of magnetic field lines at large radii in the dusk sector toward the tail, and (v) consistent outflow of megaelectron volt electrons and large-scale departures from corotation for nucleons.
Developing an optical amplifier on silicon is essential for the success of silicon-on-insulator (SOI) photonic integrated circuits. Recently, optical gain with a 1-nm bandwidth was demonstrated using the Raman effect, which led to the demonstration of a Raman oscillator, lossless optical modulation and optically tunable slow light. A key strength of optical communications is the parallelism of information transfer and processing onto multiple wavelength channels. However, the relatively narrow Raman gain bandwidth only allows for amplification or generation of a single wavelength channel. If broad gain bandwidths were to be demonstrated on silicon, then an array of wavelength channels could be generated and processed, representing a critical advance for densely integrated photonic circuits. Here we demonstrate net on/off gain over a wavelength range of 28 nm through the optical process of phase-matched four-wave mixing in suitably designed SOI channel waveguides. We also demonstrate wavelength conversion in the range 1,511-1,591 nm with peak conversion efficiencies of +5.2 dB, which represents more than 20 times improvement on previous four-wave-mixing efficiencies in SOI waveguides. These advances allow for the implementation of dense wavelength division multiplexing in an all-silicon photonic integrated circuit. Additionally, all-optical delays, all-optical switches, optical signal regenerators and optical sources for quantum information technology, all demonstrated using four-wave mixing in silica fibres, can now be transferred to the SOI platform.
Host defense peptides such as defensins are components of innate immunity and have retained antibiotic activity throughout evolution. Their activity is thought to be due to amphipathic structures, which enable binding and disruption of microbial cytoplasmic membranes. Contrary to this, we show that plectasin, a fungal defensin, acts by directly binding the bacterial cell-wall precursor Lipid II. A wide range of genetic and biochemical approaches identify cell-wall biosynthesis as the pathway targeted by plectasin. In vitro assays for cell-wall synthesis identified Lipid II as the specific cellular target. Consistently, binding studies confirmed the formation of an equimolar stoichiometric complex between Lipid II and plectasin. Furthermore, key residues in plectasin involved in complex formation were identified using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and computational modeling.
Determining classically whether a coin is fair (head on one side, tail on the other) or fake (heads or tails on both sides) requires an examination of each side. However, the analogous quantum procedure (the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm) requires just one examination step. The Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm has been realized experimentally using bulk nuclear magnetic resonance techniques, employing nuclear spins as quantum bits (qubits). In contrast, the ion trap processor utilises motional and electronic quantum states of individual atoms as qubits, and in principle is easier to scale to many qubits. Experimental advances in the latter area include the realization of a two-qubit quantum gate, the entanglement of four ions, quantum state engineering and entanglement-enhanced phase estimation. Here we exploit techniques developed for nuclear magnetic resonance to implement the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm on an ion-trap quantum processor, using as qubits the electronic and motional states of a single calcium ion. Our ion-based implementation of a full quantum algorithm serves to demonstrate experimental procedures with the quality and precision required for complex computations, confirming the potential of trapped ions for quantum computation.
Robust measurement of single quantum bits plays a key role in the realization of quantum computation and communication as well as in quantum metrology and sensing. We have implemented a method for the improved readout of single electronic spin qubits in solid-state systems. The method makes use of quantum logic operations on a system consisting of a single electronic spin and several proximal nuclear spin ancillae in order to repetitively readout the state of the electronic spin. Using coherent manipulation of a single nitrogen vacancy center in room-temperature diamond, full quantum control of an electronic-nuclear system consisting of up to three spins was achieved. We took advantage of a single nuclear-spin memory in order to obtain a 10-fold enhancement in the signal amplitude of the electronic spin readout. We also present a two-level, concatenated procedure to improve the readout by use of a pair of nuclear spin ancillae, an important step toward the realization of robust quantum information processors using electronic- and nuclear-spin qubits. Our technique can be used to improve the sensitivity and speed of spin-based nanoscale diamond magnetometers.
A synthetic five-part molecular device has been prepared that uses a multistep electron transfer strategy similar to that of photosynthetic organisms to capture light energy and convert it to chemical potential in the form of long-lived charge separation. It consists of two covalently linked porphyrin moieties, one containing a zinc ion (P(Zn)) and the other present as the free base (P). The metailated porphyrin bears a carotenoid polyene (C) and the other a diquinone species (Q(A)-Q(B)). Excitation of the free-base porphyrin in a chloroform solution of the pentad yields an initial charge-separated state, C-P(Zn)-P(.+).-Q(A)(-)-Q(B), with a quantum yield of 0.85. Subsequent electron transfer steps lead to a final charge-separated state, C(.+)-P(Zn)-P-Q(A)-Q(B)(.-), which is formed with an overall quantum yield of 0.83 and has a lifetime of 55 microseconds. Irradiation of the free-base form of the pentad, C-P-P-Q(A)-Q(B), gives a similar charge-separated state with a lower quantum yield (0.15 in dichloromethane), although the lifetime is increased to approximately 340 microseconds. The artificial photosynthetic system preserves a significant fraction ( approximately 1.0 electron volt) of the initial excitation energy (1.9 electron volts) in the long-lived, charge-separated state.
Traditional simulated annealing uses thermal fluctuations for convergence in optimization problems. Quantum tunneling provides a different mechanism for moving between states, with the potential for reduced time scales. Thermal and quantum annealing are compared in a model disordered magnet, where the effects of quantum mechanics can be tuned by varying an applied magnetic field. The results indicate that quantum annealing hastens convergence to the optimum state.
Fluxes of protons with energies of approximately 550 kev and electrons with energies of approximately 300 kev which exceed approximately 10(4) and 10(5) cm(-2) sec(-1), respectively, have been discovered in the magnetosphere of Mercury. Electron fluxes > 10(3) cm(-2) sec(-1) also are observed in the outbound pass of the Mariner 10 spacecraft throuigh the magnetosheath. The intensity versus time profiles of the particle fluxes in the magnetosphere appear with sudden onsets of approximately 10(4) cm(-2) sec(-1) beginning at interplanetary background levels and persisting for times equivalent to their being distriblited spatially over regions having a scale size comparable to the planetary radius. For a spectral form dJ/dE alpha E-gamma, where J is the differential particle intensity and E is the kinetic energy, the typical values of gamma are gamma(p) = 5.5 for protons above 500 kev and gamma(e) >/= 9 for electrons above 170 kev. Large coherent electron intensity oscillations (variations of factors of 10 to 100) have been discovered with characteristic periods of approximately 6 seconds and with higher frequency components. In some cases proton bursts are found in phase with these oscillations. On the basis of the experimental evidence and a knowledge of the general magnetic field intensities and directions along the trajectory of Mariner 10 provided by the magnetic field observations, it is shown that the radiation events observed in the magnetosphere and magnetosheath are transient and are not interpretable in terms of stable trapped particle populations. Furthermtiore, experimental evidence strongly supports the view that the particles are impulsively accelerated and that the acceleration source is not more distant from the point of observation along lines of force than approximately 8 x 10(3) to 16 x 10(3) kilometers (3 to 6.5 units of Mercury's radius). Candidates for the regions most likely to be sources of particle acceleration are discussed, namely, the magnetotail and the magnetosheath. It is pointed out that the phenomena discovered at Mercury will place more stringent conditions on allowed mnodels for electron and proton acceleration than have heretofore been possible in studies within the earth's magnetosphere.
High-temperature, high-pressure extracts of soot produced by the Kratschmer-Huffman technique (KH carbon) were characterized by mass spectrometry and imaging with scanning tunneling microscopes (STMs). The mass spectra of these samples are similar to those of ambient-pressure, high-boiling-point solvent extractions, supporting the idea that solvent temperature and possibly pressure are key parameters in extraction of the giant fuilerenes. The STM images show that the giant fullerenes in these samples are roughly spherical in shape and range in diameter from approximately 1 to 2 nanometers, corresponding to fullerenes containing 60 to 330 atoms. No evidence of bucky tubes was found.
We obtained nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of liquids in fields of a few microtesla, using prepolarization in fields of a few millitesla and detection with a dc superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). Because the sensitivity of the SQUID is frequency independent, we enhanced both signal-to-noise ratio and spectral resolution by detecting the NMR signal in extremely low magnetic fields, where the NMR lines become very narrow even for grossly inhomogeneous measurement fields. In the absence of chemical shifts, proton-phosphorous scalar (J) couplings have been detected, indicating the presence of specific covalent bonds. This observation opens the possibility for "pure J spectroscopy" as a diagnostic tool for the detection of molecules in low magnetic fields.
Optically pumped nuclear magnetic resonance (OPNMR) measurements were performed in two different electron-doped multiple quantum well samples near the fractional quantum Hall effect ground state nu = 13. Below 0.5 kelvin, the spectra provide evidence that spin-reversed charged excitations of the nu = 13 ground state are localized over the NMR time scale of about 40 microseconds. Furthermore, by varying NMR pulse parameters, the electron spin temperature (as measured by the Knight shift) could be driven above the lattice temperature, which shows that the value of the electron spin-lattice relaxation time tau1s is between 100 microseconds and 500 milliseconds at nu = 13.
Three-dimensional simulations of the heliospheric modulation of galactic cosmic ray protons show that corotating variations in the intensity can persist to quite high heliographic latitudes. Variations are seen at latitudes considerably higher than the maximum latitude extension of the heliographic current sheet, in regions where the solar wind velocity and magnetic field show no significant variation. Similar conclusions may apply also to lower energy particles, which may be accelerated at lower latitudes. Cosmic ray variations caused by corotating interaction regions present at low heliographic latitudes can propagate to significantly higher latitudes.
When an individual molecule, nanocrystal, nanotube or lithographically defined quantum dot is attached to metallic electrodes via tunnel barriers, electron transport is dominated by single-electron charging and energy-level quantization. As the coupling to the electrodes increases, higher-order tunnelling and correlated electron motion give rise to new phenomena, including the Kondo resonance. To date, all of the studies of Kondo phenomena in quantum dots have been performed on systems where precise control over the spin degrees of freedom is difficult. Molecules incorporating transition-metal atoms provide powerful new systems in this regard, because the spin and orbital degrees of freedom can be controlled through well-defined chemistry. Here we report the observation of the Kondo effect in single-molecule transistors, where an individual divanadium molecule serves as a spin impurity. We find that the Kondo resonance can be tuned reversibly using the gate voltage to alter the charge and spin state of the molecule. The resonance persists at temperatures up to 30 K and when the energy separation between the molecular state and the Fermi level of the metal exceeds 100 meV.
The motions of electrons in solids may be highly correlated by strong, long-range Coulomb interactions. Correlated electron-hole pairs (excitons) are accessed spectroscopically through their allowed single-quantum transitions, but higher-order correlations that may strongly influence electronic and optical properties have been far more elusive to study. Here we report direct observation of bound exciton pairs (biexcitons) that provide incisive signatures of four-body correlations among electrons and holes in gallium arsenide (GaAs) quantum wells. Four distinct, mutually coherent, ultrashort optical pulses were used to create coherent exciton states, transform these successively into coherent biexciton states and then new radiative exciton states, and finally to read out the radiated signals, yielding biexciton binding energies through a technique closely analogous to multiple-quantum two-dimensional Fourier transform (2D FT) nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. A measured variation of the biexciton dephasing rate indicated still higher-order correlations.
Knowledge of the positional distributions, absolute intensities, energy spectra, and angular distributions of energetic electrons and protons in the Jovian magnetosphere has been considerably advanced by the planetary flyby of Pioneer 11 in November-December 1974 along a quite different trajectory from that of Pioneer 10 a year earlier. (i) The previously reported magnetodisc is shown to be blunted and much more extended in latitude on the sunward side than on the dawn side. (ii) Rigid corotation of the population of protons E(p) approximately 1 million electron volts in the magnetodisc is confirmed. (iii) Angular distributions of energetic electrons E(e) > 21 million electron volts in the inner magnetosphere are shown to be compatible with the Kennel-Petschek whistler-mode instability. (iv) A diverse body of magnetospheric effects by the Jovian satellites is found. (v) Observations of energetic electrons in to a radial distance of 1.59 Jovian radii provide a fresh basis for the interpretation of decimetric radio noise emission.
Tunneling electrons from the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope were used to induce and monitor the reversible rotation of single molecules of molecular oxygen among three equivalent orientations on the platinum(111) surface. Detailed studies of the rotation rates indicate a crossover from a single-electron process to a multielectron process below a threshold tunneling voltage. Values for the energy barrier to rotation and the vibrational relaxation rate of the molecule were obtained by comparing the experimental data with a theoretical model. The ability to induce the controlled motion of single molecules enhances our understanding of basic chemical processes on surfaces and may lead to useful single-molecule devices.
Small-diameter (1 to 7 nanometers) silicon nanowires (SiNWs) were prepared, and their surfaces were removed of oxide and terminated with hydrogen by a hydrofluoric acid dip. Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) of these SiNWs, performed both in air and in ultrahigh vacuum, revealed atomically resolved images that can be interpreted as hydrogen-terminated Si (111)-(1 x 1) and Si (001)-(1 x 1) surfaces corresponding to SiH3 on Si (111) and SiH2 on Si (001), respectively. These hydrogen-terminated SiNW surfaces seem to be more oxidation-resistant than regular silicon wafer surfaces, because atomically resolved STM images of SiNWs were obtained in air after several days' exposure to the ambient environment. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements were performed on the oxide-removed SiNWs and were used to evaluate the electronic energy gaps. The energy gaps were found to increase with decreasing SiNW diameter from 1.1 electron volts for 7 nanometers to 3.5 electron volts for 1.3 nanometers, in agreement with previous theoretical predictions.
High-resolution images of the sun in the soft x-ray to extreme ultraviolet(EUV) regime have been obtained with normal-incidence Cassegrain multilayer telescopes operated from a sounding rocket in space. The inherent energy-selective property of multilayer-coated optics allowed distinct groups of emission lines to be isolated in the solar corona and the transition region. The Cassegrain telescopes provided images in bands centered at 173 and 256 angstroms. The bandpass centered at 173 angstroms is dominated by emission from the ions Fe IX Fe X. This emission is from coronal plasma in the temperature range 0.8 x 10(6) to 1.4 x 10(6)K. The images have angular resolution of about 1.0 to 1.5 arc seconds, and show no degradation because of x-ray scattering. Many features of coronal structure, including magnetically confined loops of hot plasma, coronal plumes, polar coronal holes, faint structures on the size scale of supergranulation and smaller, and features due to overlying cool prominences are visible in the images. The density structure of polar plumes, which are thought to contribute to the solar wind, has been derived from the observations out to 1.7 solar radii.
Observations of energetic electrons ( greater, similar 0.07 million electron volts) show that the outer magnetosphere of Jupiter consists of a thin disklike, quasitrapping region extending from about 20 to 100 planetary radii (R(J)). This magnetodisk is confined to the vicinity of the magnetic equatorial plane and appears to be an approximate figure of revolution about the magnetic axis of the planet. Hard trapping is observed within a radial distance of about 20 R(J). The omnidirectional intensity J(0) of electrons with energy greater, similar 21 million electron volts within the region 3 r 20 R(J) is given by the following provisional expression in terms of radial distance r and magnetic latitude theta: J(0) = 2.1 x 10(8) exp[-(r/a) - (theta/b)(2)]. In this expression J(0) is particles per square centimeter per second; a = 1.52 R(J) for 3 </= r </= 20 R(J); and b = 15 degrees for 3 </= r </= 10 R(J), diminishing gradually for larger r. There is tentative evidence for mild effects of the Galilean satellite Europa and possibly Io and Ganymede but not Callisto.
Multiple exciton generation, the creation of two electron-hole pairs from one high-energy photon, is well established in bulk semiconductors, but assessments of the efficiency of this effect remain controversial in quantum-confined systems like semiconductor nanocrystals. We used a photoelectrochemical system composed of PbS nanocrystals chemically bound to TiO(2) single crystals to demonstrate the collection of photocurrents with quantum yields greater than one electron per photon. The strong electronic coupling and favorable energy level alignment between PbS nanocrystals and bulk TiO(2) facilitate extraction of multiple excitons more quickly than they recombine, as well as collection of hot electrons from higher quantum dot excited states. Our results have implications for increasing the efficiency of photovoltaic devices by avoiding losses resulting from the thermalization of photogenerated carriers.
A Bose-Einstein condensate was produced in a vapor of rubidium-87 atoms that was confined by magnetic fields and evaporatively cooled. The condensate fraction first appeared near a temperature of 170 nanokelvin and a number density of 2.5 x 10(12) per cubic centimeter and could be preserved for more than 15 seconds. Three primary signatures of Bose-Einstein condensation were seen. (i) On top of a broad thermal velocity distribution, a narrow peak appeared that was centered at zero velocity. (ii) The fraction of the atoms that were in this low-velocity peak increased abruptly as the sample temperature was lowered. (iii) The peak exhibited a nonthermal, anisotropic velocity distribution expected of the minimum-energy quantum state of the magnetic trap in contrast to the isotropic, thermal velocity distribution observed in the broad uncondensed fraction.
Magnetic anisotropy allows magnets to maintain their direction of magnetization over time. Using a scanning tunneling microscope to observe spin excitations, we determined the orientation and strength of the anisotropies of individual iron and manganese atoms on a thin layer of copper nitride. The relative intensities of the inelastic tunneling processes are consistent with dipolar interactions, as seen for inelastic neutron scattering. First-principles calculations indicate that the magnetic atoms become incorporated into a polar covalent surface molecular network in the copper nitride. These structures, which provide atom-by-atom accessibility via local probes, have the potential for engineering anisotropies large enough to produce stable magnetization at low temperatures for a single atomic spin.
The control of charge transport in an active electronic device depends intimately on the modulation of the internal charge density by an external node. For example, a field-effect transistor relies on the gated electrostatic modulation of the channel charge produced by changing the relative position of the conduction and valence bands with respect to the electrodes. In molecular-scale devices, a longstanding challenge has been to create a true three-terminal device that operates in this manner (that is, by modifying orbital energy). Here we report the observation of such a solid-state molecular device, in which transport current is directly modulated by an external gate voltage. Resonance-enhanced coupling to the nearest molecular orbital is revealed by electron tunnelling spectroscopy, demonstrating direct molecular orbital gating in an electronic device. Our findings demonstrate that true molecular transistors can be created, and so enhance the prospects for molecularly engineered electronic devices.
Extensive measurements of low-energy plasma electrons and positive ions were made during the Voyager 1 encounter with Saturn and its satellites. The magnetospheric plasma contains light and heavy ions, probably hydrogen and nitrogen or oxygen; at radial distances between 15 and 7 Saturn-radii (Rs) on the inbound trajectory, the plasma appears to corotate with a velocity within 20 percent of that expected for rigid corotation. The general morphology of Saturn's magnetosphere is well represented by a plasma sheet that extends from at least 5 to 17 Rs, is symmetrical with respect to Saturn's equatorial plane and rotation axis, and appears to be well ordered by the magnetic shell parameter L (which represents the equatorial distance of a magnetic field line measured in units of Rs). Within this general configuration, two distinct structures can be identified: a central plasma sheet observed from L = 5 to L = 8 in which the density decreases rapidly away from the equatorial plane, and a more extended structure from L = 7 to beyond 18 Rs in which the density profile is nearly flat for a distance +/- 1.8 Rs off the plane and falls rapidly thereafter. The encounter with Titan took place inside the magnetosphere. The data show a clear signature characteristic of the interaction between a subsonic corotating magnetospheric plasma and the atmospheric or ionospheric exosphere of Titan. Titan appears to be a significant source of ions for the outer magnetosphere. The locations of bow shock crossings observed inbound and outbound indicate that the shape of the Saturnian magnetosphere is similar to that of Earth and that the position of the stagnation point scales approximately as the inverse one-sixth power of the ram pressure.
Quantum theory predicts that empty space is not truly empty. Even in the absence of any particles or radiation, in pure vacuum, virtual particles are constantly created and annihilated. In an electromagnetic field, the presence of virtual photons manifests itself as a small renormalization of the energy of a quantum system, known as the Lamb shift. We present an experimental observation of the Lamb shift in a solid-state system. The strong dispersive coupling of a superconducting electronic circuit acting as a quantum bit (qubit) to the vacuum field in a transmission-line resonator leads to measurable Lamb shifts of up to 1.4% of the qubit transition frequency. The qubit is also observed to couple more strongly to the vacuum field than to a single photon inside the cavity, an effect that is explained by taking into account the limited anharmonicity of the higher excited qubit states.
Understanding the mechanism by which d wave superconductivity in the cuprates emerges and is optimized by doping the Mott insulator is one of the major outstanding problems in condensed-matter physics. Our high-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy measurements of the high-transition temperature (Tc) superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta show that samples with different Tc values in the low doping regime follow a remarkably universal d wave low-energy excitation spectrum, indicating a doping-independent nodal gap. We demonstrate that Tc instead correlates with the fraction of the Fermi surface over which the samples exhibit the universal spectrum. Optimal Tc is achieved when all parts of the Fermi surface follow this universal behavior. Increasing the temperature above Tc turns the universal spectrum into an arc of gapless excitations, whereas overdoping breaks down the universal nodal behavior.
The electronic bandgap is an intrinsic property of semiconductors and insulators that largely determines their transport and optical properties. As such, it has a central role in modern device physics and technology and governs the operation of semiconductor devices such as p-n junctions, transistors, photodiodes and lasers. A tunable bandgap would be highly desirable because it would allow great flexibility in design and optimization of such devices, in particular if it could be tuned by applying a variable external electric field. However, in conventional materials, the bandgap is fixed by their crystalline structure, preventing such bandgap control. Here we demonstrate the realization of a widely tunable electronic bandgap in electrically gated bilayer graphene. Using a dual-gate bilayer graphene field-effect transistor (FET) and infrared microspectroscopy, we demonstrate a gate-controlled, continuously tunable bandgap of up to 250 meV. Our technique avoids uncontrolled chemical doping and provides direct evidence of a widely tunable bandgap-spanning a spectral range from zero to mid-infrared-that has eluded previous attempts. Combined with the remarkable electrical transport properties of such systems, this electrostatic bandgap control suggests novel nanoelectronic and nanophotonic device applications based on graphene.
When a quantum-mechanical system undergoes an adiabatic cyclic evolution, it acquires a geometrical phase factor' in addition to the dynamical one; this effect has been demonstrated in a variety of microscopic systems. Advances in nanotechnology should enable the laws of quantum dynamics to be tested at the macroscopic level, by providing controllable artificial two-level systems (for example, in quantum dots and superconducting devices). Here we propose an experimental method to detect geometric phases in a superconducting device. The setup is a Josephson junction nanocircuit consisting of a superconducting electron box. We discuss how interferometry based on geometrical phases may be realized, and show how the effect may be applied to the design of gates for quantum computation.
The bandwidth and versatility of optical devices have revolutionized information technology systems and communication networks. Precise and arbitrary control of an optical field that preserves optical coherence is an important requisite for many proposed photonic technologies. For quantum information applications, a device that allows storage and on-demand retrieval of arbitrary quantum states of light would form an ideal quantum optical memory. Recently, significant progress has been made in implementing atomic quantum memories using electromagnetically induced transparency, photon echo spectroscopy, off-resonance Raman spectroscopy and other atom-light interaction processes. Single-photon and bright-optical-field storage with quantum states have both been successfully demonstrated. Here we present a coherent optical memory based on photon echoes induced through controlled reversible inhomogeneous broadening. Our scheme allows storage of multiple pulses of light within a chosen frequency bandwidth, and stored pulses can be recalled in arbitrary order with any chosen delay between each recalled pulse. Furthermore, pulses can be time-compressed, time-stretched or split into multiple smaller pulses and recalled in several pieces at chosen times. Although our experimental results are so far limited to classical light pulses, our technique should enable the construction of an optical random-access memory for time-bin quantum information, and have potential applications in quantum information processing.
An ultracold molecular quantum gas is created by application of a magnetic field sweep across a Feshbach resonance to a Bose-Einstein condensate of cesium atoms. The ability to separate the molecules from the atoms permits direct imaging of the pure molecular sample. Magnetic levitation enables study of the dynamics of the ensemble on extended time scales. We measured ultralow expansion energies in the range of a few nanokelvin for a sample of 3000 molecules. Our observations are consistent with the presence of a macroscopic molecular matter wave.
Interpretation of high-resolution angular distribution measurements of the primary auroral electron flux detected by a rocket probe launched into a visible aurora from Fort Churchill in the fall of 1966 leads to the following conclusions. The auroral electron flux is nearly monoenergetic and has a quasi-trapped as well as a precipitating component. The quasi-trapped flux appears to be limited to a region defined by magnetic-mirror points and multiple electrostatic double layers in the ionosphere. The electrostatic field of the double-layer distribution enhances the aurora by lowering the magnetic-mirror points and supplying energy to the primary auroral electrons.
Present-day information technology is based mainly on incoherent processes in conventional semiconductor devices. To realize concepts for future quantum information technologies, which are based on coherent phenomena, a new type of 'hardware' is required. Semiconductor quantum dots are promising candidates for the basic device units for quantum information processing. One approach is to exploit optical excitations (excitons) in quantum dots. It has already been demonstrated that coherent manipulation between two excitonic energy levels--via so-called Rabi oscillations--can be achieved in single quantum dots by applying electromagnetic fields. Here we make use of this effect by placing an InGaAs quantum dot in a photodiode, which essentially connects it to an electric circuit. We demonstrate that coherent optical excitations in the quantum-dot two-level system can be converted into deterministic photocurrents. For optical excitation with so-called pi-pulses, which completely invert the two-level system, the current is given by I = fe, where f is the repetition frequency of the experiment and e is the elementary charge. We find that this device can function as an optically triggered single-electron turnstile.
A quantum pumping mechanism that produces dc current or voltage in response to a cyclic deformation of the confining potential in an open quantum dot is reported. The voltage produced at zero current bias is sinusoidal in the phase difference between the two ac voltages deforming the potential and shows random fluctuations in amplitude and direction with small changes in external parameters such as magnetic field. The amplitude of the pumping response increases linearly with the frequency of the deformation. Dependencies of pumping on the strength of the deformations, temperature, and breaking of time-reversal symmetry were also investigated.
Pioneer Venus ultraviolet spectra from the first 5 years of operation show a decline (by more than a factor of 10) in sulfur dioxide abundance at the cloud tops and in the amount of submicron haze above the clouds. At the time of the Pioneer Venus encounter, the values for both parameters greatly exceeded earlier upper limits. However, Venus had a similar appearance in the late 1950's, implying the episodic injection of sulfur dioxide possibly caused by episodic volcanism. The amount of haze in the Venus middle atmosphere is about ten times that found in Earth's stratosphere after the most recent major volcanic eruptions, and the thermal energy required for this injection on Venus is greater by about an order of magnitude than the largest of these recent Earth eruptions and about as large as the Krakatoa eruption of 1883. The episodic behavior of sulfur dioxide implies that steady-state models of the chemistry and dynamics of cloud-top regions may be of limited use.
The superconducting state is characterized by a pairing of electrons with a superconducting gap on the Fermi surface. In iron-based superconductors, an unconventional pairing state has been argued for theoretically. We used scanning tunneling microscopy on Fe(Se,Te) single crystals to image the quasi-particle scattering interference patterns in the superconducting state. By applying a magnetic field to break the time-reversal symmetry, the relative sign of the superconducting gap can be determined from the magnetic-field dependence of quasi-particle scattering amplitudes. Our results indicate that the sign is reversed between the hole and the electron Fermi-surface pockets (s(+/-)-wave), favoring the unconventional pairing mechanism associated with spin fluctuations.
Optical spectroscopy of stellar molecules trapped at 4 degrees K is particularly valuable when the data can be used to complement the corresponding gas data. The ground state is then directly established by measurement of the absorption spectrum at the low temperature, since all transitions beginning from excited states are eliminated. Isotopic substitution establishes the (0,0) bands of transitions to excited electronic states, and when these data are combined with infrared and fluorescence measurements at 4 degrees K, most of the vibrational properties of the ground and excited states can be obtained. Of the many examples cited and discussed here, C(3) is perhaps the most outstanding. Because the various molecules trapped in matrices are usually identified through prior mass spectrometric work, the optical observations often lead to the discovery of band systems of molecules whose spectra have not previously been observed-for example, those of Si(2)C(3), TaO(2), and WO(2). In these cases the location of the spectral regions in which molecular transitions appear may also serve to encourage the gas spectroscopist to further exploration with high-dispersion spectrographs. I share Ramsay's view (4, p. 204) that further investigation of f-number determinations from matrix spectra should be encouraged, particularly because of the lack of such data for molecules in stars. The principal source of error probably lies in the estimation of the number of molecules per square centimeter in the matrix, but no real test of this has been made. The only existing f values from matrix spectra are those for the C(3) (43, 44) and C(2) (51) molecules, and these are not ideal for test purposes. Because of the anomalous nature of the matrix results discussed above, the rather good agreement between f values for the solid and gas phases of C(2) (51) cannot be considered as support for the matrix determinations. What is needed is a matrix determination of several f(v'v") values (that is, determinations for specific bands) for molecules such as CN and NO or, preferably, for a gas vaporized at high temperature, for which these f values are relatively well established in the gas phase. In this connection the possibility of determining other molecular properties in matrices comes to mind. However, it has been clearly shown that the shape of the potential energy function in the electronic states of molecules can be affected when molecules are trapped in matrices. Brewer, Brabson, and Meyer, in work on S(2) (55), and Schnepp and Dressler, in work on O(2) (56), have examined the anharmonicity in matrices over many vibrational levels. Distortion of the gas potential energy curves occurs in the heavier matrices and sometimes at high vibrational levels in the light ones. Recently work has been begun on comparing the Franck-Condon factors connecting the ground state and two excited states of ScF trapped in a neon matrix (57) with factors calculated from the gas-spectrum data of R. F. Barrow et al. (58) (Deltar(e), the change in interatomic distance upon excitation, has a relatively large value of ~ 0.1 A in these systems). As is well known, such factors are particularly sensitive to the value of Deltar(e), but differences in anharmonicity do not, however, have as significant an effect upon the Franck-Condon factors. Hence a comparison of the matrix and gas factors will lead to further information about matrix effects and will indicate whether Franck-Condon factors can be obtained from matrix spectra. One of the important problems in the study of stellar molecules is the determination of the low-lying electronically excited states, similar to the (1)Delta <--> X(3)Delta difference (~ 580 cm(-1)) in TiO measured by Phillips. Most of the transition-metal oxides have such low-lying levels, and they must be taken into consideration in any calculation of thermodynamic effects at high temperature. It appears that the study of emission spectra in the infrared at 4 degrees K may be one approach to this problem, and an attempt is now being made to confirm the TiO value in order to test the method. Perhaps the greatest advantage of matrix-isolation is the fact that it allows study of these molecules-or of any molecules difficult to produce in a microwave cavity-by electron-paramagnetic-resonance spectroscopy. Study of molecules by this means can provide information about ground state wave functions that is not obtainable by optical spectroscopy, as illustrated by the investigation of ScO, YO, and LaO. Also, it seems likely that the preferential orientation of molecules in matrices, which is probably achievable in most cases, will be a valuable asset in the study of the magnetic properties of molecules by electron-paramagneticresonance spectroscopy, regardless of whether the molecules are "hot" or "cold" (60).
Proton magnetic resonance spectra of aqueous gelatin were analyzed with respect to composition and molecular interactions. Aqueous gelatin complexes cobaltous ions in the pD range of approximately 3.5 to 7.5. Glutamyl and aspartyl side chains are shown to be the sites of binding.
A very bright fireball observed over New South Wales in 1978 produced anomalous sounds clearly audible to some of the observers. An investigation of the phenomenon indicates that bright fireballs radiate considerable electromagnetic energy in the very-low-frequency (VLF) region of the spectrum. A mechanism for the production of VLF emissions from the highly energetic wake turbulence of the fireball is proposed. Trials with human subjects revealed a very extended range of thresholds for the perception of electrically excited sounds among a sample population, particularly when the VLF electric field excites surface acoustic waves in surrounding objects. This fact, together with variable propagation effects and local conditions, can account for the sporadic distribution of reports of anomalous sounds from fireballs and auroras.
Switching the magnetization of a magnetic bit by injection of a spin-polarized current offers the possibility for the development of innovative high-density data storage technologies. We show how individual superparamagnetic iron nanoislands with typical sizes of 100 atoms can be addressed and locally switched using a magnetic scanning probe tip, thus demonstrating current-induced magnetization reversal across a vacuum barrier combined with the ultimate resolution of spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy. Our technique allows us to separate and quantify three fundamental contributions involved in magnetization switching (i.e., current-induced spin torque, heating the island by the tunneling current, and Oersted field effects), thereby providing an improved understanding of the switching mechanism.
Quantum tunneling, the passage of a microscopic system from one state to another by way of a classically forbidden path, is theoretically possible in the macroscopic world. One can now make direct observations of such macroscopic quantum tunneling in very small magnetic structures. This is possible because of significant advances both in the ability to obtain magnetic systems of almost any desirable size, shape, and composition and in the development of superconducting instrumentation for the detection of extremely weak magnetic signals. As an example, measurements on magnetic horse spleen ferritin proteins with the predictions of quantum tunneling theory are discussed and shown.
The origin of jets emitted from black holes is not well understood; however, there are two possible energy sources: the accretion disk or the rotating black hole. Magnetohydrodynamic simulations show a well-defined jet that extracts energy from a black hole. If plasma near the black hole is threaded by large-scale magnetic flux, it will rotate with respect to asymptotic infinity, creating large magnetic stresses. These stresses are released as a relativistic jet at the expense of black hole rotational energy. The physics of the jet initiation in the simulations is described by the theory of black hole gravitohydromagnetics.
Electromagnetic phenomena occurring in the strong magnetic fields of neutron stars are currently of great interest in high-energy astrophysics. Observations of rotation rate changes and cyclotron lines in pulsars and gamma-ray bursts indicate that surface magnetic fields of neutron stars often exceed 10(12) gauss. In fields this strong, where electrons behave much as if they were in bound atomic states, familiar processes undergo profound changes, and exotic processes become important. Strong magnetic fields affect the physics in several fundamental ways: Energies perpendicular to the field are quantized, transverse momentum is not conserved, and electron-positron spin is important. Neutron stars therefore provide a unique laboratory for the study of physics in extremely high fields that cannot be generated on Earth.
A Monte Carlo quantum mechanical-molecular mechanical (QM-MM) simulation method was used to determine the contributions of the solvent polarization effect to the total interaction energies between solute and solvent for amino acid side chains and nucleotide bases in aqueous solution. In the present AM1-TIP3P approach, the solute molecule is characterized by valence electrons and nucleus cores with Hartree-Fock theory incorporating explicit solvent effects into the total Hamiltonian, while the solvent is approximated by the three-point charge TIP3P model. The polarization energy contributes 10 to 20 percent of the total electrostatic energy in these systems. The performance of the hybrid AM1-TIP3P model was further validated by consideration of bimolecular complexes with water and by computation of the free energies of solvation of organic molecules using statistical perturbation theory. Excellent agreement with ab initio 6-31G(d) results and experimental solvation free energies was obtained.
Inelastic light scattering by low-energy spin-excitations reveals three distinct configurations of spin of electron double layers in gallium arsenide quantum wells at even-integer quantum Hall states. The transformations among these spin states appear as quantum phase transitions driven by the interplay between Coulomb interactions and Zeeman splittings. One of the transformations correlates with the emergence of a spin-flip intersubband excitation at vanishingly low energy and provides direct evidence of a link between quantum phase transitions and soft collective excitations in a two-dimensional electron system.
Gemini-N observed the properties of dust ejected from the nucleus of comet 9P/Tempel 1 before and after its encounter with Deep Impact. Marked changes were seen in the 7.8- to 13-micrometer spectral energy distribution and derived grain properties of the inner coma. A strong, broad silicate feature dominated by emission from amorphous pyroxene, amorphous olivine, and magnesium-rich crystalline olivine had developed by 1 hour after impact. The ejected dust mass is congruent with 10(4) to 10(6) kilograms on the basis of our models. Twenty-six hours later the silicate feature had faded, leaving a smooth featureless spectrum, similar to that observed before the impact, suggesting that the impact did not produce a new active region releasing small particles on the nucleus.
Measurement is one of the fundamental building blocks of quantum-information processing systems. Partial measurement, where full wavefunction collapse is not the only outcome, provides a detailed test of the measurement process. We introduce quantum-state tomography in a superconducting qubit that exhibits high-fidelity single-shot measurement. For the two probabilistic outcomes of partial measurement, we find either a full collapse or a coherent yet nonunitary evolution of the state. This latter behavior explicitly confirms modern quantum-measurement theory and may prove important for error-correction algorithms in quantum computation.
Ultracold atoms in optical lattices provide a versatile tool with which to investigate fundamental properties of quantum many-body systems. In particular, the high degree of control of experimental parameters has allowed the study of many interesting phenomena, such as quantum phase transitions and quantum spin dynamics. Here we demonstrate how such control can be implemented at the most fundamental level of a single spin at a specific site of an optical lattice. Using a tightly focused laser beam together with a microwave field, we were able to flip the spin of individual atoms in a Mott insulator with sub-diffraction-limited resolution, well below the lattice spacing. The Mott insulator provided us with a large two-dimensional array of perfectly arranged atoms, in which we created arbitrary spin patterns by sequentially addressing selected lattice sites after freezing out the atom distribution. We directly monitored the tunnelling quantum dynamics of single atoms in the lattice prepared along a single line, and observed that our addressing scheme leaves the atoms in the motional ground state. The results should enable studies of entropy transport and the quantum dynamics of spin impurities, the implementation of novel cooling schemes, and the engineering of quantum many-body phases and various quantum information processing applications.
A phase transition in an organic charge-transfer complex, which originates from the neutral-ionic valence instability, can be tuned toward zero kelvin with use of external pressure or chemical modification as a control parameter. The phase diagram and observed dielectric behaviors are typical of quantum paraelectricity, yet this zero-kelvin transition point namely, the quantum critical point, accompanies large quantum fluctuation of the molecular charge, as demonstrated by the molecular vibrational mode spectra. The result indicates that the pi-electron transfer between donor and acceptor molecules is coupled with the zero-point lattice dynamics around the quantum critical point.
Ground-based observations have shown that Jupiter is a two-component source of microwave radio emission: thermal atmospheric emission and synchrotron emission from energetic electrons spiralling in Jupiter's magnetic field. Later in situ measurements confirmed the existence of Jupiter's high-energy electron-radiation belts, with evidence for electrons at energies up to 20[?]MeV. Although most radiation belt models predict electrons at higher energies, adiabatic diffusion theory can account only for energies up to around 20[?]MeV. Unambiguous evidence for more energetic electrons is lacking. Here we report observations of 13.8[?]GHz synchrotron emission that confirm the presence of electrons with energies up to 50[?]MeV; the data were collected during the Cassini fly-by of Jupiter. These energetic electrons may be repeatedly accelerated through an interaction with plasma waves, which can transfer energy into the electrons. Preliminary comparison of our data with model results suggests that electrons with energies of less than 20[?]MeV are more numerous than previously believed.
Electromagnetically induced transparency is a quantum interference effect that permits the propagation of light through an otherwise opaque atomic medium; a 'coupling' laser is used to create the interference necessary to allow the transmission of resonant pulses from a 'probe' laser. This technique has been used to slow and spatially compress light pulses by seven orders of magnitude, resulting in their complete localization and containment within an atomic cloud. Here we use electromagnetically induced transparency to bring laser pulses to a complete stop in a magnetically trapped, cold cloud of sodium atoms. Within the spatially localized pulse region, the atoms are in a superposition state determined by the amplitudes and phases of the coupling and probe laser fields. Upon sudden turn-off of the coupling laser, the compressed probe pulse is effectively stopped; coherent information initially contained in the laser fields is 'frozen' in the atomic medium for up to 1 ms. The coupling laser is turned back on at a later time and the probe pulse is regenerated: the stored coherence is read out and transferred back into the radiation field. We present a theoretical model that reveals that the system is self-adjusting to minimize dissipative loss during the 'read' and 'write' operations. We anticipate applications of this phenomenon for quantum information processing.
Cold, macroscopic mechanical systems are expected to behave contrary to our usual classical understanding of reality; the most striking and counterintuitive predictions involve the existence of states in which the mechanical system is located in two places simultaneously. Various schemes have been proposed to generate and detect such states, and all require starting from mechanical states that are close to the lowest energy eigenstate, the mechanical ground state. Here we report the cooling of the motion of a radio-frequency nanomechanical resonator by parametric coupling to a driven, microwave-frequency superconducting resonator. Starting from a thermal occupation of 480 quanta, we have observed occupation factors as low as 3.8 +/- 1.3 and expect the mechanical resonator to be found with probability 0.21 in the quantum ground state of motion. Further cooling is limited by random excitation of the microwave resonator and heating of the dissipative mechanical bath. This level of cooling is expected to make possible a series of fundamental quantum mechanical observations including direct measurement of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and quantum entanglement with qubits.
Polarized and unpolarized neutron scattering was used to measure the wave vector- and frequency-dependent magnetic fluctuations in the normal state (from the superconducting transition temperature, Tc = 35 kelvin, up to 350 kelvin) of single crystals of La1.86Sr0.14CuO4. The peaks that dominate the fluctuations have amplitudes that decrease as T-2 and widths that increase in proportion to the thermal energy, kBT (where kB is Boltzmann's constant), and energy transfer added in quadrature. The nearly singular fluctuations are consistent with a nearby quantum critical point.
The infrared spectrum of hot water observed in a sunspot has been assigned. The high temperature of the sunspot (3200 K) gave rise to a highly congested pure rotational spectrum in the 10-micrometer region that involved energy levels at least halfway to dissociation. Traditional spectroscopy, based on perturbation theory, is inadequate for this problem. Instead, accurate variational solutions of the vibration-rotation Schrodinger equation were used to make assignments, revealing unexpected features, including rotational difference bands and fewer degeneracies than anticipated. These results indicate that a shift away from perturbation theory to first principles calculations is necessary in order to assign spectra of hot polyatomic molecules such as water.
Image projection relies on classical wave mechanics and the use of natural or engineered structures such as lenses or resonant cavities. Well-known examples include the bending of light to create mirages in the atmosphere, and the focusing of sound by whispering galleries. However, the observation of analogous phenomena in condensed matter systems is a more recent development, facilitated by advances in nanofabrication. Here we report the projection of the electronic structure surrounding a magnetic Co atom to a remote location on the surface of a Cu crystal; electron partial waves scattered from the real Co atom are coherently refocused to form a spectral image or 'quantum mirage'. The focusing device is an elliptical quantum corral, assembled on the Cu surface. The corral acts as a quantum mechanical resonator, while the two-dimensional Cu surface-state electrons form the projection medium. When placed on the surface, Co atoms display a distinctive spectroscopic signature, known as the many-particle Kondo resonance, which arises from their magnetic moment. By positioning a Co atom at one focus of the ellipse, we detect a strong Kondo signature not only at the atom, but also at the empty focus. This behaviour contrasts with the usual spatially-decreasing response of an electron gas to a localized perturbation.
As first pointed out by Bardeen and Ginzburg in the early sixties, the amount of magnetic flux carried by vortices in superconducting materials depends on their distance from the sample edge, and can be smaller than one flux quantum, phi0 = h/2e (where h is Planck's constant and e is the electronic charge). In bulk superconductors, this reduction of flux becomes negligible at submicrometre distances from the edge, but in thin films the effect may survive much farther into the material. But the effect has not been observed experimentally, and it is often assumed that magnetic field enters type II superconductors in units of phi0. Here we measure the amount of flux introduced by individual vortices in a superconducting film, finding that the flux always differs substantially from phi0. We have observed vortices that carry as little as 0.001phi0, as well as 'negative vortices', whose penetration leads to the expulsion of magnetic field. We distinguish two phenomena responsible for non-quantized flux penetration: the finite-size effect and a nonlinear screening of the magnetic field due to the presence of a surface barrier. The latter effect has not been considered previously, but is likely to cause non-quantized penetration in most cases.
The reversible transfer of quantum states of light into and out of matter constitutes an important building block for future applications of quantum communication: it will allow the synchronization of quantum information, and the construction of quantum repeaters and quantum networks. Much effort has been devoted to the development of such quantum memories, the key property of which is the preservation of entanglement during storage. Here we report the reversible transfer of photon-photon entanglement into entanglement between a photon and a collective atomic excitation in a solid-state device. Towards this end, we employ a thulium-doped lithium niobate waveguide in conjunction with a photon-echo quantum memory protocol, and increase the spectral acceptance from the current maximum of 100 megahertz to 5 gigahertz. We assess the entanglement-preserving nature of our storage device through Bell inequality violations and by comparing the amount of entanglement contained in the detected photon pairs before and after the reversible transfer. These measurements show, within statistical error, a perfect mapping process. Our broadband quantum memory complements the family of robust, integrated lithium niobate devices. It simplifies frequency-matching of light with matter interfaces in advanced applications of quantum communication, bringing fully quantum-enabled networks a step closer.
The central few hundred parsecs of the Milky Way host a massive black hole and exhibit very violent gas motion and high temperatures in molecular gas. The origin of these properties has been a mystery for the past four decades. Wide-field imaging of the (12)CO (rotational quantum number J = 1 to 0) 2.6-millimeter spectrum has revealed huge loops of dense molecular gas with strong velocity dispersions in the galactic center. We present a magnetic flotation model to explain that the formation of the loops is due to magnetic buoyancy caused by the Parker instability. The model has the potential to offer a coherent explanation for the origin of the violent motion and extensive heating of the molecular gas in the galactic center.
High-order harmonic generation (HHG) from atoms and molecules offers potential application as a coherent ultrashort radiation source in the extreme ultraviolet and soft X-ray regions. In the three-step model of HHG, an electron tunnels out from the atom and may recombine with the parent ion (emitting a high-energy photon) after undergoing laser-driven motion in the continuum. Aligned molecules can be used to study quantum phenomena in HHG associated with molecular symmetries; in particular, simultaneous observations of both ion yields and harmonic signals under the same conditions serve to disentangle the contributions from the ionization and recombination processes. Here we report evidence for quantum interference of electron de Broglie waves in the recombination process of HHG from aligned CO2 molecules. The interference takes place within a single molecule and within one optical cycle. Characteristic modulation patterns of the harmonic signals measured as a function of the pump-probe delay are explained with simple formulae determined by the valence orbital of the molecules. We propose that simultaneous observations of both ion yields and harmonic signals can serve as a new route to probe the instantaneous structure of molecular systems.
Cosmology is in the midst of a period of revolutionary discovery, propelled by bold ideas from particle physics and by technological advances from gigapixel charge-coupled device cameras to peta-scale computing. The basic features of the universe have now been determined: It is 13.7 billion years old, spatially flat, and expanding at an accelerating rate; it is composed of atoms (4%), exotic dark matter (20%), and dark energy (76%); and there is evidence that galaxies and other structures were seeded by quantum fluctuations. Although we know much about the universe, we understand far less. Poised to dramatically advance our understanding of both the universe and the laws that govern it, cosmology is on the verge of a golden age.
Late Cretaceous climatic cycles are reflected in lithological and magnetic variations in carbonate sediments from South Atlantic Deep-Sea Drilling Project site 516F at a paleolatitude of roughly 30 degrees S. Magnetic susceptibility cycles 20 to 60 centimeters in length appear to be controlled by the precession of the equinoxes. Cyclicity is particularly robust within a 24-meter interval in the lower Campanian, where overtone spectral peaks are observed as well as secondary susceptibility maxima within individual precession cycles. One model for this behavior is that sedimentation in the narrow Cretaceous South Atlantic was controlled by equatorial climate dynamics, with the precessional insolation signal rectified by the large land masses surrounding the ocean basin.
Silicon wire arrays, though attractive materials for use in photovoltaics and as photocathodes for hydrogen generation, have to date exhibited poor performance. Using a copper-catalyzed, vapor-liquid-solid-growth process, SiCl4 and BCl3 were used to grow ordered arrays of crystalline p-type silicon (p-Si) microwires on p+-Si(111) substrates. When these wire arrays were used as photocathodes in contact with an aqueous methyl viologen(2+/+) electrolyte, energy-conversion efficiencies of up to 3% were observed for monochromatic 808-nanometer light at fluxes comparable to solar illumination, despite an external quantum yield at short circuit of only 0.2. Internal quantum yields were at least 0.7, demonstrating that the measured photocurrents were limited by light absorption in the wire arrays, which filled only 4% of the incident optical plane in our test devices. The inherent performance of these wires thus conceptually allows the development of efficient photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical energy-conversion devices based on a radial junction platform.
A psychophysical study of the perception of "sound" induced by illumination with pulse-modulated, ultrahigh-frequency electromagnetic energy indicated that perception was primarily dependent upon peak power and secondarily dependent upon pulse width. The average power did not significantly affect perception. Perceived characteristics of pitch and timbre appeared to be functions of modulation.
Topological surface states are a class of novel electronic states that are of potential interest in quantum computing or spintronic applications. Unlike conventional two-dimensional electron states, these surface states are expected to be immune to localization and to overcome barriers caused by material imperfection. Previous experiments have demonstrated that topological surface states do not backscatter between equal and opposite momentum states, owing to their chiral spin texture. However, so far there is no evidence that these states in fact transmit through naturally occurring surface defects. Here we use a scanning tunnelling microscope to measure the transmission and reflection probabilities of topological surface states of antimony through naturally occurring crystalline steps separating atomic terraces. In contrast to non-topological surface states of common metals (copper, silver and gold), which are either reflected or absorbed by atomic steps, we show that topological surface states of antimony penetrate such barriers with high probability. This demonstration of the extended nature of antimony's topological surface states suggests that such states may be useful for high current transmission even in the presence of atomic-scale irregularities-an electronic feature sought to efficiently interconnect nanoscale devices.
Solar wind energy transfer to planetary magnetospheres and ionospheres is controlled by magnetic reconnection, a process that determines the degree of connectivity between the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) and a planet's magnetic field. During MESSENGER's second flyby of Mercury, a steady southward IMF was observed and the magnetopause was threaded by a strong magnetic field, indicating a reconnection rate ~10 times that typical at Earth. Moreover, a large flux transfer event was observed in the magnetosheath, and a plasmoid and multiple traveling compression regions were observed in Mercury's magnetotail, all products of reconnection. These observations indicate that Mercury's magnetosphere is much more responsive to IMF direction and dominated by the effects of reconnection than that of Earth or the other magnetized planets.
Ensembles of defect-free InAIAs islands of ultrasmall dimensions embedded in AIGaAs have been grown by molecular beam epitaxy. Cathodoluminescence was used to directly image the spatial distribution of the quantum dots by mapping their luminescence and to spectrally resolve very sharp peaks from small groups of dots, thus providing experimental verification for the discrete density of states in a zero-dimensional quantum structure. Visible luminescence is produced by different nominal compositions of InxAI(1-x)As-AIyGa(1-y)As.
In graphene, which is an atomic layer of crystalline carbon, two of the distinguishing properties of the material are the charge carriers' two-dimensional and relativistic character. The first experimental evidence of the two-dimensional nature of graphene came from the observation of a sequence of plateaus in measurements of its transport properties in the presence of an applied magnetic field. These are signatures of the so-called integer quantum Hall effect. However, as a consequence of the relativistic character of the charge carriers, the integer quantum Hall effect observed in graphene is qualitatively different from its semiconductor analogue. As a third distinguishing feature of graphene, it has been conjectured that interactions and correlations should be important in this material, but surprisingly, evidence of collective behaviour in graphene is lacking. In particular, the quintessential collective quantum behaviour in two dimensions, the fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE), has so far resisted observation in graphene despite intense efforts and theoretical predictions of its existence. Here we report the observation of the FQHE in graphene. Our observations are made possible by using suspended graphene devices probed by two-terminal charge transport measurements. This allows us to isolate the sample from substrate-induced perturbations that usually obscure the effects of interactions in this system and to avoid effects of finite geometry. At low carrier density, we find a field-induced transition to an insulator that competes with the FQHE, allowing its observation only in the highest quality samples. We believe that these results will open the door to the physics of FQHE and other collective behaviour in graphene.
In recent years, biotechnology and biomedical research have benefited from the introduction of a variety of specialized nanoparticles whose well-defined, optically distinguishable signatures enable simultaneous tracking of numerous biological indicators. Unfortunately, equivalent multiplexing capabilities are largely absent in the field of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Comparable magnetic-resonance labels have generally been limited to relatively simple chemically synthesized superparamagnetic microparticles that are, to a large extent, indistinguishable from one another. Here we show how it is instead possible to use a top-down microfabrication approach to effectively encode distinguishable spectral signatures into the geometry of magnetic microstructures. Although based on different physical principles from those of optically probed nanoparticles, these geometrically defined magnetic microstructures permit a multiplexing functionality in the magnetic resonance radio-frequency spectrum that is in many ways analogous to that permitted by quantum dots in the optical spectrum. Additionally, in situ modification of particle geometries may facilitate radio-frequency probing of various local physiological variables.
The quantum Hall effect arises from the interplay between localized and extended states that form when electrons, confined to two dimensions, are subject to a perpendicular magnetic field. The effect involves exact quantization of all the electronic transport properties owing to particle localization. In the conventional theory of the quantum Hall effect, strong-field localization is associated with a single-particle drift motion of electrons along contours of constant disorder potential. Transport experiments that probe the extended states in the transition regions between quantum Hall phases have been used to test both the theory and its implications for quantum Hall phase transitions. Although several experiments on highly disordered samples have affirmed the validity of the single-particle picture, other experiments and some recent theories have found deviations from the predicted universal behaviour. Here we use a scanning single-electron transistor to probe the individual localized states, which we find to be strikingly different from the predictions of single-particle theory. The states are mainly determined by Coulomb interactions, and appear only when quantization of kinetic energy limits the screening ability of electrons. We conclude that the quantum Hall effect has a greater diversity of regimes and phase transitions than predicted by the single-particle framework. Our experiments suggest a unified picture of localization in which the single-particle model is valid only in the limit of strong disorder.
Advances in mesoscopic physics are enabling fundamental properties of solids to be studied at an unprecedented level of detail. In his Perspective, von Delft highlights the study by van der Wiel et al., who have demonstrated almost complete screening of the local spin of a quantum dot. This behavior mirrors the well-known Kondo effect for magnetic impurities in metals. Because they are tunable, quantum dots allow detailed tests of models for the Kondo effect, but experiments are ahead of theory at this time.
The transition-state theory of chemical kinetics, coupled with relatively crude methods of constructing potential-energy surfaces for reacting systems, has great utility in the forecasting of kinetic properties. In particular, it permits prediction of the effect of isotopic substitution on rate constants, and comparison of these predictions with experimental data provides a particularly sensitive test for the combination of potential-energy surface and transition-state theory. More rigorous tests of each of these factors depend on future developments in quantum chemistry, in studies of chemical reactions in molecular beams, and in detailed trajectory calculations of scattering processes.
Achieving coherent quantum control over massive mechanical resonators is a current research goal. Nano- and micromechanical devices can be coupled to a variety of systems, for example to single electrons by electrostatic or magnetic coupling, and to photons by radiation pressure or optical dipole forces. So far, all such experiments have operated in a regime of weak coupling, in which reversible energy exchange between the mechanical device and its coupled partner is suppressed by fast decoherence of the individual systems to their local environments. Controlled quantum experiments are in principle not possible in such a regime, but instead require strong coupling. So far, this has been demonstrated only between microscopic quantum systems, such as atoms and photons (in the context of cavity quantum electrodynamics) or solid state qubits and photons. Strong coupling is an essential requirement for the preparation of mechanical quantum states, such as squeezed or entangled states, and also for using mechanical resonators in the context of quantum information processing, for example, as quantum transducers. Here we report the observation of optomechanical normal mode splitting, which provides unambiguous evidence for strong coupling of cavity photons to a mechanical resonator. This paves the way towards full quantum optical control of nano- and micromechanical devices.
The electronic structure of simple crystalline solids can be completely described in terms either of local quantum states in real space (r-space), or of wave-like states defined in momentum-space (k-space). However, in the copper oxide superconductors, neither of these descriptions alone may be sufficient. Indeed, comparisons between r-space and k-space studies of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta (Bi-2212) reveal numerous unexplained phenomena and apparent contradictions. Here, to explore these issues, we report Fourier transform studies of atomic-scale spatial modulations in the Bi-2212 density of states. When analysed as arising from quasiparticle interference, the modulations yield elements of the Fermi-surface and energy gap in agreement with photoemission experiments. The consistency of numerous sets of dispersing modulations with the quasiparticle interference model shows that no additional order parameter is required. We also explore the momentum-space structure of the unoccupied states that are inaccessible to photoemission, and find strong similarities to the structure of the occupied states. The copper oxide quasiparticles therefore apparently exhibit particle-hole mixing similar to that of conventional superconductors. Near the energy gap maximum, the modulations become intense, commensurate with the crystal, and bounded by nanometre-scale domains. Scattering of the antinodal quasiparticles is therefore strongly influenced by nanometre-scale disorder.
Inelastic light scattering spectroscopy has, since its first discovery, been an indispensable tool in physical science for probing elementary excitations, such as phonons, magnons and plasmons in both bulk and nanoscale materials. In the quantum mechanical picture of inelastic light scattering, incident photons first excite a set of intermediate electronic states, which then generate crystal elementary excitations and radiate energy-shifted photons. The intermediate electronic excitations therefore have a crucial role as quantum pathways in inelastic light scattering, and this is exemplified by resonant Raman scattering and Raman interference. The ability to control these excitation pathways can open up new opportunities to probe, manipulate and utilize inelastic light scattering. Here we achieve excitation pathway control in graphene with electrostatic doping. Our study reveals quantum interference between different Raman pathways in graphene: when some of the pathways are blocked, the one-phonon Raman intensity does not diminish, as commonly expected, but increases dramatically. This discovery sheds new light on the understanding of resonance Raman scattering in graphene. In addition, we demonstrate hot-electron luminescence in graphene as the Fermi energy approaches half the laser excitation energy. This hot luminescence, which is another form of inelastic light scattering, results from excited-state relaxation channels that become available only in heavily doped graphene.
Anaerobic sedimentary conditions have traditionally been linked to the generation of the source rocks for petroleum formation. However, the influence of sedimentary redox conditions on the composition of freshly deposited organic matter (OM) is not clear. We assessed the effect of in situ exposure time to oxic conditions on the composition of OM accumulating in different coastal and deep-sea sediments using solid-state 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). 13C NMR spectra were resolved into mixtures of model components to distinguish between alkyl carbon present in protein and nonprotein structures. There is an inverse relation between the length of exposure to oxic conditions and the relative abundance of nonprotein alkyl (alkylNP) carbon, whose concentration is two orders of magnitude higher in coastal sediments with short exposure times than in deep-sea sediments with long exposure times. All alkylNP-rich samples contain a physically separate polymethylene component similar in composition to algaenans and kerogens in type I oil shales. The duration of exposure to oxic conditions appears to directly influence the quality and oil generation potential of OM in marine shales.
The prediction of a protein's tertiary structure is still a considerable problem because the huge amount of possible conformational space1 makes it computationally difficult. With regard to side-chain modelling, a solution has been attempted by the grouping of side-chain conformations into representative sets of rotamers2-5. Nonetheless, an exhaustive combinatorial search is still limited to carefully indentified packing units56 containing a limited number of residues. For larger systems other strategies had to be developed, such as the Monte Carlo Procedure67 and the genetic algorithm and clustering approach8. Here we present a theorem, referred to as the 'dead-end elimination' theorem, which imposes a suitable condition to identify rotamers that cannot be members of the global minimum energy conformation. Application of this theorem effectively controls the computational explosion of the rotamer combinatorial problem, thereby allowing the determination of the global minimum energy conformation of a large collection of side chains.
The continuous need for miniaturization and increase in device speed drives the electronics industry to explore new avenues of information processing. One possibility is to use electron spin to store, manipulate and carry information. All such 'spintronics' applications are faced with formidable challenges in finding fast and efficient ways to create, transport, detect, control and manipulate spin textures and currents. Here we show how most of these operations can be performed in a relatively simple manner in a hybrid system consisting of a superconducting film and a paramagnetic diluted magnetic semiconductor (DMS) quantum well. Our proposal is based on the observation that the inhomogeneous magnetic fields of the superconducting film create local spin and charge textures in the DMS quantum well, leading to a variety of effects such as Bloch oscillations and an unusual quantum Hall effect. We exploit recent progress in manipulating magnetic flux bundles (vortices) in superconductors and show how these can create, manipulate and control the spin textures in DMSs.
Several high-intensity synchrotron x-ray sources have been constructed over the past few years in the United States, West Germany, Great Britain, Japan, France, Italy, and the Soviet Union. Crystallographers have begun to use these facilities for experiments that take advantage of the characteristics of synchrotron radiation, namely, a broad distribution of wavelengths, high intensity, low divergence, strong polarization, and a pulsed time structure. In addition to more familiar diffraction experiments on single crystals and powdered samples, new types of crystallographic studies, for example, energy-dispersive and surface diffraction studies, have progressed rapidly with more general accessibility of synchrotron sources. These high-intensity sources allow diffraction experiments to be performed on very small crystals or on large biological molecules, and permit weak magnetic scattering to be detected Anomalous dispersion experiments can exploit he ability to vary the wavelength of the radiation, and the pulsed time structure of the beam makes possible fast time-resolved experiments. Because of the availability of synchrotron x-radiation, these and other kinds of experiments will be in the forefront of crystallographic research for the next several years.
The increase in temperature outward from the surface of a stellar photosphere can be understood by looking at the local energy balance. The relatively high-density stellar photosphere is cooled effectively by radiative energy loss penetrating the optically thin corona. For the low-density chromosphere and corona, if the energy input cannot be balanced by radiative energy losses, the temperature will rise steeply, possibly up to 1 million degrees or more. Coronal heating and emission appear to be strongly influenced by magnetic fields, leading to large differences in x-ray emission for otherwise similar stars. Comparatively small variations are seen in the overall chromospheric emission of stars. Chromospheres are probably mainly heated by shock-wave energy dissipation, modified by magnetic fields.
The structure of the complex formed between the intercalating agent proflavine and fibrous native DNA was studied by one- and two-dimensional high-resolution solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Carbon-13-labeled proflavine was used to show that the drug is stacked with the aromatic ring plane perpendicular to the fiber axis and that it is essentially immobile. Natural abundance carbon-13 NMR of the DNA itself shows that proflavine binding does not change the puckering of the deoxyribose ring. However, phosphorus-31 NMR spectra show profound changes in the orientation of the phosphodiester grouping on proflavine binding, with some of the phosphodiesters tilting almost parallel to the helix axis, and a second set almost perpendicular. The first group to the phosphodiesters probably spans the intercalation sites, whereas the tilting of the second set likely compensates for the unwinding of the DNA by the intercalator.
Can a gas of spin-up and spin-down fermions become ferromagnetic because of repulsive interactions? We addressed this question, for which there is not yet a definitive theoretical answer, in an experiment with an ultracold two-component Fermi gas. The observation of nonmonotonic behavior of lifetime, kinetic energy, and size for increasing repulsive interactions provides strong evidence for a phase transition to a ferromagnetic state. Our observations imply that itinerant ferromagnetism of delocalized fermions is possible without lattice and band structure, and our data validate the most basic model for ferromagnetism introduced by Stoner.
Classical phase transitions occur when a physical system reaches a state below a critical temperature characterized by macroscopic order. Quantum phase transitions occur at absolute zero; they are induced by the change of an external parameter or coupling constant, and are driven by quantum fluctuations. Examples include transitions in quantum Hall systems, localization in Si-MOSFETs (metal oxide silicon field-effect transistors; ref. 4) and the superconductor-insulator transition in two-dimensional systems. Both classical and quantum critical points are governed by a diverging correlation length, although quantum systems possess additional correlations that do not have a classical counterpart. This phenomenon, known as entanglement, is the resource that enables quantum computation and communication. The role of entanglement at a phase transition is not captured by statistical mechanics-a complete classification of the critical many-body state requires the introduction of concepts from quantum information theory. Here we connect the theory of critical phenomena with quantum information by exploring the entangling resources of a system close to its quantum critical point. We demonstrate, for a class of one-dimensional magnetic systems, that entanglement shows scaling behaviour in the vicinity of the transition point.
The active steering of the pathways taken by chemical reactions and the optimization of energy conversion processes provide striking examples of the coherent control of quantum interference through the use of shaped laser pulses. Experimentally, coherence is usually established by synchronizing a subset of molecules in an ensemble with ultra-short laser pulses. But in complex systems where even chemically identical molecules exist with different conformations and in diverse environments, the synchronized subset will have an intrinsic inhomogeneity that limits the degree of coherent control that can be achieved. A natural-and, indeed, the ultimate-solution to overcoming intrinsic inhomogeneities is the investigation of the behaviour of one molecule at a time. The single-molecule approach has provided useful insights into phenomena as diverse as biomolecular interactions, cellular processes and the dynamics of supercooled liquids and conjugated polymers. Coherent state preparation of single molecules has so far been restricted to cryogenic conditions, whereas at room temperature only incoherent vibrational relaxation pathways have been probed. Here we report the observation and manipulation of vibrational wave-packet interference in individual molecules at ambient conditions. We show that adapting the time and phase distribution of the optical excitation field to the dynamics of each molecule results in a high degree of control, and expect that the approach can be extended to achieve single-molecule coherent control in other complex inhomogeneous systems.
Controlling the electromagnetic properties of materials, going beyond the limit that is attainable with naturally existing substances, has become a reality with the advent of metamaterials. The range of various structured artificial 'atoms' has promised a vast variety of otherwise unexpected physical phenomena, among which the experimental realization of a negative refractive index has been one of the main foci thus far. Expanding the refractive index into a high positive regime will complete the spectrum of achievable refractive index and provide more design flexibility for transformation optics. Naturally existing transparent materials possess small positive indices of refraction, except for a few semiconductors and insulators, such as lead sulphide or strontium titanate, that exhibit a rather high peak refractive index at mid- and far-infrared frequencies. Previous approaches using metamaterials were not successful in realizing broadband high refractive indices. A broadband high-refractive-index metamaterial structure was theoretically investigated only recently, but the proposed structure does not lend itself to easy implementation. Here we demonstrate that a broadband, extremely high index of refraction can be realized from large-area, free-standing, flexible terahertz metamaterials composed of strongly coupled unit cells. By drastically increasing the effective permittivity through strong capacitive coupling and decreasing the diamagnetic response with a thin metallic structure in the unit cell, a peak refractive index of 38.6 along with a low-frequency quasi-static value of over 20 were experimentally realized for a single-layer terahertz metamaterial, while maintaining low losses. As a natural extension of these single-layer metamaterials, we fabricated quasi-three-dimensional high-refractive-index metamaterials, and obtained a maximum bulk refractive index of 33.2 along with a value of around 8 at the quasi-static limit.
A photon in an arbitrary polarization state cannot be cloned perfectly. But suppose that at our disposal we have several copies of a photon in an unknown state. Is it possible to delete the information content of one or more of these photons by a physical process? Specifically, if two photons are in the same initial polarization state, is there a mechanism that produces one photon in the same initial state and the other in some standard polarization state? If this could be done, then one would create a standard blank state onto which one could copy an unknown state approximately, by deterministic cloning or exactly, by probabilistic cloning. This could in principle be useful in quantum computation, where one could store new information in an already computed state by deleting the old information. Here we show, however, that the linearity of quantum theory does not allow us to delete a copy of an arbitrary quantum state perfectly. Though in a classical computer information can be deleted (reversibly) against a copy, the analogous task cannot be accomplished, even irreversibly, with quantum information.
The interplay between light and matter is the basis of many fundamental processes and various applications. Harnessing light-matter interactions in principle allows operation of solid state devices under new physical principles: for example, the a.c. optical Stark effect (OSE) has enabled coherent quantum control schemes of spins in semiconductors, with the potential for realizing quantum devices based on spin qubits. However, as the dimension of semiconductors is reduced, light-matter coupling is typically weakened, thus limiting applications at the nanoscale. Recent experiments have demonstrated significant enhancement of nanoscale light-matter interactions, albeit with the need for a high-finesse cavity, ultimately preventing device down-scaling and integration. Here we report that a sizable OSE can be achieved at substantial energy detuning in a cavity-free colloidal metal-semiconductor core-shell hetero-nanostructure, in which the metal surface plasmon is tuned to resonate spectrally with a semiconductor exciton transition. We further demonstrate that this resonantly enhanced OSE exhibits polarization dependence and provides a viable mechanism for coherent ultrafast spin manipulation within colloidal nanostructures. The plasmon-exciton resonant nature further enables tailoring of both OSE and spin manipulation by tuning plasmon resonance intensity and frequency. These results open a pathway for tailoring light-matter-spin interactions through plasmon-exciton resonant coupling in a judiciously engineered nanostructure, and offer a basis for future applications in quantum information processing at the nanoscale. More generally, integrated nanostructures with resonantly enhanced light-matter interactions should serve as a test bed for other emerging fields, including nano-biophotonics and nano-energy.
Quantum mechanical superexchange interactions form the basis of quantum magnetism in strongly correlated electronic media. We report on the direct measurement of superexchange interactions with ultracold atoms in optical lattices. After preparing a spin-mixture of ultracold atoms in an antiferromagnetically ordered state, we measured coherent superexchange-mediated spin dynamics with coupling energies from 5 hertz up to 1 kilohertz. By dynamically modifying the potential bias between neighboring lattice sites, the magnitude and sign of the superexchange interaction can be controlled, thus allowing the system to be switched between antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic spin interactions. We compare our findings to predictions of a two-site Bose-Hubbard model and find very good agreement, but are also able to identify corrections that can be explained by the inclusion of direct nearest-neighbor interactions.
On cooling through the transition temperature T(c) of a conventional superconductor, an energy gap develops as the normal-state charge carriers form Cooper pairs; these pairs form a phase-coherent condensate that exhibits the well-known signatures of superconductivity: zero resistivity and the expulsion of magnetic flux (the Meissner effect). However, in many unconventional superconductors, the formation of the energy gap is not coincident with the formation of the phase-coherent superfluid. Instead, at temperatures above the critical temperature a range of unusual properties, collectively known as 'pseudogap phenomena', are observed. Here we argue that a key pseudogap phenomenon-fluctuating superconductivity occurring substantially above the transition temperature-could be induced by the proximity of a Mott-insulating state. The Mott-insulating state in the kappa-(BEDT-TTF)2X organic molecular metals can be tuned, without doping, through superconductivity into a normal metallic state as a function of the parameter t/U, where t is the tight-binding transfer integral characterizing the metallic bandwidth and U is the on-site Coulomb repulsion. By exploiting a particularly sensitive probe of superconducting fluctuations, the vortex-Nernst effect, we find that a fluctuating regime develops as t/U decreases and the role of Coulomb correlations increases.
Triplet energy transfer (TT), a key process in molecular and organic electronics, generally occurs by either strongly distance-dependent single-step tunneling or weakly distance-dependent multistep hopping. We have synthesized a series of pi-stacked molecules consisting of a benzophenone donor, one to three fluorene bridges, and a naphthalene acceptor, and studied the rate of TT from benzophenone to naphthalene across the fluorene bridge using femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy. We show that the dominant TT mechanism switches from tunneling to wire-like hopping between bridge lengths 1 and 2. The crossover observed for TT can be determined by direct observation of the bridge-occupied state.
The rate constant of the electron-transfer reaction between a gold electrode and an electroactive ferrocene group has been measured at a structurally well-defined metal-electrolyte interface at temperatures from 1 degrees to 47 degrees C and reaction free energies from -1.0 to +0.8 electron volts (eV). The ferrocene group was positioned a fixed distance from the gold surface by the self-assembly of a mixed thiol monolayer of (eta(5)C(5)H(5))Fe(eta(5)C(5)H(4))CO(2)(CH(2))(16)SH and CH(3)(CH(2))(15)SH. Rate constants from 1 per second (s(-1)) to 2 x 10(4) s(-1) in 1 molar HClO(4) are reasonably fit with a reorganization energy of 0.85 eV and a prefactor for electron tunneling of 7 x 10(4) s(-1) eV(-1). Such self-assembled monolayers can be used to systematically probe the dependence of electron-transfer rates on distance, medium, and spacer structure, and to provide an empirical basis for the construction of interfacial devices such as sensors and transducers that utilize macroscopically directional electron-transfer reactions.
The collective excitation spectrum of interacting electrons in one dimension has been measured by controlling the energy and momentum of electrons tunneling between two closely spaced, parallel quantum wires in a GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure while measuring the resulting conductance. The excitation spectrum deviates from the noninteracting spectrum, attesting to the importance of Coulomb interactions. An observed 30% enhancement of the excitation velocity relative to noninteracting electrons with the same density, a parameter determined experimentally, is consistent with theories on interacting electrons in one dimension. In short wires, 6 and 2 micrometers long, finite size effects, resulting from the breaking of translational invariance, are observed.
Quantum communication relies on the availability of light pulses with strong quantum correlations among photons. An example of such an optical source is a single-photon pulse with a vanishing probability for detecting two or more photons. Using pulsed laser excitation of a single quantum dot, a single-photon turnstile device that generates a train of single-photon pulses was demonstrated. For a spectrally isolated quantum dot, nearly 100% of the excitation pulses lead to emission of a single photon, yielding an ideal single-photon source.
Double quantum dots provide an ideal model system for studying interactions between localized impurity spins. We report on the transport properties of a series-coupled double quantum dot as electrons are added one by one onto the dots. When the many-body molecular states are formed, we observe a splitting of the Kondo resonance peak in the differential conductance. This splitting reflects the energy difference between the bonding and antibonding states formed by the coherent superposition of the Kondo states of each dot. The occurrence of the Kondo resonance and its magnetic field dependence agree with a simple interpretation of the spin status of a double quantum dot.
A double quantum dot device is a tunable two-level system for electronic energy states. A dc electron current was used to directly measure the rates for elastic and inelastic transitions between the two levels. For inelastic transitions, energy is exchanged with bosonic degrees of freedom in the environment. The inelastic transition rates are well described by the Einstein coefficients, relating absorption with stimulated and spontaneous emission. The most effectively coupled bosons in the specific environment of the semiconductor device used here were acoustic phonons. The experiments demonstrate the importance of vacuum fluctuations in the environment for quantum dot devices and potential design constraints for their use for preparing long-lived quantum states.
The reaction of F with H2 and its isotopomers is the paradigm for an exothermic triatomic abstraction reaction. In a crossed-beam scattering experiment, we determined relative integral and differential cross sections for reaction of the ground F(2P(3/2)) and excited F*(2P(1/2)) spin-orbit states with D2 for collision energies of 0.25 to 1.2 kilocalorie/mole. At the lowest collision energy, F* is approximately 1.6 times more reactive than F, although reaction of F* is forbidden within the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approximation. As the collision energy increases, the BO-allowed reaction rapidly dominates. We found excellent agreement between multistate, quantum reactive scattering calculations and both the measured energy dependence of the F*/F reactivity ratio and the differential cross sections. This agreement confirms the fundamental understanding of the factors controlling electronic nonadiabaticity in abstraction reactions.
The nature and control of individual metal atoms on insulators are of great importance in emerging atomic-scale technologies. Individual gold atoms on an ultrathin insulating sodium chloride film supported by a copper surface exhibit two different charge states, which are stabilized by the large ionic polarizability of the film. The charge state and associated physical and chemical properties such as diffusion can be controlled by adding or removing a single electron to or from the adatom with a scanning tunneling microscope tip. The simple physical mechanism behind the charge bistability in this case suggests that this is a common phenomenon for adsorbates on polar insulating films.
Pattern recognition and allied multivariate methods provide an approach to the interpretation of the multivariate data often encountered in analytical chemistry. Widely used methods include mapping and display, discriminant development, clustering, and modeling. Each has been applied to a variety of chemical problems, and examples are given. The results of two recent studies are shown, a classification of subjects as normal or cystic fibrosis heterozygotes and simulation of chemical shifts of carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance spectra by linear model equations.
Extremophilic organisms require specialized enzymes for their exotic metabolisms. Acid-loving thermophilic Archaea that live in the mudpots of volcanic solfataras obtain their energy from reduced sulphur compounds such as hydrogen sulphide (H(2)S) and carbon disulphide (CS(2)). The oxidation of these compounds into sulphuric acid creates the extremely acidic environment that characterizes solfataras. The hyperthermophilic Acidianus strain A1-3, which was isolated from the fumarolic, ancient sauna building at the Solfatara volcano (Naples, Italy), was shown to rapidly convert CS(2) into H(2)S and carbon dioxide (CO(2)), but nothing has been known about the modes of action and the evolution of the enzyme(s) involved. Here we describe the structure, the proposed mechanism and evolution of a CS(2) hydrolase from Acidianus A1-3. The enzyme monomer displays a typical b-carbonic anhydrase fold and active site, yet CO(2) is not one of its substrates. Owing to large carboxy- and amino-terminal arms, an unusual hexadecameric catenane oligomer has evolved. This structure results in the blocking of the entrance to the active site that is found in canonical b-carbonic anhydrases and the formation of a single 15-A-long, highly hydrophobic tunnel that functions as a specificity filter. The tunnel determines the enzyme's substrate specificity for CS(2), which is hydrophobic. The transposon sequences that surround the gene encoding this CS(2) hydrolase point to horizontal gene transfer as a mechanism for its acquisition during evolution. Our results show how the ancient b-carbonic anhydrase, which is central to global carbon metabolism, was transformed by divergent evolution into a crucial enzyme in CS(2) metabolism.
Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are highly energetic explosions signaling the death of massive stars in distant galaxies. The Gamma-ray Burst Monitor and Large Area Telescope onboard the Fermi Observatory together record GRBs over a broad energy range spanning about 7 decades of gammaray energy. In September 2008, Fermi observed the exceptionally luminous GRB 080916C, with the largest apparent energy release yet measured. The high-energy gamma rays are observed to start later and persist longer than the lower energy photons. A simple spectral form fits the entire GRB spectrum, providing strong constraints on emission models. The known distance of the burst enables placing lower limits on the bulk Lorentz factor of the outflow and on the quantum gravity mass.
Piezoelectric materials have many applications at cryogenic temperatures. However, the piezoelectric response below 10 kelvin is diminished, making the use of these materials somewhat marginal. Results are presented on strontium titanate (SrTiO3), which exhibits a rapidly increasing piezoelectric response with decreasing temperature below 50 kelvin; the magnitude of its response around 1 kelvin is comparable to that of the best materials at room temperature. This "giant" piezoelectric response may open the way for a broad class of applications including use in ultralow-temperature scanning microscopies and in a magnetic field-insensitive thermometer. These observations, and the possible divergence of the mechanical response to electric fields at even lower temperatures, may arise from an apparent quantum critical point at absolute zero.
The calculation time for the energy of atoms and molecules scales exponentially with system size on a classical computer but polynomially using quantum algorithms. We demonstrate that such algorithms can be applied to problems of chemical interest using modest numbers of quantum bits. Calculations of the water and lithium hydride molecular ground-state energies have been carried out on a quantum computer simulator using a recursive phase-estimation algorithm. The recursive algorithm reduces the number of quantum bits required for the readout register from about 20 to 4. Mappings of the molecular wave function to the quantum bits are described. An adiabatic method for the preparation of a good approximate ground-state wave function is described and demonstrated for a stretched hydrogen molecule. The number of quantum bits required scales linearly with the number of basis functions, and the number of gates required grows polynomially with the number of quantum bits.
Hydrodynamic flow in classical and quantum fluids can be either laminar or turbulent. Vorticity in turbulent flow is often modelled with vortex filaments. While this represents an idealization in classical fluids, vortices are topologically stable quantized objects in superfluids. Superfluid turbulence is therefore thought to be important for the understanding of turbulence more generally. The fermionic 3He superfluids are attractive systems to study because their characteristics vary widely over the experimentally accessible temperature regime. Here we report nuclear magnetic resonance measurements and numerical simulations indicating the existence of sharp transition to turbulence in the B phase of superfluid 3He. Above 0.60T(c) (where T(c) is the transition temperature for superfluidity) the hydrodynamics are regular, while below this temperature we see turbulent behaviour. The transition is insensitive to the fluid velocity, in striking contrast to current textbook knowledge of turbulence. Rather, it is controlled by an intrinsic parameter of the superfluid: the mutual friction between the normal and superfluid components of the flow, which causes damping of the vortex motion.
The acoustic features useful for converting auditory information into perceived objects are poorly understood. Although auditory cortex neurons have been described as being narrowly tuned and preferentially responsive to narrowband signals, naturally occurring sounds are generally wideband with unique spectral energy profiles. Through the use of parametric wideband acoustic stimuli, we found that such neurons in awake marmoset monkeys respond vigorously to wideband sounds having complex spectral shapes, preferring stimuli of either high or low spectral contrast. Low contrast-preferring neurons cannot be studied thoroughly with narrowband stimuli and have not been previously described. These findings indicate that spectral contrast reflects an important stimulus decomposition in auditory cortex and may contribute to the recognition of acoustic objects.
A frustrated system is one whose symmetry precludes the possibility that every pairwise interaction ("bond") in the system can be satisfied at the same time. Such systems are common in all areas of physical and biological science. In the most extreme cases, they can have a disordered ground state with "macroscopic" degeneracy; that is, one that comprises a huge number of equivalent states of the same energy. Pauling's description of the low-temperature proton disorder in water ice was perhaps the first recognition of this phenomenon and remains the paradigm. In recent years, a new class of magnetic substance has been characterized, in which the disorder of the magnetic moments at low temperatures is precisely analogous to the proton disorder in water ice. These substances, known as spin ice materials, are perhaps the "cleanest" examples of such highly frustrated systems yet discovered. They offer an unparalleled opportunity for the study of frustration in magnetic systems at both an experimental and a theoretical level. This article describes the essential physics of spin ice, as it is currently understood, and identifies new avenues for future research on related materials and models.
Cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) systems allow the study of a variety of fundamental quantum-optics phenomena, such as entanglement, quantum decoherence and the quantum-classical boundary. Such systems also provide test beds for quantum information science. Nearly all strongly coupled cavity QED experiments have used a single atom in a high-quality-factor (high-Q) cavity. Here we report the experimental realization of a strongly coupled system in the solid state: a single quantum dot embedded in the spacer of a nanocavity, showing vacuum-field Rabi splitting exceeding the decoherence linewidths of both the nanocavity and the quantum dot. This requires a small-volume cavity and an atomic-like two-level system. The photonic crystal slab nanocavity--which traps photons when a defect is introduced inside the two-dimensional photonic bandgap by leaving out one or more holes--has both high Q and small modal volume V, as required for strong light-matter interactions. The quantum dot has two discrete energy levels with a transition dipole moment much larger than that of an atom, and it is fixed in the nanocavity during growth.
The development of transistor-based integrated circuits for modern computing is a story of great success. However, the proved concept for enhancing computational power by continuous miniaturization is approaching its fundamental limits. Alternative approaches consider logic elements that are reconfigurable at run-time to overcome the rigid architecture of the present hardware systems. Implementation of parallel algorithms on such 'chameleon' processors has the potential to yield a dramatic increase of computational speed, competitive with that of supercomputers. Owing to their functional flexibility, 'chameleon' processors can be readily optimized with respect to any computer application. In conventional microprocessors, information must be transferred to a memory to prevent it from getting lost, because electrically processed information is volatile. Therefore the computational performance can be improved if the logic gate is additionally capable of storing the output. Here we describe a simple hardware concept for a programmable logic element that is based on a single magnetic random access memory (MRAM) cell. It combines the inherent advantage of a non-volatile output with flexible functionality which can be selected at run-time to operate as an AND, OR, NAND or NOR gate.
Ultrasonic irradiation of liquids causes acoustic cavitation: the formation, growth, and implosive collapse of bubbles. Bubble collapse during cavitation generates transient hot spots responsible for high-energy chemistry and emission of light. Determination of the temperatures reached in a cavitating bubble has remained a difficult experimental problem. As a spectroscopic probe of the cavitation event, sonoluminescence provides a solution. Sonoluminescence spectra from silicone oil were reported and analyzed. The observed emission came from excited state C(2) (Swan band transitions, d(3)IIg-a(3)II(micro)), which has been modeled with synthetic spectra as a function of rotational and vibrational temperatures. From comparison of synthetic to observed spectra, the effective cavitation temperature was found to be 5075 +/- 156 K.
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectra (proton and phosphorus-31) and ultraviolet absorption spectra of the DNA decamer d(br5CGbr5CGATbr5CGbr5CG), in which the central two adenine-thymine base pairs are out of order with the rest of the purine-pyrimidine alternation sequence, indicate that under appropriate solvent conditions (high salt and methanol) the molecule undergoes a structural transition from a right-handed B-DNA conformation to a left-handed Z-DNA conformation. Measurements of the two-dimensional nuclear Overhauser effect on the decamer indicate that all of the guanines as well as the two equivalent thymines adopt the syn conformation.
The divergence of quantum and classical descriptions of particle motion is clearly apparent in quantum tunnelling between two regions of classically stable motion. An archetype of such non-classical motion is tunnelling through an energy barrier. In the 1980s, a new process, 'dynamical' tunnelling, was predicted, involving no potential energy barrier; however, a constant of the motion (other than energy) still forbids classically the quantum-allowed motion. This process should occur, for example, in periodically driven, nonlinear hamiltonian systems with one degree of freedom. Such systems may be chaotic, consisting of regions in phase space of stable, regular motion embedded in a sea of chaos. Previous studies predicted dynamical tunnelling between these stable regions. Here we observe dynamical tunnelling of ultracold atoms from a Bose-Einstein condensate in an amplitude-modulated optical standing wave. Atoms coherently tunnel back and forth between their initial state of oscillatory motion (corresponding to an island of regular motion) and the state oscillating 180 degrees out of phase with the initial state.
The development of line-narrowing techniques, such as magic-angle spinning (MAS) and high-power decoupling, has led to powerful high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance approaches for solid samples. In favorable cases (for instance, where high abundances of protons are present) cross polarization (CP) provides a means of circumventing the time bottleneck caused by inefficient spinlattice relaxation in many solids. The combined CP-MAS approach for carbon-13 with proton decoupling has become a popular and routine experiment for organic solids. For many nuclides with spin quantum number /> (1/2) the central nuclear magnetic resonance transition can be employed in high-resolution experiments that involve rapid sample spinning. A continuing stream of advances holds great promise for the use of high-resolution techniques for the characterization of solids by a wide range of nuclides.
Although hydrogen is the simplest of atoms, it does not form the simplest of solids or liquids. Quantum effects in these phases are considerable (a consequence of the light proton mass) and they have a demonstrable and often puzzling influence on many physical properties, including spatial order. To date, the structure of dense hydrogen remains experimentally elusive. Recent studies of the melting curve of hydrogen indicate that at high (but experimentally accessible) pressures, compressed hydrogen will adopt a liquid state, even at low temperatures. In reaching this phase, hydrogen is also projected to pass through an insulator-to-metal transition. This raises the possibility of new state of matter: a near ground-state liquid metal, and its ordered states in the quantum domain. Ordered quantum fluids are traditionally categorized as superconductors or superfluids; these respective systems feature dissipationless electrical currents or mass flow. Here we report a topological analysis of the projected phase of liquid metallic hydrogen, finding that it may represent a new type of ordered quantum fluid. Specifically, we show that liquid metallic hydrogen cannot be categorized exclusively as a superconductor or superfluid. We predict that, in the presence of a magnetic field, liquid metallic hydrogen will exhibit several phase transitions to ordered states, ranging from superconductors to superfluids.
The interaction between a single confined spin and the spins of an electron reservoir leads to one of the most remarkable phenomena of many-body physics--the Kondo effect. Electronic transport measurements on single artificial atoms, or quantum dots, have made it possible to study the effect in great detail. Here we report optical measurements on a single semiconductor quantum dot tunnel-coupled to a degenerate electron gas which show that absorption of a single photon leads to an abrupt change in the system Hamiltonian and a quantum quench of Kondo correlations. By inferring the characteristic power-law exponents from the experimental absorption line shapes, we find a unique signature of the quench in the form of an Anderson orthogonality catastrophe, induced by a vanishing overlap between the initial and final many-body wavefunctions. We show that the power-law exponent that determines the degree of orthogonality can be tuned using an external magnetic field, which unequivocally demonstrates that the observed absorption line shape originates from Kondo correlations. Our experiments demonstrate that optical measurements on single artificial atoms offer new perspectives on many-body phenomena previously studied using transport spectroscopy only.
2,6-Dibromophenol has been isolated from a luminous marine enteropneust, Balanoglossus biminiensis, found on intertidal beach areas at Sapelo Island, Georgia. This compound, responsible for the characteristic "iodoform-like" odor of these animals, is present in relatively large amounts; the estimated quantity per organism is 10 to 15 milligrams. Identity of the isolated substance as 2,6 dibromophenol is based on analyses of ultraviolet, infrared, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra, mass spectrometry analysis, and on melting-point data.
The generation, manipulation and detection of spin-polarized electrons in nanostructures define the main challenges of spin-based electronics. Among the different approaches for spin generation and manipulation, spin-orbit coupling--which couples the spin of an electron to its momentum--is attracting considerable interest. In a spin-orbit-coupled system, a non-zero spin current is predicted in a direction perpendicular to the applied electric field, giving rise to a spin Hall effect. Consistent with this effect, electrically induced spin polarization was recently detected by optical techniques at the edges of a semiconductor channel and in two-dimensional electron gases in semiconductor heterostructures. Here we report electrical measurements of the spin Hall effect in a diffusive metallic conductor, using a ferromagnetic electrode in combination with a tunnel barrier to inject a spin-polarized current. In our devices, we observe an induced voltage that results exclusively from the conversion of the injected spin current into charge imbalance through the spin Hall effect. Such a voltage is proportional to the component of the injected spins that is perpendicular to the plane defined by the spin current direction and the voltage probes. These experiments reveal opportunities for efficient spin detection without the need for magnetic materials, which could lead to useful spintronics devices that integrate information processing and data storage.
Confinement of charge carriers in semiconductors by quantum wells is usually accomplished with layers that vary in elemental composition, such as aluminum gallium arsenide and gallium arsenide. We fabricated diamond superlattices by creating multilayer structures of isotopically pure carbon isotopes carbon-12 (12C) and carbon-13 (13C), which confine electrons by a difference in band-gap energy of 17 millielectron volts. Cathodoluminescence experiments performed at 80 kelvin showed that excitonic recombination in the higher-energy band of 13C vanishes in favor of increased recombination in the lower-energy 12C material. Carrier confinement was achieved in diamond superlattices made up of both thinner (30 nanometers) and thicker (up to 350 nanometers) layers.
Granular materials and ordinary fluids react differently to shear stresses. Rather than deforming uniformly, materials such as dry sand or cohesionless powders develop shear bands--narrow zones of large relative particle motion, with essentially rigid adjacent regions. Because shear bands mark areas of flow, material failure and energy dissipation, they are important in many industrial, civil engineering and geophysical processes. They are also relevant to lubricating fluids confined to ultrathin molecular layers. However, detailed three-dimensional information on motion within a shear band, including the degree of particle rotation and interparticle slip, is lacking. Similarly, very little is known about how the microstructure of individual grains affects movement in densely packed material. Here we combine magnetic resonance imaging, X-ray tomography and high-speed-video particle tracking to obtain the local steady-state particle velocity, rotation and packing density for shear flow in a three-dimensional Couette geometry. We find that key characteristics of the granular microstructure determine the shape of the velocity profile.
The ability to control the quantum state of a single electron spin in a quantum dot is at the heart of recent developments towards a scalable spin-based quantum computer. In combination with the recently demonstrated controlled exchange gate between two neighbouring spins, driven coherent single spin rotations would permit universal quantum operations. Here, we report the experimental realization of single electron spin rotations in a double quantum dot. First, we apply a continuous-wave oscillating magnetic field, generated on-chip, and observe electron spin resonance in spin-dependent transport measurements through the two dots. Next, we coherently control the quantum state of the electron spin by applying short bursts of the oscillating magnetic field and observe about eight oscillations of the spin state (so-called Rabi oscillations) during a microsecond burst. These results demonstrate the feasibility of operating single-electron spins in a quantum dot as quantum bits.
When low-energy electrons strike a titanium dioxide surface, they may cause the desorption of surface oxygen. Oxygen vacancies that result from irradiating a TiO2(011)-2x1 surface with electrons with an energy of 300 electron volts were analyzed by scanning tunneling microscopy. The cross section for desorbing oxygen from the pristine surface was found to be 9 (+/-6) x 10(-17) square centimeters, which means that the initial electronic excitation was converted into atomic motion with a probability near unity. Once an O vacancy had formed, the desorption cross sections for its nearest and next-nearest oxygen neighbors were reduced by factors of 100 and 10, respectively. This site-specific desorption probability resulted in one-dimensional arrays of oxygen vacancies.
High-resolution carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of enzyme-inhibitor and enzyme-substrate complexes provide detailed structural and stereochemical information on the mechanism of enzyme action. The proteases trypsin and papain are shown to form tetrahedrally coordinated complexes and acyl derivatives with a variety of compounds artificially enriched at the site or sites of interest. These results are compared with the structural information derived from x-ray diffraction. Detailed NMR studies have provided a clearer picture of the ionization state of the residues participating in enzyme-catalyzed processes than other more classical techniques. The dynamics of enzymic catalysis can be observed at sub-zero temperatures by a combination of cryoenzymology and carbon-13 NMR spectroscopy. With these powerful techniques, transient, covalently bound intermediates in enzyme-catalyzed reactions can be detected and their structures rigorously assigned.
Diffusion in condensed phases is a ubiquitous but poorly understood phenomenon. For example, chemical diffusion, which is the transport of matter associated with chemical concentration gradients (Fick's law), is treated as a separate process from thermal transport (the Soret effect), which is mass transport induced by temperature gradients. In the past few years, large variations in the proportions of isotopes of Mg, Ca, Fe, Si and O found in silicate melts subject to thermal gradients have been found, but no physical mechanism has been proposed. Here we present a model of diffusion in natural condensed systems that explains both the chemical and isotopic fractionation of Mg, Ca and Fe in high-temperature geochemical melts. Despite the high temperatures associated with these melts (T>1,000 degC), we find that consideration of the quantum-mechanical zero-point energy of diffusing species is essential for understanding diffusion at the isotopic level. Our model explains thermal and chemical mass transport as manifestations of the same underlying diffusion mechanism. This work promises to provide insights into mass-transport phenomena (diffusion and evaporation) and associated isotopic fractionations in a wide range of natural condensed systems, including the atmospheric water cycle, geological and geochemical systems and the early Solar System. This work might also be relevant to studies of mass transport in biological and nanotechnological condensed systems.
The electrical noise of mesoscopic devices can be strongly influenced by the quantum motion of electrons. To probe this effect, we have measured the current fluctuations at high frequency (5 to 90 gigahertz) using a superconductor-insulator-superconductor tunnel junction as an on-chip spectrum analyzer. By coupling this frequency-resolved noise detector to a quantum device, we can measure the high-frequency, nonsymmetrized noise as demonstrated for a Josephson junction. The same scheme is used to detect the current fluctuations arising from coherent charge oscillations in a two-level system, a superconducting charge qubit. A narrow band peak is observed in the spectral noise density at the frequency of the coherent charge oscillations.
In a classical Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer superconductor, pairing and coherence of electrons are established simultaneously below the critical transition temperature (T(c)), giving rise to a gap in the electronic energy spectrum. In the high-T(c) copper oxide superconductors, however, a pseudogap extends above T(c). The relationship between the pseudogap and superconductivity is one of the central issues in this field. Spectral gaps arising from pairing precursors are qualitatively similar to those caused by competing electronic states, rendering a standard approach to their analysis inconclusive. The issue can be settled, however, by studying the correlation between the weights associated with the pseudogap and superconductivity spectral features. Here we report a study of two spectral weights using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. The weight of the superconducting coherent peak increases away from the node following the trend of the superconducting gap, but starts to decrease in the antinodal region. This striking non-monotonicity reveals the presence of a competing state. We demonstrate a direct correlation, for different values of momenta and doping, between the loss in the low-energy spectral weight arising from the opening of the pseudogap and a decrease in the spectral weight associated with superconductivity. We therefore conclude that the pseudogap competes with the superconductivity by depleting the spectral weight available for pairing.
The control of quantum systems is of fundamental scientific interest and promises powerful applications and technologies. Impressive progress has been achieved in isolating quantum systems from the environment and coherently controlling their dynamics, as demonstrated by the creation and manipulation of entanglement in various physical systems. However, for open quantum systems, engineering the dynamics of many particles by a controlled coupling to an environment remains largely unexplored. Here we realize an experimental toolbox for simulating an open quantum system with up to five quantum bits (qubits). Using a quantum computing architecture with trapped ions, we combine multi-qubit gates with optical pumping to implement coherent operations and dissipative processes. We illustrate our ability to engineer the open-system dynamics through the dissipative preparation of entangled states, the simulation of coherent many-body spin interactions, and the quantum non-demolition measurement of multi-qubit observables. By adding controlled dissipation to coherent operations, this work offers novel prospects for open-system quantum simulation and computation.
Research in microfabrication not only serves the microelectronics industry but also can provide research tools for studying the behavior of matter at submicrometer dimensions. A variety of techniques including optical, x-ray, and electron beam lithography and reactive ion etching can be used to make structures, devices, and arrays only hundreds of atoms across. Microfabrication techniques have been applied to experiments on surface-enhanced Raman scattering, transport in one-dimensional conductors, and macroscopic quantum tunneling. Recent progress is extending these techniques to scales of less than 100 angstroms.
Grid cells in the entorhinal cortex of freely moving rats provide a strikingly periodic representation of self-location which is indicative of very specific computational mechanisms. However, the existence of grid cells in humans and their distribution throughout the brain are unknown. Here we show that the preferred firing directions of directionally modulated grid cells in rat entorhinal cortex are aligned with the grids, and that the spatial organization of grid-cell firing is more strongly apparent at faster than slower running speeds. Because the grids are also aligned with each other, we predicted a macroscopic signal visible to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in humans. We then looked for this signal as participants explored a virtual reality environment, mimicking the rats' foraging task: fMRI activation and adaptation showing a speed-modulated six-fold rotational symmetry in running direction. The signal was found in a network of entorhinal/subicular, posterior and medial parietal, lateral temporal and medial prefrontal areas. The effect was strongest in right entorhinal cortex, and the coherence of the directional signal across entorhinal cortex correlated with spatial memory performance. Our study illustrates the potential power of combining single-unit electrophysiology with fMRI in systems neuroscience. Our results provide evidence for grid-cell-like representations in humans, and implicate a specific type of neural representation in a network of regions which supports spatial cognition and also autobiographical memory.
Quantum theory predicts that Bose-Einstein condensation of a spatially homogeneous gas with attractive interactions is precluded by a conventional phase transition into either a liquid or solid. When confined to a trap, however, such a condensate can form, provided that its occupation number does not exceed a limiting value. The stability limit is determined by a balance between the self-attractive forces and a repulsion that arises from position-momentum uncertainty under conditions of spatial confinement. Near the stability limit, self-attraction can overwhelm the repulsion, causing the condensate to collapse. Growth of the condensate is therefore punctuated by intermittent collapses that are triggered by either macroscopic quantum tunnelling or thermal fluctuation. Previous observations of growth and collapse dynamics have been hampered by the stochastic nature of these mechanisms. Here we report direct observations of the growth and subsequent collapse of a 7Li condensate with attractive interactions, using phase-contrast imaging. The success of the measurement lies in our ability to reduce the stochasticity in the dynamics by controlling the initial number of condensate atoms using a two-photon transition to a diatomic molecular state.
One fundamental question about pulsars concerns the mechanism of their pulsed electromagnetic emission. Measuring the high-end region of a pulsar's spectrum would shed light on this question. By developing a new electronic trigger, we lowered the threshold of the Major Atmospheric gamma-ray Imaging Cherenkov (MAGIC) telescope to 25 giga-electron volts. In this configuration, we detected pulsed gamma-rays from the Crab pulsar that were greater than 25 giga-electron volts, revealing a relatively high cutoff energy in the phase-averaged spectrum. This indicates that the emission occurs far out in the magnetosphere, hence excluding the polar-cap scenario as a possible explanation of our measurement. The high cutoff energy also challenges the slot-gap scenario.
Protons with energies up to approximately 10(15) eV are the main component of cosmic rays, but evidence for the specific locations where they could have been accelerated to these energies has been lacking. Electrons are known to be accelerated to cosmic-ray energies in supernova remnants, and the shock waves associated with such remnants, when they hit the surrounding interstellar medium, could also provide the energy to accelerate protons. The signature of such a process would be the decay of pions (pi(0)), which are generated when the protons collide with atoms and molecules in an interstellar cloud: pion decay results in gamma-rays with a particular spectral-energy distribution. Here we report the observation of cascade showers of optical photons resulting from gamma-rays at energies of approximately 10(12) eV hitting Earth's upper atmosphere, in the direction of the supernova remnant RX J1713.7-3946. The spectrum is a good match to that predicted by pion decay, and cannot be explained by other mechanisms.
The oxide superconductors, particularly those recently discovered that are based on La(2)CuO(4), have a set of peculiarities that suggest a common, unique mechanism: they tend in every case to occur near a metal-insulator transition into an odd-electron insulator with peculiar magnetic properties. This insulating phase is proposed to be the long-sought "resonating-valence-bond" state or "quantum spin liquid" hypothesized in 1973. This insulating magnetic phase is favored by low spin, low dimensionality, and magnetic frustration. The preexisting magnetic singlet pairs of the insulating state become charged superconducting pairs when the insulator is doped sufficiently strongly. The mechanism for superconductivity is hence predominantly electronic and magnetic, although weak phonon interactions may favor the state. Many unusual properties are predicted, especially of the insulating state.
The discovery and investigation of X-ray continua has provided a new tool for studying the detailed electronic processes that occur when atoms collide. In the collisions considered here, the quasimolecular origin of the continuum radiation has been established. Therefore, as the atomic numbers of the projectiles and target atoms are increased one can simulate some of the properties of superheavy atoms. In particular, the peaked nature of the x-ray energy dependence of the anisotropy of K, L, and M MO radiation, as well as the peaked nature of the M MO spectra, will allow approximate spectroscopic studies of superheavy atoms. Special excitement attaches to the possibility of observing fundamental processes occurring under extremely high electric and magnetic fields. The recent successful development of a 1400-Mev U beam at the GSI (Gesellschaft fur Schwerionenforschung) accelerator in Darmstadt, Germany, promises an imminent attack on these basic problems (63).
One of the most far-reaching problems in condensed-matter physics is to understand how interactions between electrons, and the resulting correlations, affect the electronic properties of disordered two-dimensional systems. Extensive experimental and theoretical studies have shown that interaction effects are enhanced by disorder, and that this generally results in a depletion of the density of electronic states. In the limit of strong disorder, this depletion takes the form of a complete gap in the density of states. It is known that this 'Coulomb gap' can turn a pure metal film that is highly disordered into a poorly conducting insulator, but the properties of these insulators are not well understood. Here we investigate the electronic properties of disordered beryllium films, with the aim of disentangling the effects of the Coulomb gap and the underlying disorder. We show that the gap is suppressed by a magnetic field and that this drives the strongly insulating beryllium films into a low-temperature 'quantum metal' phase with resistance near the quantum resistance RQ = h/e2, where h is Planck's constant and e is the electron charge.
Semiclassical theory finds use in chemical physics both as a computational method and as a conceptual framework for interpreting quantum features in experiments and in numerical quantum calculations. The semiclassical description of one-dimensional dynamical systems is essentially a solved problem for eigenvalue and scattering situations and for general topologies of potential functions (simple potential wells, multiple wells, multiple barriers, and so forth). Considerable progress has also been made in generalizing semiclassical theory to multidimensional dynamical systems (such as inelastic and reactive scattering of atoms and molecules and vibrational energy levels of polyatomic molecules), and here, too, it provides a useful picture of quantum features (interference in product state distribution, generalized tunneling phenomena, and others) in these more complex systems.
We demonstrate coupling and entangling of quantum states in a pair of vertically aligned, self-assembled quantum dots by studying the emission of an interacting electron-hole pair (exciton) in a single dot molecule as a function of the separation between the dots. An interaction-induced energy splitting of the exciton is observed that exceeds 30 millielectron volts for a dot layer separation of 4 nanometers. The results are interpreted by mapping the tunneling of a particle in a double dot to the problem of a single spin. The electron-hole complex is shown to be equivalent to entangled states of two interacting spins.
A new type of electrometer is described that uses a single-electron transistor (SET) and that allows large operating speeds and extremely high charge sensitivity. The SET readout was accomplished by measuring the damping of a 1.7-gigahertz resonant circuit in which the device is embedded, and in some ways is the electrostatic "dual" of the well-known radio-frequency superconducting quantum interference device. The device is more than two orders of magnitude faster than previous single-electron devices, with a constant gain from dc to greater than 100 megahertz. For a still-unoptimized device, a charge sensitivity of 1.2 x 10(-5) e/hertz was obtained at a frequency of 1.1 megahertz, which is about an order of magnitude better than a typical, 1/f-noise-limited SET, and corresponds to an energy sensitivity (in joules per hertz) of about 41 Planck's over 2pi.
Some of the current directions of scientific research on electrically conducting organic solids are reviewed. Both molecular charge transfer salts and polymers are included, with emphasis on the present level of understanding of the novel solid-state properties of these materials in terms of their chemistry and structure. For the charge transfer salts the various types of metal-to-insulator phase transitions which dominate the properties of most of these materials are discussed. Also described are the superconducting and magnetic states which have been found recently. In the case of the polymers the chemistry and physics of the conduction mechanism is examined and contrasted with that of their classical inorganic counterparts.
Ultracold atomic gases provide model systems in which to study many-body quantum physics. Recent experiments using Fermi gases have demonstrated a phase transition to a superfluid state with strong interparticle interactions. This system provides a realization of the 'BCS-BEC crossover' connecting the physics of Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductivity with that of Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs). Although many aspects of this system have been investigated, it has not yet been possible to measure the single-particle excitation spectrum (a fundamental property directly predicted by many-body theories). Here we use photoemission spectroscopy to directly probe the elementary excitations and energy dispersion in a strongly interacting Fermi gas of (40)K atoms. In the experiments, a radio-frequency photon ejects an atom from the strongly interacting system by means of a spin-flip transition to a weakly interacting state. We measure the occupied density of single-particle states at the cusp of the BCS-BEC crossover and on the BEC side of the crossover, and compare these results to that for a nearly ideal Fermi gas. We show that, near the critical temperature, the single-particle spectral function is dramatically altered in a way that is consistent with a large pairing gap. Our results probe the many-body physics in a way that could be compared to data for the high-transition-temperature superconductors. As in photoemission spectroscopy for electronic materials, our measurement technique for ultracold atomic gases directly probes low-energy excitations and thus can reveal excitation gaps and/or pseudogaps. Furthermore, this technique can provide an analogue of angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy for probing anisotropic systems, such as atoms in optical lattice potentials.
The self-assembly of semiconductor quantum dots has opened up new opportunities in photonics. Quantum dots are usually described as 'artificial atoms', because electron and hole confinement gives rise to discrete energy levels. This picture can be justified from the shell structure observed as a quantum dot is filled either with excitons (bound electron-hole pairs) or with electrons. The discrete energy levels have been most spectacularly exploited in single photon sources that use a single quantum dot as emitter. At low temperatures, the artificial atom picture is strengthened by the long coherence times of excitons in quantum dots, motivating the application of quantum dots in quantum optics and quantum information processing. In this context, excitons in quantum dots have already been manipulated coherently. We show here that quantum dots can also possess electronic states that go far beyond the artificial atom model. These states are a coherent hybridization of localized quantum dot states and extended continuum states: they have no analogue in atomic physics. The states are generated by the emission of a photon from a quantum dot. We show how a new version of the Anderson model that describes interactions between localized and extended states can account for the observed hybridization.
Electronic charges introduced in copper-oxide (CuO(2)) planes generate high-transition-temperature (T(c)) superconductivity but, under special circumstances, they can also order into filaments called stripes. Whether an underlying tendency towards charge order is present in all copper oxides and whether this has any relationship with superconductivity are, however, two highly controversial issues. To uncover underlying electronic order, magnetic fields strong enough to destabilize superconductivity can be used. Such experiments, including quantum oscillations in YBa(2)Cu(3)O(y) (an extremely clean copper oxide in which charge order has not until now been observed) have suggested that superconductivity competes with spin, rather than charge, order. Here we report nuclear magnetic resonance measurements showing that high magnetic fields actually induce charge order, without spin order, in the CuO(2) planes of YBa(2)Cu(3)O(y). The observed static, unidirectional, modulation of the charge density breaks translational symmetry, thus explaining quantum oscillation results, and we argue that it is most probably the same 4a-periodic modulation as in stripe-ordered copper oxides. That it develops only when superconductivity fades away and near the same 1/8 hole doping as in La(2-x)Ba(x)CuO(4) (ref. 1) suggests that charge order, although visibly pinned by CuO chains in YBa(2)Cu(3)O(y), is an intrinsic propensity of the superconducting planes of high-T(c) copper oxides.
Understanding how individual charged particles can be accelerated to extreme energies (10(20) electron volts), remains a foremost problem in astrophysics. Within our solar system, the active sun is capable of producing, on a short time scale, ions with energies higher than 25 gigaelectron volts. Satellite and ground-based observation over the past 30 years have greatly increased our knowledge of the properties of transient bursts of energetic particles emitted from the sun in association with solar flares, but a real understanding of the solar flare particle acceleration process requires greatly refined experimental data. On the practical side, it is also imperative that this problem be solved if man is to venture, for long periods of time, beyond the protective umbrella of Earth's magnetic field, which excludes much of the biologically damaging solar energetic particles. It is only through an understanding of the basic acceleration problem that we can expect to be able to predict the occurrence of a solar flare with lethal solar radiations. For our knowledge of these effects to advance, a new space mission dedicated to studying the high-energy aspects of solar flares at high spatial and energy resolution will be required.
The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope has detected the gamma-ray glow emanating from the giant radio lobes of the radio galaxy Centaurus A. The resolved gamma-ray image shows the lobes clearly separated from the central active source. In contrast to all other active galaxies detected so far in high-energy gamma-rays, the lobe flux constitutes a considerable portion (greater than one-half) of the total source emission. The gamma-ray emission from the lobes is interpreted as inverse Compton-scattered relic radiation from the cosmic microwave background, with additional contribution at higher energies from the infrared-to-optical extragalactic background light. These measurements provide gamma-ray constraints on the magnetic field and particle energy content in radio galaxy lobes, as well as a promising method to probe the cosmic relic photon fields.
Words, grammar, and phonology are linguistically distinct, yet their neural substrates are difficult to distinguish in macroscopic brain regions. We investigated whether they can be separated in time and space at the circuit level using intracranial electrophysiology (ICE), namely by recording local field potentials from populations of neurons using electrodes implanted in language-related brain regions while people read words verbatim or grammatically inflected them (present/past or singular/plural). Neighboring probes within Broca's area revealed distinct neuronal activity for lexical (approximately 200 milliseconds), grammatical (approximately 320 milliseconds), and phonological (approximately 450 milliseconds) processing, identically for nouns and verbs, in a region activated in the same patients and task in functional magnetic resonance imaging. This suggests that a linguistic processing sequence predicted on computational grounds is implemented in the brain in fine-grained spatiotemporally patterned activity.
Quantum many-body systems can have phase transitions even at zero temperature; fluctuations arising from Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, as opposed to thermal effects, drive the system from one phase to another. Typically, during the transition the relative strength of two competing terms in the system's Hamiltonian changes across a finite critical value. A well-known example is the Mott-Hubbard quantum phase transition from a superfluid to an insulating phase, which has been observed for weakly interacting bosonic atomic gases. However, for strongly interacting quantum systems confined to lower-dimensional geometry, a novel type of quantum phase transition may be induced and driven by an arbitrarily weak perturbation to the Hamiltonian. Here we observe such an effect--the sine-Gordon quantum phase transition from a superfluid Luttinger liquid to a Mott insulator--in a one-dimensional quantum gas of bosonic caesium atoms with tunable interactions. For sufficiently strong interactions, the transition is induced by adding an arbitrarily weak optical lattice commensurate with the atomic granularity, which leads to immediate pinning of the atoms. We map out the phase diagram and find that our measurements in the strongly interacting regime agree well with a quantum field description based on the exactly solvable sine-Gordon model. We trace the phase boundary all the way to the weakly interacting regime, where we find good agreement with the predictions of the one-dimensional Bose-Hubbard model. Our results open up the experimental study of quantum phase transitions, criticality and transport phenomena beyond Hubbard-type models in the context of ultracold gases.
An experimental method based on the Landau-Zener model was developed to measure very small tunnel splittings in molecular clusters of eight iron atoms, which at low temperature behave like a nanomagnet with a spin ground state of S = 10. The observed oscillations of the tunnel splittings as a function of the magnetic field applied along the hard anisotropy axis are due to topological quantum interference of two tunnel paths of opposite windings. Transitions between quantum numbers M = -S and (S - n), with n even or odd, revealed a parity effect that is analogous to the suppression of tunneling predicted for half-integer spins. This observation is direct evidence of the topological part of the quantum spin phase (Berry phase) in a magnetic system.
When two indistinguishable single photons are fed into the two input ports of a beam splitter, the photons will coalesce and leave together from the same output port. This is a quantum interference effect, which occurs because two possible paths-in which the photons leave by different output ports-interfere destructively. This effect was first observed in parametric downconversion (in which a nonlinear crystal splits a single photon into two photons of lower energy), then from two separate downconversion crystals, as well as with single photons produced one after the other by the same quantum emitter. With the recent developments in quantum information research, much attention has been devoted to this interference effect as a resource for quantum data processing using linear optics techniques. To ensure the scalability of schemes based on these ideas, it is crucial that indistinguishable photons are emitted by a collection of synchronized, but otherwise independent sources. Here we demonstrate the quantum interference of two single photons emitted by two independently trapped single atoms, bridging the gap towards the simultaneous emission of many indistinguishable single photons by different emitters. Our data analysis shows that the observed coalescence is mainly limited by wavefront matching of the light emitted by the two atoms, and to a lesser extent by the motion of each atom in its own trap.
X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectra of the manganese (Mn) cluster in physiologically native intermediate states of photosynthetic water oxidation induced by short laser flash were measured with a compact heat-insulated chamber equipped with an x-ray detector near the sample surface. The half-height energy of the Mn Kedge showed a period-four oscillation dependent on cycling of the Joliot-Kok's oxygen clock. The flash number-dependent shift in the Mn K-edge suggests that the Mn cluster is oxidized by one electron upon the S(0)-to-S(1), S(1)-to-S(2), and S(2)-to-S(3) transitions and then reduced upon the S(3)-to-S(0) transition that releases molecular oxygen.
Particle accelerators, such as those built for research in nuclear physics, can also be used together with magnetic and electrostatic mass analyzers to measure rare isotopes at very low abundance ratios. All molecular ions can be eliminated when accelerated to energies of millions of electron volts. Some atomic isobars can be eliminated with the use of negative ions; others can be separated at high energies by measuring their rate of energy loss in a detector. The long-lived radioisotopes (10)Be, (14)C,(26)A1, 36Cl, and (129)1 can now be measured in small natural samples having isotopic abundances in the range 10(-12) to 10(- 5) and as few as 10(5) atoms. In the past few years, research applications of accelerator mass spectrometry have been concentrated in the earth sciences (climatology, cosmochemistry, environmental chemistry, geochronology, glaciology, hydrology, igneous petrogenesis, minerals exploration, sedimentology, and volcanology), in anthropology and archeology (radiocarbon dating), and in physics (searches for exotic particles and measurement of halflives). In addition, accelerator mass spectrometry may become an important tool for the materials and biological sciences.
A magnetic resonance imaging technique based on intermolecular multiple-quantum coherences in solution (the correlated spectroscopy revamped by asymmetric z gradient echo detection or CRAZED experiment) is described here. Correlations between spins in different molecules were detected by magnetic-field gradient pulses. In order for a correlation to yield an observable signal, the separation between the two spins must be within a narrow band that depends on the area of the gradient pulses. The separation can be tuned from less than 10 micrometers to more than 1 millimeter, a convenient range for many applications.
We report coherent optical control of a biexciton (two electron-hole pairs), confined in a single quantum dot, that shows coherent oscillations similar to the excited-state Rabi flopping in an isolated atom. The pulse control of the biexciton dynamics, combined with previously demonstrated control of the single-exciton Rabi rotation, serves as the physical basis for a two-bit conditional quantum logic gate. The truth table of the gate shows the features of an all-optical quantum gate with interacting yet distinguishable excitons as qubits. Evaluation of the fidelity yields a value of 0.7 for the gate operation. Such experimental capability is essential to a scheme for scalable quantum computation by means of the optical control of spin qubits in dots.
Physical laws are believed to be invariant under the combined transformations of charge, parity and time reversal (CPT symmetry). This implies that an antimatter particle has exactly the same mass and absolute value of charge as its particle counterpart. Metastable antiprotonic helium (pHe(+)) is a three-body atom consisting of a normal helium nucleus, an electron in its ground state and an antiproton (p) occupying a Rydberg state with high principal and angular momentum quantum numbers, respectively n and l, such that n [?] l + 1 [?] 38. These atoms are amenable to precision laser spectroscopy, the results of which can in principle be used to determine the antiproton-to-electron mass ratio and to constrain the equality between the antiproton and proton charges and masses. Here we report two-photon spectroscopy of antiprotonic helium, in which p(3)He(+) and p(4)He(+) isotopes are irradiated by two counter-propagating laser beams. This excites nonlinear, two-photon transitions of the antiproton of the type (n, l) - (n - 2, l - 2) at deep-ultraviolet wavelengths (l = 139.8, 193.0 and 197.0 nm), which partly cancel the Doppler broadening of the laser resonance caused by the thermal motion of the atoms. The resulting narrow spectral lines allowed us to measure three transition frequencies with fractional precisions of 2.3-5 parts in 10(9). By comparing the results with three-body quantum electrodynamics calculations, we derived an antiproton-to-electron mass ratio of 1,836.1526736(23), where the parenthetical error represents one standard deviation. This agrees with the proton-to-electron value known to a similar precision.
Highly luminous rapid flares are characteristic of processes around compact objects like white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes. In the high-energy regime of X-rays and gamma-rays, outbursts with variabilities on timescales of seconds or less are routinely observed, for example in gamma-ray bursts or soft gamma-ray repeaters. At optical wavelengths, flaring activity on such timescales has not been observed, other than from the prompt phase of one exceptional gamma-ray burst. This is mostly due to the fact that outbursts with strong, fast flaring are usually discovered in the high-energy regime; most optical follow-up observations of such transients use instruments with integration times exceeding tens of seconds, which are therefore unable to resolve fast variability. Here we show the observation of extremely bright and rapid optical flaring in the Galactic transient SWIFT J195509.6+261406. Our optical light curves are phenomenologically similar to high-energy light curves of soft gamma-ray repeaters and anomalous X-ray pulsars, which are thought to be neutron stars with extremely high magnetic fields (magnetars). This suggests that similar processes are in operation, but with strong emission in the optical, unlike in the case of other known magnetars.
The tunneling resistance between two ferromagnetic metal layers that are separated by a thin insulator depends on the relative orientation of the magnetization M of each layer. In a memory device, independent switching of the magnetically soft layer is achieved by making the other layer either exchange-biased or magnetically hard. The repeated reversal of M of the soft layer by field cycling can demagnetize the other magnetically hard layer and thus erase the tunnel junction's memory. The M of exchange-biased structures was stable at least to 10(7) cycles, whereas in hard structures, M generally decayed logarithmically with the number of field cycles. The decay was very sensitive to the thickness of the hard layer and the composition of the soft layer. However, no decay was observed when the moment reversal was accomplished by coherent rotation, establishing that demagnetization results from the formation and motion of domain walls in the soft layer during field cycling.
Luminescent centers with sharp (<0.07 millielectron volt), spectrally distinct emission lines were imaged in a GaAs/AIGaAs quantum well by means of low-temperature near-field scanning optical microscopy. Temperature, magnetic field, and linewidth measurements establish that these centers arise from excitons laterally localized at interface fluctuations. For sufficiently narrow wells, virtually all emission originates from such centers. Near-field microscopy/spectroscopy provides a means to access energies and homogeneous line widths for the individual eigenstates of these centers, and thus opens a rich area of physics involving quantum resolved systems.
Observations of the Sun during total eclipses have led to major discoveries, such as the existence of helium (from its spectrum), the high temperature of the corona (though the reason for the high temperature remains controversial), and the role of magnetic fields in injecting energy into-and trapping ionized gases within-stellar atmospheres. A new generation of ground-based eclipse observations reaches spatial, temporal and spectral-resolution domains that are inaccessible from space and therefore complement satellite studies.
Feedback loops are central to most classical control procedures. A controller compares the signal measured by a sensor (system output) with the target value or set-point. It then adjusts an actuator (system input) to stabilize the signal around the target value. Generalizing this scheme to stabilize a micro-system's quantum state relies on quantum feedback, which must overcome a fundamental difficulty: the sensor measurements cause a random back-action on the system. An optimal compromise uses weak measurements, providing partial information with minimal perturbation. The controller should include the effect of this perturbation in the computation of the actuator's operation, which brings the incrementally perturbed state closer to the target. Although some aspects of this scenario have been experimentally demonstrated for the control of quantum or classical micro-system variables, continuous feedback loop operations that permanently stabilize quantum systems around a target state have not yet been realized. Here we have implemented such a real-time stabilizing quantum feedback scheme following a method inspired by ref. 13. It prepares on demand photon number states (Fock states) of a microwave field in a superconducting cavity, and subsequently reverses the effects of decoherence-induced field quantum jumps. The sensor is a beam of atoms crossing the cavity, which repeatedly performs weak quantum non-demolition measurements of the photon number. The controller is implemented in a real-time computer commanding the actuator, which injects adjusted small classical fields into the cavity between measurements. The microwave field is a quantum oscillator usable as a quantum memory or as a quantum bus swapping information between atoms. Our experiment demonstrates that active control can generate non-classical states of this oscillator and combat their decoherence, and is a significant step towards the implementation of complex quantum information operations.
Spin-dependent tunnel junctions based on magnetically hard and soft ferromagnetic layers separated by a thin insulating barrier have emerged as prime candidates for information storage. However, the observed instability of the magnetically hard reference layer, leading to magnetization decay during field cycling of the adjacent soft layer, is a serious concern for future device applications. Using Lorentz electron microscopy and micromagnetic simulations, the hard-layer decay was found to result from large fringing fields surrounding magnetic domain walls in the magnetically soft layer. The formation and motion of these walls causes statistical flipping of magnetic moments in randomly oriented grains of the hard layer, with a progressive trend toward disorder and eventual demagnetization.
High-resolution microwave observations are providing new insights into the nature of active regions and eruptions on the sun and nearby stars. The strength, evolution, and structure of magnetic fields in coronal loops can be determined by multiple-wavelength observations with the Very Large Array. Flare models can be tested with Very Large Array snapshot maps, which have angular resolutions of better than 1 second of arc in time periods as short as 10 seconds. Magnetic changes that precede solar eruptions on time scales of tens of minutes involve primarily emerging coronal loops and the interactions of two or more loops. Magnetic reconnection at the interface of two closed loops may accelerate electrons and trigger the release of microwave energy in the coronal parts of the magnetic loops. Nearby main-sequence stars of late spectral type emit slowly varying microwave radiation and stellar microwave bursts that show striking similarities to those of the sun.
The edge of a two-dimensional electron system in a magnetic field consists of one-dimensional channels that arise from the confining electric field at the edge of the system. The crossed electric and magnetic fields cause electrons to drift parallel to the sample boundary, creating a chiral current that travels along the edge in only one direction. In an ideal two-dimensional electron system in the quantum Hall regime, all the current flows along the edge. Quantization of the Hall resistance arises from occupation of N one-dimensional edge channels, each contributing a conductance of e2/h. Here we report differential conductance measurements, in the integer quantum Hall regime, of tunnelling between the edges of a pair of two-dimensional electron systems that are separated by an atomically precise, high-quality, tunnel barrier. The resultant interaction between the edge states leads to the formation of new energy gaps and an intriguing dispersion relation for electrons travelling along the barrier: for example, we see a persistent conductance peak at zero bias voltage and an absence of tunnelling features due to electron spin. These features are unexpected and are not consistent with a model of weakly interacting edge states. Remnant disorder along the barrier and charge screening may each play a role, although detailed numerical studies will be required to elucidate these effects.
The reaction K + NaBr --> KBr + Na is probed during the reactive collision by a continuous wave laser tuned to frequencies not resonant with excitation in either reagents or products. Transient [K..Br..Na] absorbs a laser photon giving [K..Br..Na](*), which can decompose to Na(*) + KBr. Emission from excited Na(*) at the sodium D lines provides direct evidence of laser absorption during the reaction. Different excitation spectra were observed, depending on which sodium D line was monitored. This difference is explicable if, in the absence of the laser, the reaction flux partially bifurcates to a second potential energy surface during the reaction.
Knowledge of regional cerebral hemodynamics has widespread application for both physiological research and clinical assessment because of the well-established interrelation between physiological function, energy metabolism, and localized blood supply. A magnetic resonance technique was developed for quantitative imaging of cerebral hemodynamics, allowing for measurement of regional cerebral blood volume during resting and activated cognitive states. This technique was used to generate the first functional magnetic resonance maps of human task activation, by using a visual stimulus paradigm. During photic stimulation, localized increases in blood volume (32 +/- 10 percent, n = 7 subjects) were detected in the primary visual cortex. Center-of-mass coordinates and linear extents of brain activation within the plane of the calcarine fissure are reported.
Tunneling electrons from a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) were used to excite photon emission from individual porphyrin molecules adsorbed on an ultrathin alumina film grown on a NiAl(110) surface. Vibrational features were observed in the light-emission spectra that depended sensitively on the different molecular conformations and corresponding electronic states obtained by scanning tunneling spectroscopy. The high spatial resolution of the STM enabled the demonstration of variations in light-emission spectra from different parts of the molecule. These experiments realize the feasibility of fluorescence spectroscopy with the STM and enable the integration of optical spectroscopy with a nanoprobe for the investigation of single molecules.
It has been a long-standing goal to detect the effects of quantum mechanics on a macroscopic mechanical oscillator. Position measurements of an oscillator are ultimately limited by quantum mechanics, where 'zero-point motion' fluctuations in the quantum ground state combine with the uncertainty relation to yield a lower limit on the measured average displacement. Development of a position transducer, integrated with a mechanical resonator, that can approach this limit could have important applications in the detection of very weak forces, for example in magnetic resonance force microscopy and a variety of other precision experiments. One implementation that might allow near quantum-limited sensitivity is to use a single electron transistor (SET) as a displacement sensor: the exquisite charge sensitivity of the SET at cryogenic temperatures is exploited to measure motion by capacitively coupling it to the mechanical resonator. Here we present the experimental realization of such a device, yielding an unequalled displacement sensitivity of 2 x 10(-15) m x Hz(-1/2) for a 116-MHz mechanical oscillator at a temperature of 30 mK-a sensitivity roughly a factor of 100 larger than the quantum limit for this oscillator.
The phenomenon of spin resonance has had far-reaching influence since its discovery 70 years ago. Electron spin resonance driven by high-frequency magnetic fields has enhanced our understanding of quantum mechanics, and finds application in fields as diverse as medicine and quantum information. Spin resonance can also be induced by high-frequency electric fields in materials with a spin-orbit interaction; the oscillation of the electrons creates a momentum-dependent effective magnetic field acting on the electron spin. Here we report electron spin resonance due to a spin-orbit interaction that does not require external driving fields. The effect, which we term ballistic spin resonance, is driven by the free motion of electrons that bounce at frequencies of tens of gigahertz in micrometre-scale channels of a two-dimensional electron gas. This is a frequency range that is experimentally challenging to access in spin resonance, and especially difficult on a chip. The resonance is manifest in electrical measurements of pure spin currents-we see a strong suppression of spin relaxation length when the oscillating spin-orbit field is in resonance with spin precession in a static magnetic field. These findings illustrate how the spin-orbit interaction can be harnessed for spin manipulation in a spintronic circuit, and point the way to gate-tunable coherent spin rotations in ballistic nanostructures without external alternating current fields.
Nonlocal transport through edge channels holds great promise for low-power information processing. However, edge channels have so far only been demonstrated to occur in the quantum Hall regime, at high magnetic fields. We found that mercury telluride quantum wells in the quantum spin Hall regime exhibit nonlocal edge channel transport at zero external magnetic field. The data confirm that the quantum transport through the (helical) edge channels is dissipationless and that the contacts lead to equilibration between the counterpropagating spin states at the edge. The experimental data agree quantitatively with the theory of the quantum spin Hall effect. The edge channel transport paves the way for a new generation of spintronic devices for low-power information processing.
A quantum spin-liquid phase is an intriguing possibility for a system of strongly interacting magnetic units in which the usual magnetically ordered ground state is avoided owing to strong quantum fluctuations. It was first predicted theoretically for a triangular-lattice model with antiferromagnetically coupled S = 1/2 spins. Recently, materials have become available showing persuasive experimental evidence for such a state. Although many studies show that the ideal triangular lattice of S = 1/2 Heisenberg spins actually orders magnetically into a three-sublattice, non-collinear 120deg arrangement, quantum fluctuations significantly reduce the size of the ordered moment. This residual ordering can be completely suppressed when higher-order ring-exchange magnetic interactions are significant, as found in nearly metallic Mott insulators. The layered molecular system k-(BEDT-TTF)(2)Cu(2)(CN)(3) is a Mott insulator with an almost isotropic, triangular magnetic lattice of spin-1/2 BEDT-TTF dimers that provides a prime example of a spin liquid formed in this way. Despite a high-temperature exchange coupling, J, of 250 K (ref. 6), no obvious signature of conventional magnetic ordering is seen down to 20 mK (refs 7, 8). Here we show, using muon spin rotation, that applying a small magnetic field to this system produces a quantum phase transition between the spin-liquid phase and an antiferromagnetic phase with a strongly suppressed moment. This can be described as Bose-Einstein condensation of spin excitations with an extremely small spin gap. At higher fields, a second transition is found that suggests a threshold for deconfinement of the spin excitations. Our studies reveal the low-temperature magnetic phase diagram and enable us to measure characteristic critical properties. We compare our results closely with current theoretical models, and this gives some further insight into the nature of the spin-liquid phase.
Superconductivity in the extreme two-dimensional limit is studied on ultrathin lead films down to two atomic layers, where only a single channel of quantum well states exists. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy reveals that local superconducting order remains robust until two atomic layers, where the transition temperature abruptly plunges to a lower value, depending sensitively on the exact atomic structure of the film. Our result shows that Cooper pairs can still form in the last two-dimensional channel of electron states, although their binding is strongly affected by the substrate.
The entanglement of quantum states is both a central concept in fundamental physics and a potential tool for realizing advanced materials and applications. The quantum superpositions underlying entanglement are at the heart of the intricate interplay of localized spin states and itinerant electronic states that gives rise to the Kondo effect in certain dilute magnetic alloys. In systems where the density of localized spin states is sufficiently high, they can no longer be treated as non-interacting; if they form a dense periodic array, a Kondo lattice may be established. Such a Kondo lattice gives rise to the emergence of charge carriers with enhanced effective masses, but the precise nature of the coherent Kondo state responsible for the generation of these heavy fermions remains highly debated. Here we use atomic-resolution tunnelling spectroscopy to investigate the low-energy excitations of a generic Kondo lattice system, YbRh(2)Si(2). We find that the hybridization of the conduction electrons with the localized 4f electrons results in a decrease in the tunnelling conductance at the Fermi energy. In addition, we observe unambiguously the crystal-field excitations of the Yb(3+) ions. A strongly temperature-dependent peak in the tunnelling conductance is attributed to the Fano resonance resulting from tunnelling into the coherent heavy-fermion states that emerge at low temperature. Taken together, these features reveal how quantum coherence develops in heavy 4f-electron Kondo lattices. Our results demonstrate the efficiency of real-space electronic structure imaging for the investigation of strong electronic correlations, specifically with respect to coherence phenomena, phase coexistence and quantum criticality.
The spin dynamics of an arbitrary localized impurity in an insulating two-dimensional antiferromagnet, across the host transition from a paramagnet with a spin gap to a Neel state, is described. The impurity spin susceptibility has a Curie-like divergence at the quantum-critical coupling, but with a universal effective spin that is neither an integer nor a half-odd integer. In the Neel state, the transverse impurity susceptibility is a universal number divided by the host spin stiffness (which determines the energy cost to slow twists in the orientation of the Neel order). These and numerous other results for the thermodynamics, Knight shift, and magnon damping have important applications in experiments on layered transition metal oxides.
Gamma-ray bursts are among the most powerful events in nature. These events release most of their energy as photons with energies in the range from 30 keV to a few MeV, with a smaller fraction of the energy radiated in radio, optical, and soft X-ray afterglows. The data are in general agreement with a relativistic shock model, where the prompt and afterglow emissions correspond to synchrotron radiation from shock-accelerated electrons. Here we report an observation of a high-energy (multi-MeV) spectral component in the burst of 17 October 1994 that is distinct from the previously observed lower-energy gamma-ray component. The flux of the high-energy component decays more slowly and its fluence is greater than the lower-energy component; it is described by a power law of differential photon number index approximately -1 up to about 200 MeV. This observation is difficult to explain with the standard synchrotron shock model, suggesting the presence of new phenomena such as a different non-thermal electron process, or the interaction of relativistic protons with photons at the source.
The epidermal growth factors (EGFs) are powerful mitogens for a wide variety of cells in culture; human EGF (hEGF), known as urogastrone, also inhibits gastric acid secretion in vivo. The transforming growth factors (TGF-alpha) are related to the EGF family both in sequence and activity and EGF-like sequences are often observed in a wide range of functionally unrelated proteins. Attempts to examine the structure of EGF by diffraction methods have not yet succeeded because of difficulties with crystallization. We report here a three-dimensional structure of a biologically active derivative (residues 1-48) of the 53-residue human EGF. An analysis of high resolution 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra was used together with a combination of distance geometry, restrained energy minimization and restrained molecular dynamics methods. The three-dimensional structure provides a basis for understanding the properties of EGFs and for predicting the structures of homologous sequences in other proteins.
Quasicrystals are unique structures with long-range order but no periodicity. Their properties have intrigued scientists ever since their discovery and initial theoretical analysis. The lack of periodicity excludes the possibility of describing quasicrystal structures with well-established analytical tools, including common notions like Brillouin zones and Bloch's theorem. New and unique features such as fractal-like band structures and 'phason' degrees of freedom are introduced. In general, it is very difficult to directly observe the evolution of electronic waves in solid-state atomic quasicrystals, or the dynamics of the structure itself. Here we use optical induction to create two-dimensional photonic quasicrystals, whose macroscopic nature allows us to explore wave transport phenomena. We demonstrate that light launched at different quasicrystal sites travels through the lattice in a way equivalent to quantum tunnelling of electrons in a quasiperiodic potential. At high intensity, lattice solitons are formed. Finally, we directly observe dislocation dynamics when crystal sites are allowed to interact with each other. Our experimental results apply not only to photonics, but also to other quasiperiodic systems such as matter waves in quasiperiodic traps, generic pattern-forming systems as in parametrically excited surface waves, liquid quasicrystals, and the more familiar atomic quasicrystals.
We generated narrowband pairs of nearly identical photons at a rate of 5 x 10(4) pairs per second from a laser-cooled atomic ensemble inside an optical cavity. A two-photon interference experiment demonstrated that the photons could be made 90% indistinguishable, a key requirement for quantum information-processing protocols. Used as a conditional single-photon source, the system operated near the fundamental limits on recovery efficiency (57%), Fourier transform-limited bandwidth, and pair-generation-rate-limited suppression of two-photon events (factor of 33 below the Poisson limit). Each photon had a spectral width of 1.1 megahertz, ideal for interacting with atomic ensembles that form the basis of proposed quantum memories and logic.
The translocation step of protein synthesis entails large-scale rearrangements of the ribosome-transfer RNA (tRNA) complex. Here we have followed tRNA movement through the ribosome during translocation by time-resolved single-particle electron cryomicroscopy (cryo-EM). Unbiased computational sorting of cryo-EM images yielded 50 distinct three-dimensional reconstructions, showing the tRNAs in classical, hybrid and various novel intermediate states that provide trajectories and kinetic information about tRNA movement through the ribosome. The structures indicate how tRNA movement is coupled with global and local conformational changes of the ribosome, in particular of the head and body of the small ribosomal subunit, and show that dynamic interactions between tRNAs and ribosomal residues confine the path of the tRNAs through the ribosome. The temperature dependence of ribosome dynamics reveals a surprisingly flat energy landscape of conformational variations at physiological temperature. The ribosome functions as a Brownian machine that couples spontaneous conformational changes driven by thermal energy to directed movement.
The promise of tremendous computational power, coupled with the development of robust error-correcting schemes, has fuelled extensive efforts to build a quantum computer. The requirements for realizing such a device are confounding: scalable quantum bits (two-level quantum systems, or qubits) that can be well isolated from the environment, but also initialized, measured and made to undergo controllable interactions to implement a universal set of quantum logic gates. The usual set consists of single qubit rotations and a controlled-NOT (CNOT) gate, which flips the state of a target qubit conditional on the control qubit being in the state 1. Here we report an unambiguous experimental demonstration and comprehensive characterization of quantum CNOT operation in an optical system. We produce all four entangled Bell states as a function of only the input qubits' logical values, for a single operating condition of the gate. The gate is probabilistic (the qubits are destroyed upon failure), but with the addition of linear optical quantum non-demolition measurements, it is equivalent to the CNOT gate required for scalable all-optical quantum computation.
Spin liquids are magnetically frustrated systems, in which spins are prevented from ordering or freezing, owing to quantum or thermal fluctuations among degenerate states induced by the frustration. Chiral spin liquids are a hypothetical class of spin liquids in which the time-reversal symmetry is macroscopically broken in the absence of an applied magnetic field or any magnetic dipole long-range order. Even though such chiral spin-liquid states were proposed more than two decades ago, an experimental realization and observation of such states has remained a challenge. One of the characteristic order parameters in such systems is a macroscopic average of the scalar spin chirality, a solid angle subtended by three nearby spins. In previous experimental reports, however, the spin chirality was only parasitic to the non-coplanar spin structure associated with a magnetic dipole long-range order or induced by the applied magnetic field, and thus the chiral spin-liquid state has never been found. Here, we report empirical evidence that the time-reversal symmetry can be broken spontaneously on a macroscopic scale in the absence of magnetic dipole long-range order. In particular, we employ the anomalous Hall effect to directly probe the broken time-reversal symmetry for the metallic frustrated magnet Pr(2)Ir(2)O(7). An onset of the Hall effect is observed at zero field in the absence of uniform magnetization, within the experimental accuracy, suggesting an emergence of a chiral spin liquid. The origin of this spontaneous Hall effect is ascribed to chiral spin textures, which are inferred from the magnetic measurements indicating the spin ice-rule formation.
Cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) studies the interaction between a quantum emitter and a single radiation-field mode. When an atom is strongly coupled to a cavity mode, it is possible to realize important quantum information processing tasks, such as controlled coherent coupling and entanglement of distinguishable quantum systems. Realizing these tasks in the solid state is clearly desirable, and coupling semiconductor self-assembled quantum dots to monolithic optical cavities is a promising route to this end. However, validating the efficacy of quantum dots in quantum information applications requires confirmation of the quantum nature of the quantum-dot-cavity system in the strong-coupling regime. Here we find such confirmation by observing quantum correlations in photoluminescence from a photonic crystal nanocavity interacting with one, and only one, quantum dot located precisely at the cavity electric field maximum. When off-resonance, photon emission from the cavity mode and quantum-dot excitons is anticorrelated at the level of single quanta, proving that the mode is driven solely by the quantum dot despite an energy mismatch between cavity and excitons. When tuned to resonance, the exciton and cavity enter the strong-coupling regime of cavity QED and the quantum-dot exciton lifetime reduces by a factor of 145. The generated photon stream becomes antibunched, proving that the strongly coupled exciton/photon system is in the quantum regime. Our observations unequivocally show that quantum information tasks are achievable in solid-state cavity QED.
Entangled quantum states are not separable, regardless of the spatial separation of their components. This is a manifestation of an aspect of quantum mechanics known as quantum non-locality. An important consequence of this is that the measurement of the state of one particle in a two-particle entangled state defines the state of the second particle instantaneously, whereas neither particle possesses its own well-defined state before the measurement. Experimental realizations of entanglement have hitherto been restricted to two-state quantum systems, involving, for example, the two orthogonal polarization states of photons. Here we demonstrate entanglement involving the spatial modes of the electromagnetic field carrying orbital angular momentum. As these modes can be used to define an infinitely dimensional discrete Hilbert space, this approach provides a practical route to entanglement that involves many orthogonal quantum states, rather than just two Multi-dimensional entangled states could be of considerable importance in the field of quantum information, enabling, for example, more efficient use of communication channels in quantum cryptography.
Superconductivity in layered copper oxide compounds emerges when charge carriers are added to antiferromagnetically ordered CuO(2) layers. The carriers destroy the antiferromagnetic order, but strong spin fluctuations persist throughout the superconducting phase and are intimately linked to superconductivity. Neutron scattering measurements of spin fluctuations in hole-doped copper oxides have revealed an unusual 'hour-glass' feature in the momentum-resolved magnetic spectrum that is present in a wide range of superconducting and non-superconducting materials. There is no widely accepted explanation for this feature. One possibility is that it derives from a pattern of alternating spin and charge stripes, and this idea is supported by measurements on stripe-ordered La(1.875)Ba(0.125)CuO(4) (ref. 15). Many copper oxides without stripe order, however, also exhibit an hour-glass spectrum. Here we report the observation of an hour-glass magnetic spectrum in a hole-doped antiferromagnet from outside the family of superconducting copper oxides. Our system has stripe correlations and is an insulator, which means that its magnetic dynamics can conclusively be ascribed to stripes. The results provide compelling evidence that the hour-glass spectrum in the copper oxide superconductors arises from fluctuating stripes.
Bulk quantities of defect-free silicon (Si) nanowires with nearly uniform diameters ranging from 40 to 50 angstroms were grown to a length of several micrometers with a supercritical fluid solution-phase approach. Alkanethiol-coated gold nanocrystals (25 angstroms in diameter) were used as uniform seeds to direct one-dimensional Si crystallization in a solvent heated and pressurized above its critical point. The orientation of the Si nanowires produced with this method could be controlled with reaction pressure. Visible photoluminescence due to quantum confinement effects was observed, as were discrete optical transitions in the ultraviolet-visible absorbance spectra.
Optical control of the primary step of photoisomerization of the retinal molecule in bacteriorhodopsin from the all-trans to the 13-cis state was demonstrated under weak field conditions (where only 1 of 300 retinal molecules absorbs a photon during the excitation cycle) that are relevant to understanding biological processes. By modulating the phases and amplitudes of the spectral components in the photoexcitation pulse, we showed that the absolute quantity of 13-cis retinal formed upon excitation can be enhanced or suppressed by +/-20% of the yield observed using a short transform-limited pulse having the same actinic energy. The shaped pulses were shown to be phase-sensitive at intensities too low to access different higher electronic states, and so these pulses apparently steer the isomerization through constructive and destructive interference effects, a mechanism supported by observed signatures of vibrational coherence. These results show that the wave properties of matter can be observed and even manipulated in a system as large and complex as a protein.
Rydberg atoms have an electron in a state with a very high principal quantum number, and as a result can exhibit unusually long-range interactions. One example is the bonding of two such atoms by multipole forces to form Rydberg-Rydberg molecules with very large internuclear distances. Notably, bonding interactions can also arise from the low-energy scattering of a Rydberg electron with negative scattering length from a ground-state atom. In this case, the scattering-induced attractive interaction binds the ground-state atom to the Rydberg atom at a well-localized position within the Rydberg electron wavefunction and thereby yields giant molecules that can have internuclear separations of several thousand Bohr radii. Here we report the spectroscopic characterization of such exotic molecular states formed by rubidium Rydberg atoms that are in the spherically symmetric s state and have principal quantum numbers, n, between 34 and 40. We find that the spectra of the vibrational ground state and of the first excited state of the Rydberg molecule, the rubidium dimer Rb(5s)-Rb(ns), agree well with simple model predictions. The data allow us to extract the s-wave scattering length for scattering between the Rydberg electron and the ground-state atom, Rb(5s), in the low-energy regime (kinetic energy, <100 meV), and to determine the lifetimes and the polarizabilities of the Rydberg molecules. Given our successful characterization of s-wave bound Rydberg states, we anticipate that p-wave bound states, trimer states and bound states involving a Rydberg electron with large angular momentum-so-called trilobite molecules-will also be realized and directly probed in the near future.
In quantum information processing, qudits (d-level systems) are an extension of qubits that could speed up certain computing tasks. We demonstrate the operation of a superconducting phase qudit with a number of levels d up to d = 5 and show how to manipulate and measure the qudit state, including simultaneous control of multiple transitions. We used the qudit to emulate the dynamics of single spins with principal quantum number s = 1/2, 1, and 3/2, allowing a measurement of Berry's phase and the even parity of integer spins (and odd parity of half-integer spins) under 2pi-rotation. This extension of the two-level qubit to a multilevel qudit holds promise for more-complex quantum computational architectures and for richer simulations of quantum mechanical systems.
High-field (63.4 kilogauss) Fourier transform nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 13C in natural abundance has been used to study the structural organization and molecular dynamics of constituent lipids of normal human very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) and low-density lipoproteins (LDL). The same method was used to study the abnormal beta-VLDL of two type III hyperlipoproteinemia patients having markedly differing ratios of VLDL cholesterol to triglyceride (0.3 and 0.6, respectively). Resolution obtained at 63.4 kilogauss has made possible the assignment of several additional resonances of cholesterol ring carbon atoms, not resolved in earlier studies at lower fields, in the VLDL spectra. The rotational reorientation of the ring portion of cholesteryl esters in VLDL (normal) and beta-VLDL (abnormal) is not highly anisotropic and is similar to that for cholesteryl esters disolved in excess triolein. The rotations of cholesteryl esters in LDL are more highly anisotropic and significantly more restricted. The results suggest that the structural organization of the lipid components in beta-VLDL resembles that found in normal VLDL but differs significantly from that for normal LDL.
Many indirect methods have been developed to study the constitution and conformation of macromolecules inside the living cell. Direct analysis by Raman spectroscopy is an ideal complement to techniques using directly labelled fluorescent probes or of indirect labelling with mono- and polyclonal antibodies. The high information content of Raman spectra can characterize biological macromolecules both in solution and in crystals. The positions, intensities and linewidths of the Raman lines (corresponding to vibrational energy levels) in spectra of DNA-protein complexes yield information about the composition, secondary structure and interactions of these molecules, including the chemical microenvironment of molecular subgroups. The main drawback of the method is the low Raman scattering cross-section of biological macromolecules, which until now has prohibited studies at the level of the single cell with the exception of (salmon) sperm heads, in which the DNA is condensed to an exceptionally high degree. Ultraviolet-resonance Raman spectroscopy has been used to obtain single cell spectra (and F. Sureau and P. Y. Turpin, personal communication), but in this method absorption of laser light may impair the integrity of the sample. We have avoided this problem in developing a novel, highly sensitive confocal Raman microspectrometer for nonresonant Raman spectroscopy. Our instrument makes it possible to study single cells and chromosomes with a high spatial resolution (approximately less than 1 micron 3).
The examples discussed here represent only a small part of the published work relating to infrared spectra of adsorbed molecules. The publications in this field indicate that infrared spectroscopy is being used for surface chemistry research in about 50 laboratories throughout the world. This effort is mainly devoted to problems related to catalysis, and in this field infrared spectroscopy is the most widely used physical tool for surface chemistry studies. The general acceptance of infrared spectroscopy is primarily due to the fact that it provides information which is pertinent to the understanding of surface reactions on an atomic scale. During the last decade significant progress has also been made in the classical chemical techniques of catalysis study and in utilization of physical tools which depend on phenomena of magnetism, conductivity, low-energy electron diffraction, and electron emission. Probably the most important progress has been in the field of inorganic chemistry, where dramatic advances have been made in knowledge of metal coordination compounds. Such knowledge is vital to the understanding of catalysis on metal surfaces. I believe this progress has produced an attitude of sophisticated optimism among catalysis researchers with regard to eventual understanding of heterogeneous catalysis. This attitude is closely related to the realization that there is no "secret of catalysis" which places catalytic action beyond the limits of ordinary chemical knowledge (22). This view implies that the chemical aspects of heterogeneous catalysis are not unique and that the use of solid catalysts merely provides a highly effective exposure of catalytic atoms and facilitates separation of the products from the catalyst. Many capable catalysis researchers believe that studies of homogeneous catalysis provide the most direct route for the study of heterogeneous catalysis. Obviously homogeneous reactions catalyzed by compounds containing only one or two metal atoms do not leave room for effects associated with crystal parameters or with electronic band structure characteristic of the metallic state. At present, I believe, it is more reasonable to concede that these solid-state factors may play a role of secondary importance than to completely exclude them from consideration. The view that catalysis involves only conventional chemistry carried out under complicated conditions gives grounds for optimism, since it limits the boundaries of the problem. However, it also imposes a limitation on what might be expected from fundamental catalysis research. Most fundamental catalysis researchers do not rest their hopes on a single dramatic discovery which will make it possible to predict in detail the best catalyst for any specific reaction. The idea that catalysis researchers work with this goal in mind is as unrealistic as the idea that workers involved in practical catalysis development select constituents for catalysts by throwing darts at the periodic table. Although the fundamental catalysis researcher does not expect to advance ahead of general chemical knowledge, he does hope that he will not continue to lag behind. Infrared spectroscopy has provided a significant step toward closing the gap.
Water-cluster anions can serve as a bridge to understand the transition from gaseous species to the bulk hydrated electron. However, debate continues regarding how the excess electron is bound in (H2O)-n, as an interior, bulklike, or surface electronic state. To address the uncertainty, the properties of (H2O)-n clusters with 20 to 200 water molecules have been evaluated by mixed quantum-classical simulations. The theory reproduces every observed energetic, spectral, and structural trend with cluster size that is seen in experimental photoelectron and optical absorption spectra. More important, surface states and interior states each manifest a characteristic signature in the simulation data. The results strongly support assignment of surface-bound electronic states to the water-cluster anions in published experimental studies thus far.
A general method of manipulating adsorbed atoms and molecules on room-temperature surfaces with the use of a scanning tunneling microscope is described. By applying an appropriate voltage pulse between the sample and probe tip, adsorbed atoms can be induced to diffuse into the region beneath the tip. The field-induced diffusion occurs preferentially toward the tip during the voltage pulse because of the local potential energy gradient arising from the interaction of the adsorbate dipole moment with the electric field gradient at the surface. Depending upon the surface and pulse parameters, cesium (Cs) structures from one nanometer to a few tens of nanometers across have been created in this way on the (110) surfaces of gallium arsenide (GaAs) and indium antimonide (InSb), including structures that do not naturally occur.
Over the past several decades, quantum information science has emerged to seek answers to the question: can we gain some advantage by storing, transmitting and processing information encoded in systems that exhibit unique quantum properties? Today it is understood that the answer is yes, and many research groups around the world are working towards the highly ambitious technological goal of building a quantum computer, which would dramatically improve computational power for particular tasks. A number of physical systems, spanning much of modern physics, are being developed for quantum computation. However, it remains unclear which technology, if any, will ultimately prove successful. Here we describe the latest developments for each of the leading approaches and explain the major challenges for the future.
Certain materials have an electrical conductivity that is extremely sensitive to an applied magnetic field; this phenomenon, termed 'giant magnetoresistance', can be used in sensor applications. Typically, such a device comprises several ferromagnetic layers, separated by non-magnetic spacer layer(s)--a so-called 'super-lattice' geometry. In the absence of a magnetic field, the ferromagnetic layers may be magnetized in opposite directions by interlayer exchange coupling, while an applied external magnetic field causes the magnetization directions to become parallel. Because the resistivity depends on the magnetization direction, an applied field that changes the magnetic configuration may be detected simply by measuring the change in resistance. In order to detect weak fields, the energy difference between different magnetization directions should be small; this is usually achieved by using many non-magnetic atomic spacer layers. Here we show, using first-principles theory, that materials combinations such as Fe/V/Co multilayers can produce a non-collinear magnetic state in which the magnetization direction between Fe and Co layers differs by about 90 degrees. This state is energetically almost degenerate with the collinear magnetic states, even though the number of non-magnetic vanadium spacer layers is quite small.
The control and manipulation of the electron spin in semiconductors is central to spintronics, which aims to represent digital information using spin orientation rather than electron charge. Such spin-based technologies may have a profound impact on nanoelectronics, data storage, and logic and computer architectures. Recently it has become possible to induce and detect spin polarization in otherwise non-magnetic semiconductors (gallium arsenide and silicon) using all-electrical structures, but so far only at temperatures below 150 K and in n-type materials, which limits further development. Here we demonstrate room-temperature electrical injection of spin polarization into n-type and p-type silicon from a ferromagnetic tunnel contact, spin manipulation using the Hanle effect and the electrical detection of the induced spin accumulation. A spin splitting as large as 2.9 meV is created in n-type silicon, corresponding to an electron spin polarization of 4.6%. The extracted spin lifetime is greater than 140 ps for conduction electrons in heavily doped n-type silicon at 300 K and greater than 270 ps for holes in heavily doped p-type silicon at the same temperature. The spin diffusion length is greater than 230 nm for electrons and 310 nm for holes in the corresponding materials. These results open the way to the implementation of spin functionality in complementary silicon devices and electronic circuits operating at ambient temperature, and to the exploration of their prospects and the fundamental rules that govern their behaviour.
We have studied the structural stability of thin silver films with thicknesses of N = 1 to 15 monolayers, deposited on an Fe(100) substrate. Photoemission spectroscopy results show that films of N = 1, 2, and 5 monolayer thicknesses are structurally stable for temperatures above 800 kelvin, whereas films of other thicknesses are unstable and bifurcate into a film with N +/- 1 monolayer thicknesses at temperatures around 400 kelvin. The results are in agreement with theoretical predictions that consider the electronic energy of the quantum well associated with a particular film thickness as a significant contribution to the film stability.
REVIEW High-efficiency light-emitting diodes emitting amber, green, blue, and ultraviolet light have been obtained through the use of an InGaN active layer instead of a GaN active layer. The localized energy states caused by In composition fluctuation in the InGaN active layer are related to the high efficiency of the InGaN-based emitting devices. The blue and green InGaN quantum-well structure light-emitting diodes with luminous efficiencies of 5 and 30 lumens per watt, respectively, can be made despite the large number of threading dislocations (1 x 10(8) to 1 x 10(12) cm-2). Epitaxially laterally overgrown GaN on sapphire reduces the number of threading dislocations originating from the interface of the GaN epilayer with the sapphire substrate. InGaN multi-quantum-well structure laser diodes formed on the GaN layer above the SiO2 mask area can have a lifetime of more than 10,000 hours. Dislocations increase the threshold current density of the laser diodes.
Angle-resolved photoemission data from the cuprate superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta above and below the superconducting transition temperature Tc reveal momentum-dependent changes that extend up to an energy of about 0.3 electron volt, or 40kTc (where k is the Boltzmann constant). The data suggest an anomalous transfer of spectral weight from one momentum to another, involving a sizable momentum transfer Q approximately (0.45pi, 0). The observed Q is intriguingly near the charge-order periodicity required if fluctuating charge stripes are present.
One of the crucial issues in biological electron transfer is the determination of the role of spatially intermediate amino acid residues in controlling or directing the electronic tunneling interaction between redox sites. A quantum path integral Monte Carlo method is developed for the analysis of electronic tunneling pathways in a highly structured environment. This path integral method is applied to intramolecular electron transfer in a ruthenium-modified myoglobin that contains a tryptophan in the "line-of-flight." A principal result is the identification of the relevant cylindrical zone swept out by the tunneling electron.
Electrically charged particles, such as the electron, are ubiquitous. In contrast, no elementary particles with a net magnetic charge have ever been observed, despite intensive and prolonged searches (see ref. 1 for example). We pursue an alternative strategy, namely that of realizing them not as elementary but rather as emergent particles-that is, as manifestations of the correlations present in a strongly interacting many-body system. The most prominent examples of emergent quasiparticles are the ones with fractional electric charge e/3 in quantum Hall physics. Here we propose that magnetic monopoles emerge in a class of exotic magnets known collectively as spin ice: the dipole moment of the underlying electronic degrees of freedom fractionalises into monopoles. This would account for a mysterious phase transition observed experimentally in spin ice in a magnetic field, which is a liquid-gas transition of the magnetic monopoles. These monopoles can also be detected by other means, for example, in an experiment modelled after the Stanford magnetic monopole search.
Electrons in a single sheet of graphene behave quite differently from those in traditional two-dimensional electron systems. Like massless relativistic particles, they have linear dispersion and chiral eigenstates. Furthermore, two sets of electrons centred at different points in reciprocal space ('valleys') have this dispersion, giving rise to valley degeneracy. The symmetry between valleys, together with spin symmetry, leads to a fourfold quartet degeneracy of the Landau levels, observed as peaks in the density of states produced by an applied magnetic field. Recent electron transport measurements have observed the lifting of the fourfold degeneracy in very large applied magnetic fields, separating the quartet into integer and, more recently, fractional levels. The exact nature of the broken-symmetry states that form within the Landau levels and lift these degeneracies is unclear at present and is a topic of intense theoretical debate. Here we study the detailed features of the four quantum states that make up a degenerate graphene Landau level. We use high-resolution scanning tunnelling spectroscopy at temperatures as low as 10 mK in an applied magnetic field to study the top layer of multilayer epitaxial graphene. When the Fermi level lies inside the fourfold Landau manifold, significant electron correlation effects result in an enhanced valley splitting for even filling factors, and an enhanced electron spin splitting for odd filling factors. Most unexpectedly, we observe states with Landau level filling factors of 7/2, 9/2 and 11/2, suggestive of new many-body states in graphene.
Quantum entangled states can be very delicate and easily perturbed by their external environment. This sensitivity can be harnessed in measurement technology to create a quantum sensor with a capability of outperforming conventional devices at a fundamental level. We compared the magnetic field sensitivity of a classical (unentangled) system with that of a 10-qubit entangled state, realized by nuclei in a highly symmetric molecule. We observed a 9.4-fold quantum enhancement in the sensitivity to an applied field for the entangled system and show that this spin-based approach can scale favorably as compared with approaches in which qubit loss is prevalent. This result demonstrates a method for practical quantum field sensing technology.
The 11-kD protease (PR) encoded by the human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) is essential for the correct processing of viral polyproteins and the maturation of infectious virus, and is therefore a target for the design of selective acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) therapeutics. To facilitate the identification of novel inhibitors of HIV-1 PR, as well as to permit detailed studies on the enzymology and inhibition of this enzyme, a continuous assay for its activity was developed that was based on intramolecular fluorescence resonance energy transfer (RET). The assay used the quenched fluorogenic substrate 4-(4-dimethylaminophenylazo)benzoic acid (DABCYL)--Ser Gln Asn Tyr Pro Ile Val Gln--5-[(2-aminoethyl)amino]naphthalene-1 sulfonic acid (EDANS), whose peptide sequence is derived from a natural processing site for HIV-1 PR. Incubation of recombinant HIV-1 PR with the fluorogenic substrate resulted in specific cleavage at the Tyr-Pro bond and a time-dependent increase in fluorescence intensity that was linearly related to the extent of substrate hydrolysis. An internally quenched fluorogenic substrate was also designed that was selectively cleaved by the related PR from avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV). The fluorescence quantum yields of the HIV-1 PR and AMV PR substrates in the RET assay increased by 40.0- and 34.4-fold, respectively, per mole of substrate cleaved. Because of its simplicity, rapidity, and precision in the determination of reaction rates required for kinetic analysis, this method offers many advantages over the commonly used high-performance liquid chromatography- or electrophoresis-based assays for peptide substrate hydrolysis by retroviral PRs.
Quantum dots or 'artificial atoms' are of fundamental and technological interest--for example, quantum dots may form the basis of new generations of lasers. The emission in quantum-dot lasers originates from the recombination of excitonic complexes, so it is important to understand the dot's internal electronic structure (and of fundamental interest to compare this to real atomic structure). Here we investigate artificial electronic structure by injecting optically a controlled number of electrons and holes into an isolated single quantum dot. The charge carriers form complexes that are artificial analogues of hydrogen, helium, lithium, beryllium, boron and carbon excitonic atoms. We observe that electrons and holes occupy the confined electronic shells in characteristic numbers according to the Pauli exclusion principle. In each degenerate shell, collective condensation of the electrons and holes into coherent many-exciton ground states takes place; this phenomenon results from hidden symmetries (the analogue of Hund's rules for real atoms) in the energy function that describes the multi-particle system. Breaking of the hidden symmetries leads to unusual quantum interferences in emission involving excited states.
Understanding and controlling the complex environment of solid-state quantum bits is a central challenge in spintronics and quantum information science. Coherent manipulation of an individual electron spin associated with a nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond was used to gain insight into its local environment. We show that this environment is effectively separated into a set of individual proximal 13C nuclear spins, which are coupled coherently to the electron spin, and the remainder of the 13C nuclear spins, which cause the loss of coherence. The proximal nuclear spins can be addressed and coupled individually because of quantum back-action from the electron, which modifies their energy levels and magnetic moments, effectively distinguishing them from the rest of the nuclei. These results open the door to coherent manipulation of individual isolated nuclear spins in a solid-state environment even at room temperature.
Cavity optomechanics studies the coupling between a mechanical oscillator and the electromagnetic field in a cavity. We report on a cavity optomechanical system in which a collective density excitation of a Bose-Einstein condensate serves as the mechanical oscillator coupled to the cavity field. A few photons inside the ultrahigh-finesse cavity trigger strongly driven back-action dynamics, in quantitative agreement with a cavity optomechanical model. We approach the strong coupling regime of cavity optomechanics, where a single excitation of the mechanical oscillator substantially influences the cavity field. The results open up new directions for investigating mechanical oscillators in the quantum regime and the border between classical and quantum physics.
An electron hopping on non-coplanar spin sites with spin chirality obtains a complex phase factor (Berry phase) in its quantum mechanical amplitude that acts as an internal magnetic field, and is predicted to manifest itself in the Hall effect when it is not cancelled. The present combined work of transport measurement, neutron scattering, and theoretical calculation provides evidence that the gigantic anomalous Hall effect observed in Nd2Mo2O7, a pyrochlore ferromagnet with geometrically frustrated lattice structure, is mostly due to the spin chirality and the associated Berry phase originating from the Mo spin tilting.
Learning and memory in humans rely upon several memory systems, which appear to have dissociable brain substrates. A fundamental question concerns whether, and how, these memory systems interact. Here we show using functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) that these memory systems may compete with each other during classification learning in humans. The medial temporal lobe and basal ganglia were differently engaged across subjects during classification learning depending upon whether the task emphasized declarative or nondeclarative memory, even when the to-be-learned material and the level of performance did not differ. Consistent with competition between memory systems suggested by animal studies and neuroimaging, activity in these regions was negatively correlated across individuals. Further examination of classification learning using event-related FMRI showed rapid modulation of activity in these regions at the beginning of learning, suggesting that subjects relied upon the medial temporal lobe early in learning. However, this dependence rapidly declined with training, as predicted by previous computational models of associative learning.
Chemical vapor deposition of germanium onto the silicon (001) surface at atmospheric pressure and 600 degrees Celsius has previously been shown to produce distinct families of smaller (up to 6 nanometers high) and larger (all approximately 15 nanometers high) nanocrystals. Under ultrahigh-vacuum conditions, physical vapor deposition at approximately the same substrate temperature and growth rate produced a similar bimodal size distribution. In situ scanning tunneling microscopy revealed that the smaller square-based pyramids transform abruptly during growth to significantly larger multifaceted domes, and that few structures with intermediate size and shape remain. Both nanocrystal shapes have size-dependent energy minima that result from the interplay between strain relaxation at the facets and stress concentration at the edges. A thermodynamic model similar to a phase transition accounts for this abrupt morphology change.
Highest-resolution laser spectroscopy has generally been limited to single trapped ion systems because of the rapid decoherence that plagues neutral atom ensembles. Precision spectroscopy of ultracold neutral atoms confined in a trapping potential now shows superior optical coherence without any deleterious effects from motional degrees of freedom, revealing optical resonance linewidths at the hertz level with a good signal-to-noise ratio. The resonance quality factor of 2.4 x 10(14) is the highest ever recovered in any form of coherent spectroscopy. The spectral resolution permits direct observation of the breaking of nuclear spin degeneracy for the 1S0 and 3P0 optical clock states of 87Sr under a small magnetic bias field. This optical approach for excitation of nuclear spin states allows an accurate measurement of the differential Lande g factor between 1S0 and 3P0. The optical atomic coherence demonstrated for collective excitation of a large number of atoms will have a strong impact on quantum measurement and precision frequency metrology.
In 1935, Schrodinger attempted to demonstrate the limitations of quantum mechanics using a thought experiment in which a cat is put in a quantum superposition of alive and dead states. The idea remained an academic curiosity until the 1980s when it was proposed that, under suitable conditions, a macroscopic object with many microscopic degrees of freedom could behave quantum mechanically, provided that it was sufficiently decoupled from its environment. Although much progress has been made in demonstrating the macroscopic quantum behaviour of various systems such as superconductors, nanoscale magnets, laser-cooled trapped ions, photons in a microwave cavity and C60 molecules, there has been no experimental demonstration of a quantum superposition of truly macroscopically distinct states. Here we present experimental evidence that a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) can be put into a superposition of two magnetic-flux states: one corresponding to a few microamperes of current flowing clockwise, the other corresponding to the same amount of current flowing anticlockwise.
Recent progress in nanotechnology has stimulated interest in mesoscopic superconductors as components for quantum computing and cryoelectronics. The critical parameters for superconductivity (current and field) of a mesoscopic sample are determined by the pattern of vortices in it, which in turn is controlled by the symmetry imposed by the shape of the sample (see ref. 1 and references therein). Hitherto it has been unclear what happens when the number of vortices is not consistent with the natural symmetry. Here we show that additional vortex-antivortex pairs nucleate spontaneously so as to preserve the symmetry of the sample. For example, in a square with three vortices, the spontaneously generated pair, along with the original three vortices, distribute themselves so that the four vortices sit in the four corners, with the antivortex in the centre. The measured superconducting phase boundary (of superconducting transition temperature Tc versus magnetic field strength) is in very good agreement with the calculations, giving direct experimental evidence for these symmetry-induced vortex-antivortex pairs. Vortex entry into the sample is also changed: vortices enter a square in fours, with antivortices generated to preserve the imposed vorticity. The symmetry-induced nucleation of antivortices is not restricted to superconductors, but should also apply to symmetrically confined superfluids and Bose-Einstein condensates.
We present data from an induced gallium arsenide (GaAs) quantum wire that exhibits an additional conductance plateau at 0.5(2e2/h), where e is the charge of an electron and h is Planck's constant, in zero magnetic field. The plateau was most pronounced when the potential landscape was tuned to be symmetric by using low-temperature scanning-probe techniques. Source-drain energy spectroscopy and temperature response support the hypothesis that the origin of the plateau is the spontaneous spin-polarization of the transport electrons: a ferromagnetic phase. Such devices may have applications in the field of spintronics to either generate or detect a spin-polarized current without the complications associated with external magnetic fields or magnetic materials.
Massive stars play a crucial role in the production of heavy elements and in the evolution of the interstellar medium, yet how they form is still a matter of debate. We report high-angular-resolution submillimeter observations toward the massive hot molecular core (HMC) in the high-mass star-forming region G31.41+0.31. We find that the evolution of the gravitational collapse of the HMC is controlled by the magnetic field. The HMC is simultaneously contracting and rotating, and the magnetic field lines threading the HMC are deformed along its major axis, acquiring an hourglass shape. The magnetic energy dominates over the centrifugal and turbulence energies, and there is evidence of magnetic braking in the contracting core.
A source of triggered entangled photon pairs is a key component in quantum information science; it is needed to implement functions such as linear quantum computation, entanglement swapping and quantum teleportation. Generation of polarization entangled photon pairs can be obtained through parametric conversion in nonlinear optical media or by making use of the radiative decay of two electron-hole pairs trapped in a semiconductor quantum dot. Today, these sources operate at a very low rate, below 0.01 photon pairs per excitation pulse, which strongly limits their applications. For systems based on parametric conversion, this low rate is intrinsically due to the Poissonian statistics of the source. Conversely, a quantum dot can emit a single pair of entangled photons with a probability near unity but suffers from a naturally very low extraction efficiency. Here we show that this drawback can be overcome by coupling an optical cavity in the form of a 'photonic molecule' to a single quantum dot. Two coupled identical pillars-the photonic molecule-were etched in a semiconductor planar microcavity, using an optical lithography method that ensures a deterministic coupling to the biexciton and exciton energy states of a pre-selected quantum dot. The Purcell effect ensures that most entangled photon pairs are emitted into two cavity modes, while improving the indistinguishability of the two optical recombination paths. A polarization entangled photon pair rate of 0.12 per excitation pulse (with a concurrence of 0.34) is collected in the first lens. Our results open the way towards the fabrication of solid state triggered sources of entangled photon pairs, with an overall (creation and collection) efficiency of 80%.
The three-dimensional structure of the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of the glucocorticoid receptor has been determined by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and distance geometry. The structure of a 71-residue protein fragment containing two "zinc finger" domains is based on a large set of proton-proton distances derived from nuclear Overhauser enhancement spectra, hydrogen bonds in previously identified secondary structure elements, and coordination of two zinc atoms by conserved cysteine residues. The DBD is found to consist of a globular body from which the finger regions extend. A model of the dimeric complex between the DBD and the glucocorticoid response element is proposed. The model is consistent with previous results indicating that specific amino acid residues of the DBD are involved in protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions.
Spintronics relies on the ability to transport and use the spin properties of an electron rather than its charge. We describe a spin ratchet at the single-electron level that produces spin currents with no net bias or charge transport. Our device is based on the ground-state energetics of a single-electron transistor comprising a superconducting island connected to normal leads via tunnel barriers with different resistances that break spatial symmetry. We demonstrate spin transport and quantify the spin ratchet efficiency by using ferromagnetic leads with known spin polarization. Our results are modeled theoretically and provide a robust route to the generation and manipulation of pure spin currents.
A photon in an arbitrary polarization state cannot be cloned perfectly. But suppose that at our disposal we have several copies of a photon in an unknown state. Is it possible to delete the information content of one or more of these photons by a physical process? Specifically, if two photons are in the same initial polarization state, is there a mechanism that produces one photon in the same initial state and the other in some standard polarization state? If this could be done, then one would create a standard blank state onto which one could copy an unknown state approximately, by deterministic cloning or exactly, by probabilistic cloning. This could in principle be useful in quantum computation, where one could store new information in an already computed state by deleting the old information. Here we show, however, that the linearity of quantum theory does not allow us to delete a copy of an arbitrary quantum state perfectly. Though in a classical computer information can be deleted (reversibly) against a copy, the analogous task cannot be accomplished, even irreversibly, with quantum information.
Sunspots are concentrations of magnetic field on the visible solar surface that strongly affect the convective energy transport in their interior and surroundings. The filamentary outer regions (penumbrae) of sunspots show systematic radial outward flows along channels of nearly horizontal magnetic field. These flows were discovered 100 years ago and are present in all fully developed sunspots. By using a comprehensive numerical simulation of a sunspot pair, we show that penumbral structures with such outflows form when the average magnetic field inclination to the vertical exceeds about 45 degrees. The systematic outflows are a component of the convective flows that provide the upward energy transport and result from anisotropy introduced by the presence of the inclined magnetic field.
Brains perform with remarkable efficiency, are capable of prodigious computation, and are marvels of communication. We are beginning to understand some of the geometric, biophysical, and energy constraints that have governed the evolution of cortical networks. To operate efficiently within these constraints, nature has optimized the structure and function of cortical networks with design principles similar to those used in electronic networks. The brain also exploits the adaptability of biological systems to reconfigure in response to changing needs.
Despite a rich phenomenology, gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are divided into two classes based on their duration and spectral hardness--the long-soft and the short-hard bursts. The discovery of afterglow emission from long GRBs was a watershed event, pinpointing their origin to star-forming galaxies, and hence the death of massive stars, and indicating an energy release of about 10(51) erg. While theoretical arguments suggest that short GRBs are produced in the coalescence of binary compact objects (neutron stars or black holes), the progenitors, energetics and environments of these events remain elusive despite recent localizations. Here we report the discovery of the first radio afterglow from the short burst GRB 050724, which unambiguously associates it with an elliptical galaxy at a redshift z = 0.257. We show that the burst is powered by the same relativistic fireball mechanism as long GRBs, with the ejecta possibly collimated in jets, but that the total energy release is 10-1,000 times smaller. More importantly, the nature of the host galaxy demonstrates that short GRBs arise from an old (> 1 Gyr) stellar population, strengthening earlier suggestions and providing support for coalescing compact object binaries as the progenitors.
Quantum criticality is the intriguing possibility offered by the laws of quantum mechanics when the wave function of a many-particle physical system is forced to evolve continuously between two distinct, competing ground states. This phenomenon, often related to a zero-temperature magnetic phase transition, is believed to govern many of the fascinating properties of strongly correlated systems such as heavy-fermion compounds or high-temperature superconductors. In contrast to bulk materials with very complex electronic structures, artificial nanoscale devices could offer a new and simpler means of understanding quantum phase transitions. Here we demonstrate this possibility in a single-molecule quantum dot, where a gate voltage induces a crossing of two different types of electron spin state (singlet and triplet) at zero magnetic field. The quantum dot is operated in the Kondo regime, where the electron spin on the quantum dot is partially screened by metallic electrodes. This strong electronic coupling between the quantum dot and the metallic contacts provides the strong electron correlations necessary to observe quantum critical behaviour. The quantum magnetic phase transition between two different Kondo regimes is achieved by tuning gate voltages and is fundamentally different from previously observed Kondo transitions in semiconductor and nanotube quantum dots. Our work may offer new directions in terms of control and tunability for molecular spintronics.
We report that the Kondo effect exerted by a magnetic ion depends on its chemical environment. A cobalt phthalocyanine molecule adsorbed on an Au111 surface exhibited no Kondo effect. Cutting away eight hydrogen atoms from the molecule with voltage pulses from a scanning tunneling microscope tip allowed the four orbitals of this molecule to chemically bond to the gold substrate. The localized spin was recovered in this artificial molecular structure, and a clear Kondo resonance was observed near the Fermi surface. We attribute the high Kondo temperature (more than 200 kelvin) to the small on-site Coulomb repulsion and the large half-width of the hybridized d-level.
There has been an active search for cost-effective photovoltaic devices since the development of the first solar cells in the 1950s (refs 1-3). In conventional solid-state solar cells, electron-hole pairs are created by light absorption in a semiconductor, with charge separation and collection accomplished under the influence of electric fields within the semiconductor. Here we report a multilayer photovoltaic device structure in which photon absorption instead occurs in photoreceptors deposited on the surface of an ultrathin metal-semiconductor junction Schottky diode. Photoexcited electrons are transferred to the metal and travel ballistically to--and over--the Schottky barrier, so providing the photocurrent output. Low-energy (approximately 1 eV) electrons have surprisingly long ballistic path lengths in noble metals, allowing a large fraction of the electrons to be collected. Unlike conventional cells, the semiconductor in this device serves only for majority charge transport and separation. Devices fabricated using a fluorescein photoreceptor on an Au/TiO2/Ti multilayer structure had typical open-circuit photovoltages of 600-800 mV and short-circuit photocurrents of 10-18 micro A cm(-2) under 100 mW cm(-2) visible band illumination: the internal quantum efficiency (electrons measured per photon absorbed) was 10 per cent. This alternative approach to photovoltaic energy conversion might provide the basis for durable low-cost solar cells using a variety of materials.
End states--the zero-dimensional analogs of the two-dimensional states that occur at a crystal surface--were observed at the ends of one-dimensional atom chains that were self-assembled by depositing gold on the vicinal Si(553) surface. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements of the differential conductance along the chains revealed quantized states in isolated segments with differentiated states forming over end atoms. A comparison to a tight-binding model demonstrated how the formation of electronic end states transforms the density of states and the energy levels within the chains.
That animals and humans can accomplish the same goal using different effectors and different goals using the same effectors attests to the remarkable flexibility of the central nervous system. This phenomenon has been termed 'motor equivalence', an example being the writing of a name with a pencil held between the toes or teeth. The idea of motor equivalence has reappeared because single-cell studies in monkeys have shown that parameters of voluntary movement (such as direction) may be specified in the brain, relegating muscle activation to spinal interneuronal systems. Using a novel experimental paradigms and a full-head SQUID (for superconducting quantum interference device) array to record magnetic fields corresponding to ongoing brain activity, we demonstrate: (1), a robust relationship between time-dependent activity in sensorimotor cortex and movement velocity, independent of explicit task requirements; and (2) neural activations that are specific to task demands alone. It appears, therefore, that signatures of motor equivalence in humans may be found in dynamic patterns of cortical activity.
Motivated by the technical and economic difficulties in further miniaturizing silicon-based transistors with the present fabrication technologies, there is a strong effort to develop alternative electronic devices, based, for example, on single molecules. Recently, carbon nanotubes have been successfully used for nanometre-sized devices such as diodes, transistors, and random access memory cells. Such nanotube devices are usually very long compared to silicon-based transistors. Here we report a method for dividing a semiconductor nanotube into multiple quantum dots with lengths of about 10nm by inserting Gd@C82 endohedral fullerenes. The spatial modulation of the nanotube electronic bandgap is observed with a low-temperature scanning tunnelling microscope. We find that a bandgap of approximately 0.5eV is narrowed down to approximately 0.1eV at sites where endohedral metallofullerenes are inserted. This change in bandgap can be explained by local elastic strain and charge transfer at metallofullerene sites. This technique for fabricating an array of quantum dots could be used for nano-electronics and nano-optoelectronics.
A multi- high-frequency electron paramagnetic resonance method is used to probe the magnetic excitations of a dimer of single-molecule magnets. The measured spectra display well-resolved quantum transitions involving coherent superposition states of both molecules. The behavior may be understood in terms of an isotropic superexchange coupling between pairs of single-molecule magnets, in analogy with several recently proposed quantum devices based on artificially fabricated quantum dots or clusters. These findings highlight the potential utility of supramolecular chemistry in the design of future quantum devices based on molecular nanomagnets.
The analytical technique of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is based on coherent quantum mechanical superposition of nuclear spin states. Recently, NMR has received considerable renewed interest in the context of quantum computation and information processing, which require controlled coherent qubit operations. However, standard NMR is not suitable for the implementation of realistic scalable devices, which would require all-electrical control and the means to detect microscopic quantities of coherent nuclear spins. Here we present a self-contained NMR semiconductor device that can control nuclear spins in a nanometre-scale region. Our approach enables the direct detection of (otherwise invisible) multiple quantum coherences between levels separated by more than one quantum of spin angular momentum. This microscopic high sensitivity NMR technique is especially suitable for probing materials whose nuclei contain multiple spin levels, and may form the basis of a versatile multiple qubit device.
A network of second-generation low-temperature gravitational radiation detectors is nearing completion. These detectors, sensitive to mechanical strains of order 10(-18), are possible because of a variety of technical innovations hat have been made in cryogenics, low-noise superconducting instrumentation, and vibration isolation techniques. Another five orders of magnitude improvement in energy sensitivity of resonant-mass detectors is possible before the linear amplifier quantum limit is encountered.
The routing and interconnection of optical signals through narrow channels and around sharp corners are important for large-scale all-optical circuit applications. A recent computational result suggests that photonic crystals may offer a novel way of achieving this goal by providing a mechanism for guiding light that is fundamentally different from traditional index guiding. Waveguiding in a photonic crystal and near 100 percent transmission of electromagnetic waves around sharp 90 degree corners were observed experimentally. Bending radii were made smaller than one wavelength.
Magnetization and neutron diffraction measurements on polycrystalline BaCuO2+x revealed a combination of magnetic behaviors. The Cu(6) ring clusters and Cu(18) sphere clusters in this compound had ferromagnetic ground states with large spins 3 and 9, respectively. The Cu(6) rings ordered antiferromagnetically below the Neel temperature T(N) = 15 +/- 0.5 kelvin, whereas the Cu(18) spheres remained paramagnetic down to 2 kelvin. The ordered moment below T(N) was 0.89(5) Bohr magnetons per Cu in the Cu(6) rings, demonstrating that quantum fluctuation effects are small in these atomic clusters. The Cu(18) clusters are predicted to exhibit ferromagnetic intercluster order below about 1 kelvin.
Quantum dynamical processes near the energy barrier that separates reactants from products influence the detailed mechanism by which elementary chemical reactions occur. In fact, these processes can change the product scattering behaviour from that expected from simple collision considerations, as seen in the two classical reactions F + H(2) --> HF + H and H + H(2) --> H(2) + H and their isotopic variants. In the case of the F + HD reaction, the role of a quantized trapped Feshbach resonance state had been directly determined, confirming previous conclusions that Feshbach resonances cause state-specific forward scattering of product molecules. Forward scattering has also been observed in the H + D(2) --> HD + D reaction and attributed to a time-delayed mechanism. But despite extensive experimental and theoretical investigations, the details of the mechanism remain unclear. Here we present crossed-beam scattering experiments and quantum calculations on the H + HD --> H(2) + D reaction. We find that the motion of the system along the reaction coordinate slows down as it approaches the top of the reaction barrier, thereby allowing vibrations perpendicular to the reaction coordinate and forward scattering. The reaction thus proceeds, as previously suggested, through a well-defined 'quantized bottleneck state' different from the trapped Feshbach resonance states observed before.
The phosphorylation of 2-deoxyglucose by the mammalian brain is used as an index of the brain's energy metabolism. The results of phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance (31P NMR) monitoring of conscious animals in vivo showed rapid phosphorylation of 2-deoxyglucose by brain tissue. The rate of phosphorylation as determined by 31P NMR was consistent with results achieved by tracer methods using carbon-14-labeled 2-deoxyglucose. However, the disappearance of 2-deoxyglucose-6-phosphate was shown to be faster than that reported by tracer studies and occurred without alterations of intracellular pH and energy homeostasis. These results were confirmed by gas chromatography and mass spectroscopy. It is postulated that 2-deoxyglucose may be metabolized in several ways, including dephosphorylation by a hexose phosphatase.
Extensive measurements of low-energy positive ions and electrons were made throughout the Jupiter encounter of Voyager 1. The bow shock and magneto-pause were crossed several times at distances consistent with variations in the upstream solar wind pressure measured on Voyager 2. During the inbound pass, the number density increased by six orders of magnitude between the innermost magnetopause crossing at approximately 47 Jupiter radii and near closest approach at approximately 5 Jupiter radii; the plasma flow during this period was predominately in the direction of corotation. Marked increases in number density were observed twice per planetary rotation, near the magnetic equator. Jupiterward of the Io plasma torus, a cold, corotating plasma was observed and the energylcharge spectra show well-resolved, heavy-ion peaks at mass-to-charge ratios A/Z* = 8, 16, 32, and 64.
Polarization of the optical emission from GRB 990123 was measured on 24.17 January 1999 universal time with the Nordic Optical Telescope. An upper limit of 2.3% on the linear polarization was found. Accurate polarization measurements provide important clues to the blast wave geometry and magnetic field structure of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). The lack of detectable polarization for GRB 990123 indicates that the optical afterglow was produced by a blast wave of unknown geometry with an insignificant coherent magnetic field or by a beamed outflow at high Lorentz factor seen at a small viewing angle. Such a collimated jet would help solve the problem of energy release in this exceptionally luminous cosmological burst.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments are typically performed with samples immersed in a magnet shimmed to high homogeneity. However, there are many circumstances in which it is impractical or undesirable to insert objects or subjects into the bore of a high-field magnet. Here we present a methodology based on an adaptation of nutation echoes that provides resolved spectra in the presence of matched inhomogeneous static and radiofrequency fields, thereby opening the way to high-resolution ex situ NMR. The observation of chemical shifts is regained through the use of multiple-pulse sequences of correlated, composite z-rotation pulses, producing resolved NMR spectra of liquid samples.
The local effects of isolated magnetic adatoms on the electronic properties of the surface of a superconductor were studied with a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope. Tunneling spectra obtained near magnetic adsorbates reveal the presence of excitations within the superconductor's energy gap that can be detected over a few atomic diameters around the impurity at the surface. These excitations are locally asymmetric with respect to tunneling of electrons and holes. A model calculation based on the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations can be used to understand the details of the local tunneling spectra.
In several metals, including URhGe, superconductivity has recently been observed to appear and coexist with ferromagnetism at temperatures well below that at which the ferromagnetic state forms. However, the material characteristics leading to such a state of coexistence have not yet been fully elucidated. We report that in URhGe there is a magnetic transition where the direction of the spin axis changes when a magnetic field of 12 tesla is applied parallel to the crystal b axis. We also report that a second pocket of superconductivity occurs at low temperature for a range of fields enveloping this magnetic transition, well above the field of 2 tesla at which superconductivity is first destroyed. Our findings strongly suggest that excitations in which the spins rotate stimulate superconductivity in the neighborhood of a quantum phase transition under high magnetic field.
Advances in solid-state and atomic physics are exposing the hidden relationships between conventional and exotic states of quantum matter. Prominent examples include the discovery of exotic superconductivity proximate to conventional spin and charge order, and the crossover from long-range phase order to preformed pairs achieved in gases of cold fermions and inferred for copper oxide superconductors. The unifying theme is that incompatible ground states can be connected by quantum phase transitions. Quantum fluctuations about the transition are manifestations of the competition between qualitatively distinct organizing principles, such as a long-wavelength density wave and a short-coherence-length condensate. They may even give rise to 'protected' phases, like fluctuation-mediated superconductivity that survives only in the vicinity of an antiferromagnetic quantum critical point. However, few model systems that demonstrate continuous quantum phase transitions have been identified, and the complex nature of many systems of interest hinders efforts to more fully understand correlations and fluctuations near a zero-temperature instability. Here we report the suppression of magnetism by hydrostatic pressure in elemental chromium, a simple cubic metal that demonstrates a subtle form of itinerant antiferromagnetism formally equivalent to the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) state in conventional superconductors. By directly measuring the associated charge order in a diamond anvil cell at low temperatures, we find a phase transition at pressures of approximately 10 GPa driven by fluctuations that destroy the BCS-like state but preserve the strong magnetic interaction between itinerant electrons and holes. Chromium is unique among stoichiometric magnetic metals studied so far in that the quantum phase transition is continuous, allowing experimental access to the quantum singularity and a direct probe of the competition between conventional and exotic order in a theoretically tractable material.
For an isolated quantum particle, such as an electron, the orbital (L) and spin (S) magnetic moments can change provided that the total angular momentum of the particle is conserved. In condensed matter, an efficient transfer between L and S can occur owing to the spin-orbit interaction, which originates in the relativistic motion of electrons. Disentangling the absolute contributions of the orbital and spin angular momenta is challenging, however, as any transfer between the two occurs on femtosecond timescales. Here we investigate such phenomena by using ultrashort optical laser pulses to change the magnetization of a ferromagnetic film and then probe its dynamics with circularly polarized femtosecond X-ray pulses. Our measurements enable us to disentangle the spin and orbital components of the magnetic moment, revealing different dynamics for L and S. We highlight the important role played by the spin-orbit interaction in the ultrafast laser-induced demagnetization of ferromagnetic films, and show also that the magneto-crystalline anisotropy energy is an important quantity to consider in such processes. Our study provides insights into the dynamics in magnetic systems as well as perspectives for the ultrafast control of information in magnetic recording media.
There are two main theoretical descriptions of antiferromagnets. The first arises from atomic physics, which predicts that atoms with unpaired electrons develop magnetic moments. In a solid, the coupling between moments on nearby ions then yields antiferromagnetic order at low temperatures. The second description, based on the physics of electron fluids or 'Fermi liquids' states that Coulomb interactions can drive the fluid to adopt a more stable configuration by developing a spin density wave. It is at present unknown which view is appropriate at a 'quantum critical point' where the antiferromagnetic transition temperature vanishes. Here we report neutron scattering and bulk magnetometry measurements of the metal CeCu(6-x)Au(x), which allow us to discriminate between the two models. We find evidence for an atomically local contribution to the magnetic correlations which develops at the critical gold concentration (x(c) = 0.1), corresponding to a magnetic ordering temperature of zero. This contribution implies that a Fermi-liquid-destroying spin-localizing transition, unanticipated from the spin density wave description, coincides with the antiferromagnetic quantum critical point.
Demonstration of quantum entanglement, a key resource in quantum computation arising from a nonclassical correlation of states, requires complete measurement of all states in varying bases. By using simultaneous measurement and state tomography, we demonstrated entanglement between two solid-state qubits. Single qubit operations and capacitive coupling between two super-conducting phase qubits were used to generate a Bell-type state. Full two-qubit tomography yielded a density matrix showing an entangled state with fidelity up to 87%. Our results demonstrate a high degree of unitary control of the system, indicating that larger implementations are within reach.
Ideas about quantized energy levels originated in atomic physics, but research in superconductivity has led to unparalleled precision in the measurement of energy levels. A comparison of levels produced by two Josephson junctions shows that they differ by no more than 3 parts in 10(19) at an energy of 0.0003 electron volt. The fact that the myriad of interactions of 10(12) particles in a macroscopic body, a Josephson junction, can produce sharply defined energy levels suggests a dynamical state effectively divorced from the complexities of its environment. The existence of this state, the macroscopic quantum state of superconductors, is well established, but its isolation from intrinsic perturbations has recently been shown to be extraordinary. These new results, with an improved precision of about ten orders of magnitude, are discussed in the context of highly accurate results from quantum electrodynamics, atomic spectroscopy, and the standards of metrology. Further refinements in precision may be achievable at higher energy levels, about 12 electron volts, as they become available from a new series array of 18,992 Josephson junctions.
High-temperature superconductivity is achieved by doping copper oxide insulators with charge carriers. The density of carriers in conducting materials can be determined from measurements of the Hall voltage--the voltage transverse to the flow of the electrical current that is proportional to an applied magnetic field. In common metals, this proportionality (the Hall coefficient) is robustly temperature independent. This is in marked contrast to the behaviour seen in high-temperature superconductors when in the 'normal' (resistive) state; the departure from expected behaviour is a key signature of the unconventional nature of the normal state, the origin of which remains a central controversy in condensed matter physics. Here we report the evolution of the low-temperature Hall coefficient in the normal state as the carrier density is increased, from the onset of superconductivity and beyond (where superconductivity has been suppressed by a magnetic field). Surprisingly, the Hall coefficient does not vary monotonically with doping but rather exhibits a sharp change at the optimal doping level for superconductivity. This observation supports the idea that two competing ground states underlie the high-temperature superconducting phase.
Nearly perfect speech recognition was observed under conditions of greatly reduced spectral information. Temporal envelopes of speech were extracted from broad frequency bands and were used to modulate noises of the same bandwidths. This manipulation preserved temporal envelope cues in each band but restricted the listener to severely degraded information on the distribution of spectral energy. The identification of consonants, vowels, and words in simple sentences improved markedly as the number of bands increased; high speech recognition performance was obtained with only three bands of modulated noise. Thus, the presentation of a dynamic temporal pattern in only a few broad spectral regions is sufficient for the recognition of speech.
A study of geomagnetic disturbances during 1967 and 1968, for which in situ solar wind observations are available, reveals that the magnetosphere acts as a half-wave rectifier of the interplanetary electric field. The rate of injection of energy into the magnetosphere, as inferred from the strength of the disturbance, is approximately linearly proportional to the component of the electric field from dawn to dusk but is effectively zero if the electricfield has a component from dusk to dawn.
Much has been learned about the electromagnetic interaction between Jupiter and its satellite Io from in situ observations. Io, in its motion through the Io plasma torus at Jupiter, continuously generates an Alfven wing that carries two billion kilowatts of power into the jovian ionosphere. Concurrently, Io is acted upon by a J x B force tending to propel it out of the jovian system. The energy source for these processes is the rotation of Jupiter. This unusual planet-satellite coupling serves as an archetype for the interaction of a large moving conductor with a magnetized plasma, a problem of general space and astrophysical interest.
Paramagnetic resonance spectra of Apollo 11 fines and rocks were measured at 9 and 35 gigahertz and at 4 degrees , 80 degrees , and 300 degrees K. At both frequencies the material has an intense absorption at g = 2, with a line width of approximately 950 gauss. Fe ions with strong exchange interactions produce this resonance. A comparison of the resonance absorption due to Fe(3+) showed that the energy of the crystal field interaction was approximately 0.1 per centimeter. Mn(2+) was identified in several samples, and an absorption at g = 1.89 was tentatively attributed to Ti(3+). The nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of (27)Al had a distribution of asymmetry parameters eta ranging from 0.25 to 0.75 and had nuclear quadrupole coupling constants e(2)qQ/h of approximately 3 megahertz.
In many two-dimensional superconducting systems, such as Josephson-junction arrays, granular superconducting films, and the high-temperature superconductors, it appears that the electrons bind into Cooper pairs below a pairing temperature (T(P)) that is well above the Kosterlitz-Thouless temperature (T(KT)) the temperature below which there is long-range superconducting order). The electron dynamics at temperatures between T(KT) and T(P) involve a complex interplay of thermal and quantum fluctuations, for which no quantitative theory exists. Here we report numerical results for this region, by exploiting its proximity to a T = 0 superconductor-insulator quantum phase transition. This quantum critical point need not be experimentally accessible for our results to apply. We characterize the static, thermodynamic properties by a single dimensionless parameter, gamma(T). Quantitative and universal results are obtained for the frequency dependence of the conductivity, which are dependent only upon gamma(T) and fundamental constants of nature.
Intermolecular dipole-dipole interactions were once thought to average to zero in gases and liquids as a result of rapid molecular motion that leads to sharp nuclear magnetic resonance lines. Recent papers have shown that small residual couplings survive the motional averaging if the magnetization is nonuniform or nonspherical. Here, we show that a much larger, qualitatively different intermolecular dipolar interaction remains in nanogases and nanoliquids as an effect of confinement. The dipolar coupling that characterizes such interactions is identical for all spin pairs and depends on the shape, orientation (with respect to the external magnetic field), and volume of the gas/liquid container. This nanoscale effect is useful in the determination of nanostructures and could have unique applications in the exploration of quantum space.
