The Smad4/DPC4 tumour suppressor is inactivated in nearly half of pancreatic carcinomas and to a lesser extent in a variety of other cancers. Smad4/DPC4, and the related tumour suppressor Smad2, belong to the SMAD family of proteins that mediate signalling by the TGF-beta/activin/BMP-2/4 cytokine superfamily from receptor Ser/Thr protein kinases at the cell surface to the nucleus. SMAD proteins, which are phosphorylated by the activated receptor, propagate the signal, in part, through homo- and hetero-oligomeric interactions. Smad4/DPC4 plays a central role as it is the shared hetero-oligomerization partner of the other SMADs. The conserved carboxy-terminal domains of SMADs are sufficient for inducing most of the ligand-specific effects, and are the primary targets of tumorigenic inactivation. We now describe the crystal structure of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the Smad4/DPC4 tumour suppressor, determined at 2.5 A resolution. The structure reveals that the Smad4/DPC4 CTD forms a crystallographic trimer through a conserved protein-protein interface, to which the majority of the tumour-derived missense mutations map. These mutations disrupt homo-oligomerization in vitro and in vivo, indicating that the trimeric assembly of the Smad4/DPC4 CTD is critical for signalling and is disrupted by tumorigenic mutations.
Amphiphilic phospholipids were used to direct the formation of biocompatible, uniform silica nanostructures in the presence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and bacterial cell lines. The cell surfaces organize multilayered phospholipid vesicles that interface coherently with the silica host and help relieve drying stresses that develop with conventional templates. These host structures maintain cell accessibility, addressability, and viability in the absence of buffer or an external fluidic architecture. The cell surfaces are accessible and can be used to localize added proteins, plasmids, and nanocrystals. Prolonged cell viability combined with reporter protein expression enabled stand-alone cell-based sensing.
Two sediment traps were deployed for 234 days in 2670 meters of water at 0 degrees 36'N, 86 degrees 6'W. A comparison of the fluxes of ten elements into the traps and into the surface sediment indicates that the refractory elements iron, aluminum, and barium are accumulating in the sediments at rates very similar to those measured in the traps. In contrast, at least 80 percent of the opal, 50 percent of the carbonate, and 90 percent of the organic carbon is consumed at the sediment-water interface.
Metals deposited in vacuum on metal oxides such as alumina normally grow as three-dimensional clusters because of weak adatom-substrate interactions. This tendency hinders our ability to form interfaces of ultrathin, laminar metal films on oxides for use in microelectronics and other technologies where nanostructural control is desired. We present experimental and theoretical results showing that room temperature Co deposition on fully hydroxylated clean sapphire (alpha-Al2O3) produces a surface chemical reaction that leads to laminar growth, despite a large mismatch in lattice constants. This process should be applicable to a wide range of metals and metal oxides.
Liquid-vapour interfaces, particularly those involving water, are common in both natural and artificial environments. They were first described as regions of continuous variation of density, caused by density fluctuations within the bulk phases. In contrast, the more recent capillary-wave models assumes a step-like local density profile across the liquid-vapour interface, whose width is the result of the propagation of thermally excited capillary waves. The model has been validated for length scales of tenths of micrometres and larger, but the structure of liquid surfaces on submicrometre length scales--where the capillary theory is expected to break down--remains poorly understood. Here we report grazing-incidence X-ray scattering experiments that allow for a complete determination of the free surface structure and surface energy for water and a range of organic liquids. We observe a large decrease of up to 75% in the surface energy of submicrometre waves that cannot be explained by capillary theory, but is in accord with the effects arising from the non-locality of attractive intermolecule interactions as predicted by a recent density functional theory. Our data, and the results of comparable measurements on liquid solutions, metallic alloys, surfactants, lipids and wetting films should thus provide a stringent test for any new theories that attempt to describe the structure of liquid interfaces with nanometre-scale resolution.
Vinblastine is one of several tubulin-targeting Vinca alkaloids that have been responsible for many chemotherapeutic successes since their introduction in the clinic as antitumour drugs. In contrast with the two other classes of small tubulin-binding molecules (Taxol and colchicine), the binding site of vinblastine is largely unknown and the molecular mechanism of this drug has remained elusive. Here we report the X-ray structure of vinblastine bound to tubulin in a complex with the RB3 protein stathmin-like domain (RB3-SLD). Vinblastine introduces a wedge at the interface of two tubulin molecules and thus interferes with tubulin assembly. Together with electron microscopical and biochemical data, the structure explains vinblastine-induced tubulin self-association into spiral aggregates at the expense of microtubule growth. It also shows that vinblastine and the amino-terminal part of RB3-SLD binding sites share a hydrophobic groove on the alpha-tubulin surface that is located at an intermolecular contact in microtubules. This is an attractive target for drugs designed to perturb microtubule dynamics by interfacial interference, for which tubulin seems ideally suited because of its propensity to self-associate.
Enzymes use substrate-binding energy both to promote ground-state association and to stabilize the reaction transition state selectively. The monomeric homing endonuclease I-AniI cleaves with high sequence specificity in the centre of a 20-base-pair (bp) DNA target site, with the amino (N)-terminal domain of the enzyme making extensive binding interactions with the left (-) side of the target site and the similarly structured carboxy (C)-terminal domain interacting with the right (+) side. Here we show that, despite the approximate twofold symmetry of the enzyme-DNA complex, there is almost complete segregation of interactions responsible for substrate binding to the (-) side of the interface and interactions responsible for transition-state stabilization to the (+) side. Although single base-pair substitutions throughout the entire DNA target site reduce catalytic efficiency, mutations in the (-) DNA half-site almost exclusively increase the dissociation constant (K(D)) and the Michaelis constant under single-turnover conditions (K(M)*), and those in the (+) half-site primarily decrease the turnover number (k(cat)*). The reduction of activity produced by mutations on the (-) side, but not mutations on the (+) side, can be suppressed by tethering the substrate to the endonuclease displayed on the surface of yeast. This dramatic asymmetry in the use of enzyme-substrate binding energy for catalysis has direct relevance to the redesign of endonucleases to cleave genomic target sites for gene therapy and other applications. Computationally redesigned enzymes that achieve new specificities on the (-) side do so by modulating K(M)*, whereas redesigns with altered specificities on the (+) side modulate k(cat)*. Our results illustrate how classical enzymology and modern protein design can each inform the other.
Isotope studies show that the Vostok ice core consists of ice refrozen from Lake Vostok water, from 3539 meters below the surface of the Antarctic ice sheet to its bottom at about 3750 meters. Additional evidence comes from the total gas content, crystal size, and electrical conductivity of the ice. The Vostok site is a likely place for water freezing at the lake-ice interface, because this interface occurs at a higher level here than anywhere else above the lake. Isotopic data suggest that subglacial Lake Vostok is an open system with an efficient circulation of water that was formed during periods that were slightly warmer than those of the past 420,000 years. Lake ice recovered by deep drilling is of interest for preliminary investigations of lake chemistry and bedrock properties and for the search for indigenous lake microorganisms. This latter aspect is of potential importance for the exploration of icy planets and moons.
Monolayers of rare gas atoms adsorbed onto the basal planes of graphite play the same prototype role in two dimensions that rare gas liquids and solids do in three dimensions. In recent experiments such novel phenomena as continuous melting, the lack of true crystallinity in two dimensions, orientationally ordered fluid phases, and melting from a solid to a reentrant fluid with decreasing temperature have been observed. Because the forces in these rare gas monolayers are simple and well understood, by studying them the investigator can examine a direct interface between experiment and first principles. In order to understand the phases and phase transitions that occur in such materials, it is necessary to consider the geometrical matching of the rare gas overlayer to the graphite substrate. It turns out that in two dimensions both the local and the long-distance behavior are important. These two-dimensional rare gas solids may be effectively probed with synchrotron x-ray techniques, and the results of a series of synchrotron x-ray scattering studies of these solids are presented.
The high performance of Au-CeO2 and Au-TiO2 catalysts in the water-gas shift (WGS) reaction (H2O + CO-->H2 + CO2) relies heavily on the direct participation of the oxide in the catalytic process. Although clean Au(111) is not catalytically active for the WGS, gold surfaces that are 20 to 30% covered by ceria or titania nanoparticles have activities comparable to those of good WGS catalysts such as Cu(111) or Cu(100). In TiO(2-x)/Au(111) and CeO(2-x)/Au(111), water dissociates on O vacancies of the oxide nanoparticles, CO adsorbs on Au sites located nearby, and subsequent reaction steps take place at the metal-oxide interface. In these inverse catalysts, the moderate chemical activity of bulk gold is coupled to that of a more reactive oxide.
The dry valleys of southern Victoria Land, constituting the largest ice-free expanse in the Antarctic, contain numerous lakes whose perennial ice cover is the cause of some unique physical and biological properties.  Although the depth, temperature and salinity of the liquid water varies considerably from lake to lake, the thickness of the ice cover is remarkably consistent, ranging from 3.5 to 6 m, which is determined primarily by the balance between conduction of energy out of the ice and the release of latent heat at the ice-water interface and is also affected by the transmission and absorption of sunlight.  In the steady state, the release of latent heat at the ice bottom is controlled by ablation from the ice surface.  Here we present a simple energy-balance model, using the measured ablation rate of 30 cm yr-1, which can explain the observed ice thickness.
The reported thermal conductivity (kappa) of suspended graphene, 3000 to 5000 watts per meter per kelvin, exceeds that of diamond and graphite. Thus, graphene can be useful in solving heat dissipation problems such as those in nanoelectronics. However, contact with a substrate could affect the thermal transport properties of graphene. Here, we show experimentally that kappa of monolayer graphene exfoliated on a silicon dioxide support is still as high as about 600 watts per meter per kelvin near room temperature, exceeding those of metals such as copper. It is lower than that of suspended graphene because of phonons leaking across the graphene-support interface and strong interface-scattering of flexural modes, which make a large contribution to kappa in suspended graphene according to a theoretical calculation.
Since its initial discovery nearly a decade ago, non-volcanic tremor has provided information about a region of the Earth that was previously thought incapable of generating seismic radiation. A thorough explanation of the geologic process responsible for tremor generation has, however, yet to be determined. Owing to their location at the plate interface, temporal correlation with geodetically measured slow-slip events and dominant shear wave energy, tremor observations in southwest Japan have been interpreted as a superposition of many low-frequency earthquakes that represent slip on a fault surface. Fluids may also be fundamental to the failure process in subduction zone environments, as teleseismic and tidal modulation of tremor in Cascadia and Japan and high Poisson ratios in both source regions are indicative of pressurized pore fluids. Here we identify a robust correlation between extremely small, tidally induced shear stress parallel to the San Andreas fault and non-volcanic tremor activity near Parkfield, California. We suggest that this tremor represents shear failure on a critically stressed fault in the presence of near-lithostatic pore pressure. There are a number of similarities between tremor in subduction zone environments, such as Cascadia and Japan, and tremor on the deep San Andreas transform, suggesting that the results presented here may also be applicable in other tectonic settings.
Caspase-9-mediated apoptosis (programmed cell death) plays a central role in the development and homeostasis of all multicellular organisms. Mature caspase-9 is derived from its procaspase precursor as a result of recruitment by the activating factor Apaf-1. The crystal structures of the caspase-recruitment domain of Apaf-1 by itself and in complex with the prodomain of procaspase-9 have been determined at 1.6 and 2.5 A resolution, respectively. These structures and other evidence reveal that each molecule of Apaf-1 interacts with a molecule of procaspase-9 through two highly charged and complementary surfaces formed by non-conserved residues; these surfaces determine recognition specificity through networks of intermolecular hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions. Mutation of the important interface residues in procaspase-9 or Apaf-1 prevents or reduces activation of procaspase-9 in a cell-free system. Wild-type, but not mutant, prodomains of caspase-9 completely inhibit catalytic processing of procaspase-9. Furthermore, analysis of homologues from Caenorhabditis elegans indicates that recruitment of CED-3 by CED-4 is probably mediated by the same set of conserved structural motifs, with a corresponding change in the specificity-determining residues.
The crystal structure of the Escherichia coli trp repressor has been solved to atomic resolution. The dimeric protein has a remarkable subunit interface in which five of each subunit's six helices are interlinked. The binding of L-tryptophan activates the aporepressor indirectly by fixing the orientation of the second helix of the helix-turn-helix motif and by moulding the details of the repressor's structure near the DNA binding surface.
Two-dimensional crystals are formed from macromolecules bound on the surface of a lipid monolayer. A ligand linked to the lipid orientates the binding, and lateral diffusion of the lipids facilitates crystallization. The crystals are suitable for structural analysis by image processing of electron micrographs. An example is the formation of ordered arrays of antibodies on a monolayer of a lipid hapten, and subsequent decoration of these arrays with the first component of complement. Image processing indicates the arrangement of antibodies and the site of complement binding. This approach should be widely applicable to molecular complexes, such as those in replication, protein synthesis, hormone-receptor interaction and metabolic processes.
Understanding the nature of solid-liquid interfaces is important for many processes of technological interest, such as solidification, liquid-phase epitaxial growth, wetting, liquid-phase joining, crystal growth, and lubrication. Recent studies have reported on indirect evidence of density fluctuations at solid-liquid interfaces on the basis of x-ray scattering methods that have been complemented by atomistic simulations. We provide evidence for ordering of liquid atoms adjacent to an interface with a crystal, based on real-time high-temperature observations of alumina-aluminum solid-liquid interfaces at the atomic-length scale. In addition, crystal growth of alumina into liquid aluminum, facilitated by interfacial transport of oxygen from the microscope column, was observed in situ with the use of high-resolution transmission electron microscopy.
Metamaterials are artificially engineered structures that have properties, such as a negative refractive index, not attainable with naturally occurring materials. Negative-index metamaterials (NIMs) were first demonstrated for microwave frequencies, but it has been challenging to design NIMs for optical frequencies and they have so far been limited to optically thin samples because of significant fabrication challenges and strong energy dissipation in metals. Such thin structures are analogous to a monolayer of atoms, making it difficult to assign bulk properties such as the index of refraction. Negative refraction of surface plasmons was recently demonstrated but was confined to a two-dimensional waveguide. Three-dimensional (3D) optical metamaterials have come into focus recently, including the realization of negative refraction by using layered semiconductor metamaterials and a 3D magnetic metamaterial in the infrared frequencies; however, neither of these had a negative index of refraction. Here we report a 3D optical metamaterial having negative refractive index with a very high figure of merit of 3.5 (that is, low loss). This metamaterial is made of cascaded 'fishnet' structures, with a negative index existing over a broad spectral range. Moreover, it can readily be probed from free space, making it functional for optical devices. We construct a prism made of this optical NIM to demonstrate negative refractive index at optical frequencies, resulting unambiguously from the negative phase evolution of the wave propagating inside the metamaterial. Bulk optical metamaterials open up prospects for studies of 3D optical effects and applications associated with NIMs and zero-index materials such as reversed Doppler effect, superlenses, optical tunnelling devices, compact resonators and highly directional sources.
DNA gyrase is a type II DNA topoisomerase from bacteria that introduces supercoils into DNA. It catalyses the breakage of a DNA duplex (the G segment), the passage of another segment (the T segment) through the break, and then the reunification of the break. This activity involves the opening and dosing of a series of molecular 'gates' which is coupled to ATP hydrolysis. Here we present the crystal structure of the 'breakage-reunion' domain of the gyrase at 2.8 A resolution. Comparison of the structure of this 59K (relative molecular mass, 59,000) domain with that of a 92K fragment of yeast topoisomerase II reveals a very different quaternary organization, and we propose that the two structures represent two principal conformations that participate in the enzymatic pathway. The gyrase structure reveals a new dimer contact with a grooved concave surface for binding the G segment and a cluster of conserved charged residues surrounding the active-site tyrosines. It also shows how breakage of the G segment can occur and, together with the topoisomerase II structure, suggests a pathway by which the T segment can be released through the second gate of the enzyme. Mutations that confer resistance to the quinolone antibacterial agents cluster at the new dimer interface, indicating how these drugs might interact with the gyrase-DNA complex.
Regular arrays of topologically complex, millimeter-scale objects were prepared by self-assembly, with the shapes of the assembling objects and the wettability of their surfaces determining the structure of the arrays. The system was composed of solid objects floating at the interface between perfluorodecalin and water and interacting by lateral capillary forces; patterning of the wettability of the surfaces of the objects directs these forces. Self-assembly results from minimization of the interfacial free energy of the liquid-liquid interface. Calculations suggest that this strategy for self-assembly can be applied to objects on a micrometer scale.
Aluminas and their surface chemistry play a vital role in many areas of modern technology. The behavior of adsorbed water is particularly important and poorly understood. Simulations of hydrated alpha-alumina (0001) surfaces with ab initio molecular dynamics elucidate many aspects of this problem, especially the complex dynamics of water dissociation and related surface reactions. At low water coverage, free energy profiles established that molecularly adsorbed water is metastable and dissociates readily, even in the absence of defects, by a kinetically preferred pathway. Observations at higher water coverage revealed rapid dissociation and unanticipated collective effects, including water-catalyzed dissociation and proton transfer reactions between adsorbed water and hydroxide. The results provide a consistent interpretation of the measured coverage dependence of water heats of adsorption, hydroxyl vibrational spectra, and other experiments.
A transition from metal-like double-layer capacitive charging to redox-like charging was observed in electrochemical ensemble Coulomb staircase experiments on solutions of gold nanoparticles of varied core size. The monodisperse gold nanoparticles are stabilized by short-chain alkanethiolate monolayers and have 8 to 38 kilodaltons core mass (1.1 to 1.9 nanometers in diameter). Larger cores display Coulomb staircase responses consistent with double-layer charging of metal-electrolyte interfaces, whereas smaller core nanoparticles exhibit redox chemical character, including a large central gap. The change in behavior is consistent with new near-infrared spectroscopic data showing an emerging gap between the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied orbitals of 0.4 to 0.9 electron volt.
Dust grains in the interstellar medium and the outer Solar System commonly have a coating of water ice, which affects their optical properties and surface chemistry. The thickness of these icy mantles may be determined in part by the extent of photodesorption (photosputtering) by background ultraviolet radiation. But this process is poorly understood, with theoretical estimates of the photodesorption rate spanning several orders of magnitude. Here we report measurements of the absolute ultraviolet photodesorption yield of low-temperature water ice. Our results indicate that the rate of photodesorption is appreciable. In particular, it can account for the absence of icy mantles on grains in diffuse interstellar clouds, it exceeds solar-wind ion erosion and sublimation in the outer Solar System, and it is important in determining the lifetimes of icy mantles in dense molecular clouds.
Micromachining allows the formation of micrometer-sized regions of bare gold on the surface of a gold film supporting a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of alkanethiolate. A second SAM forms on the micromachined surfaces when the entire system-the remaining undisturbed gold-supported SAM and the micromachined features of bare gold-is exposed to a solution of dialkyl disulfide. By preparing an initial hydrophilic SAM from HS(CH(2))(15)COOH, micromachining features into this SAM, and covering these features with a hydrophobic SAM formed from [CH(3)(CH(2))(11)S](2), it is possible to construct micrometer-scale hydrophobic lines in a hydrophilic surface. These lines provide new structures with which to manipulate the shapes of liquid drops.
Quantum mechanics places a fundamental limit on the accuracy of measurements. In most circumstances, the measurement uncertainty is distributed equally between pairs of complementary properties; this leads to the 'standard quantum limit' for measurement resolution. Using a technique known as 'squeezing', it is possible to reduce the uncertainty of one desired property below the standard quantum limit at the expense of increasing that of the complementary one. Squeezing is already being used to enhance the sensitivity of gravity-wave detectors and may play a critical role in other high precision applications, such as atomic clocks and optical communications. Spin squeezing (the squeezing of angular momentum variables) is a powerful tool, particularly in the context of quantum light-matter interfaces. Although impressive gains in squeezing have been made, optical spin-squeezed systems are still many orders of magnitude away from the maximum possible squeezing, known as the Heisenberg uncertainty limit. Here we demonstrate how an optical system can be squeezed essentially all the way to this fundamental bound. We construct spin-squeezed states by overlapping three indistinguishable photons in an optical fibre and manipulating their polarization (spin), resulting in the formation of a squeezed composite particle known as a 'triphoton'. The symmetry properties of polarization imply that the measured triphoton states can be most naturally represented by quasi-probability distributions on the surface of a sphere. In this work we show that the spherical topology of polarization imposes a limit on how much squeezing can occur, leading to the quasi-probability distributions wrapping around the sphere-a phenomenon we term 'over-squeezing'. Our observations of spin-squeezing in the few-photon regime could lead to new quantum resources for enhanced measurement, lithography and information processing that can be precisely engineered photon-by-photon.
One of the primary objectives of modern surface chemistry of transition metals is the synthesis of surface compounds and complexes and the understanding of their reactivity, structure, and bonding. Such considerations are paramount for advancing understanding of catalysis, adhesion, organic thin-film growth, and electrocatalysis. On selected metals, particularly copper, silver, and gold, selective scission of X-H bonds (where X is oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, or sulfur) by surface-bound atomic oxygen occurs to form moderately stable species that can be isolated for further study. Selective oxidation reactions may occur heterogeneously by means of this novel oxygen- activated route. Furthermore, this selective chemistry offers a paradigm for synthesis of a wide variety of surface organometallic complexes, whose formation can be predicted from acid-base principles. These subjects are discussed in this article with emphasis on their role in catalytic oxidation cycles.
Recent developments in ion-scattering spectrometry have led to a surface crystallography that is sensitive to all elements, including hydrogen. Time-of-flight techniques for the detection of atoms scattered and recoiled from surfaces in simple collision sequences, together with calculations of shadowing and blocking cones, can be used to make direct measurements of interatomic spacings and adsorption sites within an accuracy of </=0.1 angstrom. Time-of-flight detection of both neutrals and ions provides the high sensitivity necessary for nondestructive analysis. Structures are determined by monitoring the angular anisotropies in the scattered primary and recoiled target atom flux. Such surface and adsorption site determinations find application in such fields as catalysis, thin film growth, and interfaces.
During the past 15 years, surfaces have been increasingly studied on the atomic scale. As a result, their atomic structure and composition and the dynamics of gas-surface interactions are much better understood. Modern surface science is beginning to have an impact on many technologies. Techniques are readily available to study solid-vacuum and solid-gas interfaces. Studies of solid-liquid and solid-solid interfaces are difficult and appear to be challenging frontier areas of research. Surface science is at the heart of most research and development problems in energy conversion and storage.
Mapping the spatial arrangement of chemical functional groups and their interactions is of significant importance to problems ranging from lubrication and adhesion to recognition in biological systems. A force microscope has been used to measure the adhesive and friction forces between molecularly modified probe tips and organic monolayers terminating in a lithographically defined pattern of distinct functional groups. The adhesive interactions between simple CH(3)/CH(3), CH(3)/COOH, and COOH/COOH functional groups correlate directly with friction images of sample surfaces patterned with these groups. Thus, by monitoring the friction between a specifically functionalized tip and sample, one can produce friction images that display predictable contrast and correspond to the spatial distribution of functional groups on the sample surface. Applications of this chemically sensitive imaging technique are discussed.
Gold (Au) is an interesting catalytic material because of its ability to catalyze reactions, such as partial oxidations, with high selectivities at low temperatures; but limitations arise from the low O2 dissociation probability on Au. This problem can be overcome by using Au nanoparticles supported on suitable oxides which, however, are prone to sintering. Nanoporous Au, prepared by the dealloying of AuAg alloys, is a new catalyst with a stable structure that is active without any support. It catalyzes the selective oxidative coupling of methanol to methyl formate with selectivities above 97% and high turnover frequencies at temperatures below 80 degrees C. Because the overall catalytic characteristics of nanoporous Au are in agreement with studies on Au single crystals, we deduced that the selective surface chemistry of Au is unaltered but that O2 can be readily activated with this material. Residual silver is shown to regulate the availability of reactive oxygen.
Many human cancers involve up-regulation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase PI3Kalpha, with oncogenic mutations identified in both the p110alpha catalytic and the p85alpha regulatory subunits. We used crystallographic and biochemical approaches to gain insight into activating mutations in two noncatalytic p110alpha domains-the adaptor-binding and the helical domains. A structure of the adaptor-binding domain of p110alpha in a complex with the p85alpha inter-Src homology 2 (inter-SH2) domain shows that oncogenic mutations in the adaptor-binding domain are not at the inter-SH2 interface but in a polar surface patch that is a plausible docking site for other domains in the holo p110/p85 complex. We also examined helical domain mutations and found that the Glu545 to Lys545 (E545K) oncogenic mutant disrupts an inhibitory charge-charge interaction with the p85 N-terminal SH2 domain. These studies extend our understanding of the architecture of PI3Ks and provide insight into how two classes of mutations that cause a gain in function can lead to cancer.
Lipid-bilayer membranes supported on solid substrates are widely used as cell-surface models that connect biological and artificial materials. They can be placed either directly on solids or on ultrathin polymer supports that mimic the generic role of the extracellular matrix. The tools of modern genetic engineering and bioorganic chemistry make it possible to couple many types of biomolecule to supported membranes. This results in sophisticated interfaces that can be used to control, organize and study the properties and function of membranes and membrane-associated proteins. Particularly exciting opportunities arise when these systems are coupled with advanced semiconductor technology.
Deep ultraviolet (UV) irradiation is shown to modify organosilane self-assembled monolayer (SAM) films by a photocleavage mechanism, which renders the surface amenable to further SAM modification. Patterned UV exposure creates alternating regions of intact SAM film and hydrophilic, reactive sites. The exposed regions can undergo a second chemisorption reaction to produce an assembly of SAMs in the same molecular plane with similar substrate attachment chemistry. The UV-patterned films are used as a template for selective buildup of fluorophores, metals, and biological cells.
Voltage-dependent ion channels serve as field-effect transistors by opening a gate in response to membrane voltage changes. The gate's response to voltage is mediated by voltage sensors, which are arginine-containing structures that must move with respect to the membrane electric field. We have analysed by electron microscopy a voltage-dependent K(+) channel from Aeropyrum pernix (KvAP). Fab fragments were attached to 'voltage sensor paddles' and identified in the electron microscopy map at 10.5 A resolution. The extracellular surface location of the Fab fragments in the map is consistent with the membrane-depolarized, open conformation of the channel in electrophysiological experiments. Comparison of the map with a crystal structure demonstrates that the voltage sensor paddles are 'up' (that is, near the channel's extracellular surface) and situated at the protein-lipid interface. This finding supports the hypothesis that in response to changes in voltage the sensors move at the protein-lipid interface rather than in a gating pore surrounded by protein.
Progress in understanding the many scientifically interesting and technologically important processes that occur at surfaces has been slowed by the absence of basic structural information. A variety of new techniques are being developed to attack this central problem in surface science. With the new surface probes it is now possible to quantitatively determine the arrangement of atoms in the first monolayers of a solid. This provides the basis for exciting advances in surface science.
Gas-liquid scattering experiments provide direct observations of the fate of hydrogen-bonding molecules striking the surfaces of acidic liquids. Collisions of gaseous formic acid with concentrated sulfuric acid show that impinging monomers (HCOOH and DCOOD) scatter inelastically from the interface or become trapped by surface H2SO4. Most trapped DCOOD molecules undergo proton exchange before desorbing from the acid, indicating that gas-surface accommodation almost always leads to reaction with H2SO4 molecules. This proton transfer is not inhibited by dimerization of the formic acid: The dimers readily undergo intramolecular hydrogen bond cleavage and D-H exchange before desorbing from the acid.
Room-temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) are promising candidates for a broad range of "green" applications, for which their interaction with solid surfaces plays a crucial role. In this high-energy x-ray reflectivity study, the temperature-dependent structures of three ionic liquids with the tris(pentafluoroethyl)trifluorophosphate anion in contact with a charged sapphire substrate were investigated with submolecular resolution. All three RTILs show strong interfacial layering, starting with a cation layer at the substrate and decaying exponentially into the bulk liquid. The observed decay length and layering period point to an interfacial ordering mechanism, akin to the charge inversion effect, which is suggested to originate from strong correlations between the unscreened ions. The observed layering is expected to be a generic feature of RTILs at charged interfaces.
During the last 20 years, surface scientists have developed a variety of techniques that make it possible to study, on the molecular level, the structure, composition, and chemical bonding in the surface monolayer. Both single-crystal model catalysts and real catalyst systems that are active in important chemical processes have been investigated by a combination of ultrahigh-vacuum surface science techniques and high-pressure kinetic techniques in an effort to determine the relation between the structure and composition of the surface and the rates of reaction and selectivities. The structure of the atomic surface, a strongly adsorbed overlayer, and the oxidation states of surface atoms are the important molecular features of an active catalyst. As a consequence of modern surface science, the design and preparation of catalysts has developed from an art into a high technology.
Interfacial adsorption of pancreatic lipase is strongly dependent on the physical chemical properties of the lipid surface. These properties are affected by amphiphiles such as phospholipids and bile salts. In the presence of such amphiphiles, lipase binding to the interface requires a protein cofactor, colipase. We obtained crystals of the pancreatic lipase-procolipase complex and solved the structure at 3.04 A resolution. Here we describe the structure of procolipase, which essentially consists of three 'fingers' and is topologically comparable to snake toxins. The tips of the fingers contain most of the hydrophobic amino acids and presumably form the interfacial binding site. Lipase binding occurs at the opposite side to this site and involves polar interactions. Determination of the three-dimensional structure of pancreatic lipase has revealed the presence of two domains: an amino-terminal domain, at residues 1-336 containing the active site and a carboxy-terminal domain at residues 337-449 (ref. 6). Procolipase binds exclusively to the C-terminal domain of lipase. No conformational change in the lipase molecule is induced by the binding of procolipase.
Synchrotron surface x-ray scattering (SXS) studies have been carried out at the Au(lll)/electrolyte interface to determine the influence of surface charge on the microscopic arrangement of gold surface atoms. At the electrochemical interface, the surface charge density can be continuously varied by controlling the applied potential. The top layer of gold atoms undergoes a reversible phase transition between the (1 x 1) bulk termination and a (23 x radical3) reconstructed phase on changing the electrode potential. In order to differentiate the respective roles of surface charge and adsorbates, studies were carried out in 0.1 M NaF, NaCl, and NaBr solutions. The phase transition occurs at an induced surface charge density of 0.07 +/- 0.02 electron per atom in all three solutions.
The three-dimensional structure of the lipase-procolipase complex, co-crystallized with mixed micelles of phosphatidylcholine and bile salt, has been determined at 3 A resolution by X-ray crystallography. The lid, a surface helix covering the catalytic triad of lipase, adopts a totally different conformation which allows phospholipid to bind to the enzyme's active site. The open lid is an essential component of the active site and interacts with procolipase. Together they form the lipid-water interface binding site. This reorganization of the lid structure provokes a second drastic conformational change in an active site loop, which in its turn creates the oxyanion hole (induced fit).
Air bubbles breaking at the air-water interface can remove bacteria that concentrate in the surface microlayer and eject the bacteria into the atmosphere. The bacterial concentrations (numbers per milliliter) in the drops ejected from the bubbles may, depending on drop size, be from 10 to 1000 times that of the water in which the bubbles burst.
Heterogeneous, patterned surfaces comprising well-defined hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions and having micrometer-scale periodicities were prepared by patterning the adsorption of omega-functionalized alkanethiolates in self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on gold. Condensation of water on such surfaces resulted in drops that followed the patterns in the SAMs. These patterned condensation figures (CFs) acted as optical diffraction gratings for reflected (or transmitted) light from a helium-neon laser (wavelength of 632.8 nanometers). Under an atmosphere of constant relative humidity, the development of the condensation figure was monitored quantitatively, as the temperature of the surface was lowered, by following the change in intensity of a first-order diffraction spot. This experimental technique may be useful in the development of new types of optical sensors that respond to their environment by changing the reflectivity of patterned regions and for studying phenomena such as drop nucleation, contact angle hysteresis, and spontaneous dewetting and break-up of thin liquid films.
Surface science is an important and well-established branch of materials science involving the study of changes in material properties near a surface or interface. A fundamental issue has been atomic reconstruction: how the surface lattice symmetry differs from the bulk. 'Correlated-electron compounds' are materials in which strong electron-electron and electron-lattice interactions produce new electronic phases, including interaction-induced (Mott) insulators, many forms of spin, charge and orbital ordering, and (presumably) high-transition-temperature superconductivity. Here we propose that the fundamental issue for the new field of correlated-electron surface/interface science is 'electronic reconstruction': how does the surface/interface electronic phase differ from that in the bulk? As a step towards a general understanding of such phenomena, we present a theoretical study of an interface between a strongly correlated Mott insulator and a band insulator. We find dramatic interface-induced electronic reconstructions: in wide parameter ranges, the near-interface region is metallic and ferromagnetic, whereas the bulk phase on either side is insulating and antiferromagnetic. Extending the analysis to a wider range of interfaces and surfaces is a fundamental scientific challenge and may lead to new applications for correlated electron materials.
Figure 1 in the report "Ice nucleation by, alcohols arranged in monolayers at the surface of water drops" by M. Gavish et al. (16 Nov., p. 973) should have been credited to B. Kamb [in Structural Chemistry and Molecular Biology, A. Rich, Ed. (Freeman, New York, 1968), pp. 507-542, figure 3a].
Functional relationships, available from only a few monolayer studies, can be applied to a relatively simple model of the excitable membrane to give permeability-potential curves quite similar to the conductance-potential curves obtained experimentally in voltage-clamped giant axons. Contrary to the usual view in terms of "carrier systems," the present model considers the permeability to sodium and potassium to be reduced by the increase in the surface pressure induced by large lipophilic cations and anions in the outer layer of the lipoidal bimolecular leaflet constituting the living membrane; hence, the increase in permeability during depolarization, for example, is due to a decrease in the amount of the organic anions in this layer, whereas the decrease in sodium permeability during inactivation is caused by a rise in content of organic cations. The present proposal has the advantage that it is in keeping with known phenomena observed in simple physico-chemical systems as well as in excitable systems; moreover, the current actually transferred by the postulated lipophilic ions can be negligible compared to that transferred by the inorganic cations they control. The latter situation, as well as the steepness of the permeability-potential relationships obtained, have been pointed out to be critical requirements of a satisfactory molecular hypothesis.
The examples discussed here represent only a small part of the published work relating to infrared spectra of adsorbed molecules. The publications in this field indicate that infrared spectroscopy is being used for surface chemistry research in about 50 laboratories throughout the world. This effort is mainly devoted to problems related to catalysis, and in this field infrared spectroscopy is the most widely used physical tool for surface chemistry studies. The general acceptance of infrared spectroscopy is primarily due to the fact that it provides information which is pertinent to the understanding of surface reactions on an atomic scale. During the last decade significant progress has also been made in the classical chemical techniques of catalysis study and in utilization of physical tools which depend on phenomena of magnetism, conductivity, low-energy electron diffraction, and electron emission. Probably the most important progress has been in the field of inorganic chemistry, where dramatic advances have been made in knowledge of metal coordination compounds. Such knowledge is vital to the understanding of catalysis on metal surfaces. I believe this progress has produced an attitude of sophisticated optimism among catalysis researchers with regard to eventual understanding of heterogeneous catalysis. This attitude is closely related to the realization that there is no "secret of catalysis" which places catalytic action beyond the limits of ordinary chemical knowledge (22). This view implies that the chemical aspects of heterogeneous catalysis are not unique and that the use of solid catalysts merely provides a highly effective exposure of catalytic atoms and facilitates separation of the products from the catalyst. Many capable catalysis researchers believe that studies of homogeneous catalysis provide the most direct route for the study of heterogeneous catalysis. Obviously homogeneous reactions catalyzed by compounds containing only one or two metal atoms do not leave room for effects associated with crystal parameters or with electronic band structure characteristic of the metallic state. At present, I believe, it is more reasonable to concede that these solid-state factors may play a role of secondary importance than to completely exclude them from consideration. The view that catalysis involves only conventional chemistry carried out under complicated conditions gives grounds for optimism, since it limits the boundaries of the problem. However, it also imposes a limitation on what might be expected from fundamental catalysis research. Most fundamental catalysis researchers do not rest their hopes on a single dramatic discovery which will make it possible to predict in detail the best catalyst for any specific reaction. The idea that catalysis researchers work with this goal in mind is as unrealistic as the idea that workers involved in practical catalysis development select constituents for catalysts by throwing darts at the periodic table. Although the fundamental catalysis researcher does not expect to advance ahead of general chemical knowledge, he does hope that he will not continue to lag behind. Infrared spectroscopy has provided a significant step toward closing the gap.
Friction converts kinetic energy at sliding interfaces into lattice vibrations, but the detailed mechanisms of this process remain unresolved. Atomic force microscopy measurements reveal that changing the mass of the terminating atoms on a surface, and thus their vibrational frequencies, affects nanoscale friction substantially. We compared hydrogen- and deuterium-terminated single-crystal diamond and silicon surfaces, and in all cases the hydrogenated surface exhibited higher friction. This result implies that the lower natural frequency of chemisorbed deuterium reduces the rate at which the tip's kinetic energy is dissipated. This discovery is consistent with a model describing energy transfer to adsorbates from a moving surface.
The liquid-vapor interface of a bismuth-gallium mixture (0.2 percent bismuth and 99.8 percent gallium) at 36 degrees C has been studied by grazing incidence x-ray diffraction. The data show, in agreement with thermodynamic arguments, that bismuth is heavily concentrated in the liquid-vapor interface. The x-ray diffraction data are interpreted with the assistance of a simple model that represents the interface as a partial monolayer of bismuth. This analysis leads to the conclusion that the bismuth concentration in the interface is about 80 percent, that there is no significant mixing of gallium and bismuth in the interface, and that the structure function of the interfacial bismuth is like that of supercooled bulk liquid bismuth.
We analyzed the glassy-state structural relaxation of polymers near surfaces and interfaces by monitoring fluorescence in multilayer films. Relative to that of bulk, the rate of structural relaxation of poly(methyl methacrylate) is reduced by a factor of 2 at a free surface and by a factor of 15 at a silica substrate interface; the latter exhibits a nearly complete arresting of relaxation. The distribution in relaxation rates extends more than 100 nanometers into the film interior, a distance greater than that over which surfaces and interfaces affect the glass transition temperature.
Crystals are generally considered to grow by attachment of ions to inorganic surfaces or organic templates. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy of biomineralization products of iron-oxidizing bacteria revealed an alternative coarsening mechanism in which adjacent 2- to 3-nanometer particles aggregate and rotate so their structures adopt parallel orientations in three dimensions. Crystal growth is accomplished by eliminating water molecules at interfaces and forming iron-oxygen bonds. Self-assembly occurs at multiple sites, leading to a coarser, polycrystalline material. Point defects (from surface-adsorbed impurities), dislocations, and slabs of structurally distinct material are created as a consequence of this growth mechanism and can dramatically impact subsequent reactivity.
Silicon nitride (Si3N4) ceramics are used in numerous applications because of their superior mechanical properties. Their intrinsically brittle nature is a critical issue, but can be overcome by introducing whisker-like microstructural features. However, the formation of such anisotropic grains is very sensitive to the type of cations used as the sintering additives. Understanding the origin of dopant effects, central to the design of high-performance Si3N4 ceramics, has been sought for many years. Here we show direct images of dopant atoms (La) within the nanometre-scale intergranular amorphous films typically found at grain boundaries, using aberration corrected Z-contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy. It is clearly shown that the La atoms preferentially segregate to the amorphous/crystal interfaces. First-principles calculations confirm the strong preference of La for the crystalline surfaces, which is essential for forming elongated grains and a toughened microstructure. Whereas principles of micrometre-scale structural design are currently used to improve the mechanical properties of ceramics, this work represents a step towards the atomic-level structural engineering required for the next generation of ceramics.
An x-ray resonance effect in an organic thin film on an x-ray reflecting mirror is reported. The resonance effect is the result of interference between reflected and refracted x-rays at the air-organic thin film interface and occurs at incident angles slightly above the critical angle of the film. In excellent agreement with theory, the primary resonant x-ray electric field that is confined in the organic thin film is approximately 20 times as intense as the electric field of the incident beam when measured at a position close to the center of the film. Resonance-enhanced x-rays can be used to characterize the internal structure of Langmuir-Blodgett thin film membranes. This effect may also find use in x-ray-based thin film devices and in the structural analysis of adlayers and surfaces that have thus far proved difficult, if not impossible, to study because of sensitivity limitations.
Detection of receptor-ligand interactions is generally accomplished by indirect assays such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A direct colorimetric detection method based on a polydiacetylene bilayer assembled on glass microscope slides has been developed. The bilayer is composed of a self-assembled monolayer of octadecylsilane and a Langmuir-Blodgett monolayer of polydiacetylene. The polydiacetylene layer is functionalized with an analog of sialic acid, the receptor-specific ligand for the influenza virus hemagglutinin. The sialic acid ligand serves as a molecular recognition element and the conjugated polymer backbone signals binding at the surface by a chromatic transition. The color transition is readily visible to the naked eye as a blue to red color change and can be quantified by visible absorption spectroscopy. Direct colorimetric detection by polydiacetylene films offers new possibilities for diagnostic applications and screening for new drug candidates or binding ligands.
The Ca2+-dependent binding of annexin proteins to secretory granule membranes seems to be involved in the early stage of exocytosis. Binding studies have shown that these proteins have a specificity for phosphatidylserine (PtdS) interfaces. Furthermore, aminolipids are necessary for contact and fusion between lipid vesicles or between liposomes and chromaffin granules. Thus, PtdS must be present on the granule outer (cytoplasmic) monolayer. We report here that chromaffin granules possess a mechanism to maintain PtdS orientation, comparable to the ATP-dependent aminophospholipid translocase from human erythrocytes. The translocase, in granules, selectively transports PtdS from the luminal to the cytoplasmic monolayer, provided the incubation medium contains ATP. As this protein shares several properties with the granule vanadate-sensitive ATPase II, we infer that this ATPase, of relative molecular mass 115,000, is the protein responsible for aminophospholipid translocation. This is the first evidence for an ATP-dependent specific phospholipid 'flippase' in intracellular organelles.
A two-dimensional antiferromagnetic structure within a pseudomorphic monolayer film of chemically identical manganese atoms on tungsten(110) was observed with atomic resolution by spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy at 16 kelvin. A magnetic superstructure changes the translational symmetry of the surface lattice with respect to the chemical unit cell. It is shown, with the aid of first-principles calculations, that as a result of this, spin-polarized tunneling electrons give rise to an image corresponding to the magnetic superstructure and not to the chemical unit cell. These investigations demonstrate a powerful technique for the understanding of complicated magnetic configurations of nanomagnets and thin films engineered from ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic materials used for magnetoelectronics.
Statistical analyses of protein families reveal networks of coevolving amino acids that functionally link distantly positioned functional surfaces. Such linkages suggest a concept for engineering allosteric control into proteins: The intramolecular networks of two proteins could be joined across their surface sites such that the activity of one protein might control the activity of the other. We tested this idea by creating PAS-DHFR, a designed chimeric protein that connects a light-sensing signaling domain from a plant member of the Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS) family of proteins with Escherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). With no optimization, PAS-DHFR exhibited light-dependent catalytic activity that depended on the site of connection and on known signaling mechanisms in both proteins. PAS-DHFR serves as a proof of concept for engineering regulatory activities into proteins through interface design at conserved allosteric sites.
The dendritic branches (neurites) of developing neurons migrate along specific pathways to reach their targets. It has been suggested that this migration is guided by factors present on the surface of other neurons or glial cells. The molecular nature of such factors, however, remains to be elucidated. N-cadherin is a cell-surface glycoprotein which belongs to the cadherin family of cell-cell adhesion molecules. This adhesion molecule is expressed in various neuronal cells as well as in glial cells of the central and peripheral nervous systems in vertebrate embryos and recent immunological studies suggested that N-cadherin may play a role in guiding the migration of neurites on myotubes or astrocytes. To further examine this possibility, we used a molecular-genetic approach; that is, we examined the outgrowth of chicken embryonic optic axons on monolayer cultures of Neuro 2a or L cells transfected with the complementary DNA encoding chicken N-cadherin. The data indicate that N-cadherin is used as a guide molecule for the migration of optic axons on cell surfaces.
Wild-type and pseudorevertant signal peptides of the lamB gene product of Escherichia coli interact with lipid systems whereas a nonfunctional deletion mutant signal peptide does not. This conclusion is based on interaction of synthetic signal peptides with a lipid monolayer-water surface, conformational changes induced by presence of lipid vesicles in an aqueous solution of signal peptide, and capacities of the peptides to promote vesicle aggregation. Analysis of the signal sequences and previous conformational studies suggest that these lipid interaction properties may be attributable to the tendency of the functional signal peptides to adopt alpha-helical conformations. Although the possibility of direct interaction between the signal peptide and membrane lipids during protein secretion is controversial, the results suggest that conformationally related amphiphilicity and consequent membrane affinity of signal sequences are important for function in vivo.
Transcription factor IIIB (TFIIIB), consisting of the TATA-binding protein (TBP), TFIIB-related factor (Brf1) and Bdp1, is a central component in basal and regulated transcription by RNA polymerase III. TFIIIB recruits its polymerase to the promoter and subsequently has an essential role in the formation of the open initiation complex. The amino-terminal half of Brf1 shares a high degree of sequence similarity with the polymerase II general transcription factor TFIIB, but it is the carboxy-terminal half of Brf1 that contributes most of its binding affinity with TBP. The principal anchoring region is located between residues 435 and 545 of yeast Brf1, comprising its homology domain II. The same region also provides the primary interface for assembling Bdp1 into the TFIIIB complex. We report here a 2.95 A resolution crystal structure of the ternary complex containing Brf1 homology domain II, the conserved region of TBP and 19 base pairs of U6 promoter DNA. The structure reveals the core interface for assembly of TFIIIB and demonstrates how the loosely packed Brf1 domain achieves remarkable binding specificity with the convex and lateral surfaces of TBP.
The phenomenon of supercooling in metals-that is, the preservation of a disordered, fluid phase in a metastable state well below the melting point-has led to speculation that local atomic structure configurations of dense, symmetric, but non-periodic packing act as the main barrier for crystal nucleation. For liquids in contact with solids, crystalline surfaces induce layering of the adjacent atoms in the liquid and may prevent or lower supercooling. This seed effect is supposed to depend on the local lateral order adopted in the last atomic layers of the liquid in contact with the crystal. Although it has been suggested that there might be a direct coupling between surface-induced lateral order and supercooling, no experimental observation of such lateral ordering at interfaces is available. Here we report supercooling in gold-silicon (AuSi) eutectic droplets, enhanced by a Au-induced (6 x 6) reconstruction of the Si(111) substrate. In situ X-ray scattering and ab initio molecular dynamics reveal that pentagonal atomic arrangements of Au atoms at this interface favour a lateral-ordering stabilization process of the liquid phase. This interface-enhanced stabilization of the liquid state shows the importance of the solid-liquid interaction for the structure of the adjacent liquid layers. Such processes are important for present and future technologies, as fluidity and crystallization play a key part in soldering and casting, as well as in processing and controlling chemical reactions for microfluidic devices or during the vapour-liquid-solid growth of semiconductor nanowires.
Posttransfer modification of preformed Langmuir-Blodgett films of poly(tert-butyl methacrylate) and poly(tert-butyl acrylate) by gaseous hydrochloric acid yields films with layered architecture of poly(methacrylic acid) and poly(acrylic acid), respectively. X-ray reflectivity and infrared spectroscopy confirm monolayer by monolayer transfer of the source polymers and their transformation to acid multilayer assemblies with retention of low surface roughnesses. The incorporation of cross-linking groups into the system offers the possibility for further chemical modification to produce ultrathin films of model networks desirable for bioadsorption studies and as hydrophilic spacing layers for tethered membranes.
The controlled transfer of organized monolayers of amphiphilic molecules from the airwater interface to a solid substrate was the first molecular-scale technology for the creation of new materials. However, the potential benefits of the technology envisioned by Langmuir and Blodgett in the 1930s have yet to be fully realized. Problems of reproducibility and defects and the lack of basic understanding of the packing of complex molecules in thin films have continued to thwart practical applications of Langmuir-Blodgett films and devices made from such films. However, modern high-resolution x-ray diffraction and scanning probe microscopy have proven to be ideal tools to resolve many of the basic questions involving thin organic films. Here, studies are presented of molecular order and organization in thin films of fatty acid salts, the prototypical system of Katharine Blodgett. Even these relatively simple systems present liquid, hexatic, and crystalline order; van der Waals and strained layer epitaxy on various substrates; wide variations in crystal symmetry and interfacial area with counterions; modulated superstructures; and coexisting lattice structures. The wide variety of possible structures presents both a challenge and an opportunity for future molecular design of organic thin-film devices.
There is much interest in early T-cell development, particularly in relation to the diversification of the T-cell receptor repertoire and the elucidation of the lineage relationships between T-cell populations in the thymus and peripheral lymphoid organs. However, the requirements for the growth of the earliest thymic T-cell precursor in 13-14-day mouse embryo thymus in isolation from the thymic environment are unknown. Proliferation and maturation of such cells are not sustained either in the presence of monolayers of thymic stromal cells or by the addition of interleukin-2 (IL-2), despite the expression of receptors for this growth factor on a proportion of thymocytes displaying the immature Thy 1+ Lyt-2-L3T4- phenotype in the embryonic thymus. In contrast, when maintained within the intact thymic environment in organ cultures, 13-14-day thymic stem cells do show a pattern of surface marker and functional development similar to that seen in vivo, suggesting that short-range growth signals, perhaps necessitating direct contact with organized epithelial cells, are required. We have shown, by exploiting the selective toxicity of deoxyguanosine (dGuo) for early T cells, that this organ culture system can be manipulated to produce alymphoid lobes that can be recolonized from a source of precursors in a transfilter system. We now show that recolonization of alymphoid lobes can also be achieved by association with T-cell precursors in hanging drops, allowing recolonization by exposure to defined numbers of precursors, including a single micromanipulated stem cell. Analysis of T-cell marker expression in these cultures shows that a single thymic stem cell can produce progeny of distinct phenotypes, suggesting that these marker-defined populations are not derived from separate prethymic precursors, but arise within the thymus.
Overlayer structures can be formed on surfaces by the deposition of clusters containing hundreds or thousands of atoms. Cluster assembly alters the reaction pathway at the surface so that novel structures with unique chemical and physical properties can be stabilized. This article discusses the process of cluster assembly. Cluster-assembled interfaces are compared to those obtained by conventional techniques, and examples are given for metal-semiconductor and semiconductor-high temperature superconductor systems.
The prospect of using low-temperature processable organic semiconductors to implement transistors, circuits, displays and sensors on arbitrary substrates, such as glass or plastics, offers enormous potential for a wide range of electronic products. Of particular interest are portable devices that can be powered by small batteries or by near-field radio-frequency coupling. The main problem with existing approaches is the large power consumption of conventional organic circuits, which makes battery-powered applications problematic, if not impossible. Here we demonstrate an organic circuit with very low power consumption that uses a self-assembled monolayer gate dielectric and two different air-stable molecular semiconductors (pentacene and hexadecafluorocopperphthalocyanine, F16CuPc). The monolayer dielectric is grown on patterned metal gates at room temperature and is optimized to provide a large gate capacitance and low gate leakage currents. By combining low-voltage p-channel and n-channel organic thin-film transistors in a complementary circuit design, the static currents are reduced to below 100 pA per logic gate. We have fabricated complementary inverters, NAND gates, and ring oscillators that operate with supply voltages between 1.5 and 3 V and have a static power consumption of less than 1 nW per logic gate. These organic circuits are thus well suited for battery-powered systems such as portable display devices and large-surface sensor networks as well as for radio-frequency identification tags with extended operating range.
The spike protein (S) of SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) attaches the virus to its cellular receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). A defined receptor-binding domain (RBD) on S mediates this interaction. The crystal structure at 2.9 angstrom resolution of the RBD bound with the peptidase domain of human ACE2 shows that the RBD presents a gently concave surface, which cradles the N-terminal lobe of the peptidase. The atomic details at the interface between the two proteins clarify the importance of residue changes that facilitate efficient cross-species infection and human-to-human transmission. The structure of the RBD suggests ways to make truncated disulfide-stabilized RBD variants for use in the design of coronavirus vaccines.
The structure of the ternary complex consisting of yeast phenylalanyl-transfer RNA (Phe-tRNAPhe), Thermus aquaticus elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu), and the guanosine triphosphate (GTP) analog GDPNP was determined by x-ray crystallography at 2.7 angstrom resolution. The ternary complex participates in placing the amino acids in their correct order when messenger RNA is translated into a protein sequence on the ribosome. The EF-Tu-GDPNP component binds to one side of the acceptor helix of Phe-tRNAPhe involving all three domains of EF-Tu. Binding sites for the phenylalanylated CCA end and the phosphorylated 5' end are located at domain interfaces, whereas the T stem interacts with the surface of the beta-barrel domain 3. The binding involves many conserved residues in EF-Tu. The overall shape of the ternary complex is similar to that of the translocation factor, EF-G-GDP, and this suggests a novel mechanism involving "molecular mimicry" in the translational apparatus.
DNA methylation of CpG dinucleotides is an important epigenetic modification of mammalian genomes and is essential for the regulation of chromatin structure, of gene expression and of genome stability. Differences in DNA methylation patterns underlie a wide range of biological processes, such as genomic imprinting, inactivation of the X chromosome, embryogenesis, and carcinogenesis. Inheritance of the epigenetic methylation pattern is mediated by the enzyme DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), which methylates newly synthesized CpG sequences during DNA replication, depending on the methylation status of the template strands. The protein UHRF1 (also known as Np95 and ICBP90) recognizes hemi-methylation sites via a SET and RING-associated (SRA) domain and directs Dnmt1 to these sites. Here we report the crystal structures of the SRA domain in free and hemi-methylated DNA-bound states. The SRA domain folds into a globular structure with a basic concave surface formed by highly conserved residues. Binding of DNA to the concave surface causes a loop and an amino-terminal tail of the SRA domain to fold into DNA interfaces at the major and minor grooves of the methylation site. In contrast to fully methylated CpG sites recognized by the methyl-CpG-binding domain, the methylcytosine base at the hemi-methylated site is flipped out of the DNA helix in the SRA-DNA complex and fits tightly into a protein pocket on the concave surface. The complex structure suggests that the successive flip out of the pre-existing methylated cytosine and the target cytosine to be methylated is associated with the coordinated transfer of the hemi-methylated CpG site from UHRF1 to Dnmt1.
The circulation of light within dielectric volumes enables storage of optical power near specific resonant frequencies and is important in a wide range of fields including cavity quantum electrodynamics, photonics, biosensing and nonlinear optics. Optical trajectories occur near the interface of the volume with its surroundings, making their performance strongly dependent upon interface quality. With a nearly atomic-scale surface finish, surface-tension-induced microcavities such as liquid droplets or spheres are superior to all other dielectric microresonant structures when comparing photon lifetime or, equivalently, cavity Q factor. Despite these advantageous properties, the physical characteristics of such systems are not easily controlled during fabrication. It is known that wafer-based processing of resonators can achieve parallel processing and control, as well as integration with other functions. However, such resonators-on-a-chip suffer from Q factors that are many orders of magnitude lower than for surface-tension-induced microcavities, making them unsuitable for ultra-high-Q experiments. Here we demonstrate a process for producing silica toroid-shaped microresonators-on-a-chip with Q factors in excess of 100 million using a combination of lithography, dry etching and a selective reflow process. Such a high Q value was previously attainable only by droplets or microspheres and represents an improvement of nearly four orders of magnitude over previous chip-based resonators.
Both human lung surfactant protein, SP-B, and its amino-terminal peptide, SP-B1-25, inhibit the formation of condensed phases in monolayers of palmitic acid, resulting in a new fluid phase. This fluid phase forms a network, separating condensed-phase domains at coexistence. The network persists to high surface pressures, altering the nucleation, growth, and morphology of monolayer collapse structures, leading to lower surface tensions on compression and more reversible respreading on expansion. The network is stabilized by the low line tension between the fluid phase and the condensed phase as confirmed by the formation of "stripe" phases.
Atmospheric general circulation models used for climate simulation and weather forecasting require the fluxes of radiation, heat, water vapor, and momentum across the land-atmosphere interface to be specified. These fluxes are calculated by submodels called land surface parameterizations. Over the last 20 years, these parameterizations have evolved from simple, unrealistic schemes into credible representations of the global soil-vegetation-atmosphere transfer system as advances in plant physiological and hydrological research, advances in satellite data interpretation, and the results of large-scale field experiments have been exploited. Some modern schemes incorporate biogeochemical and ecological knowledge and, when coupled with advanced climate and ocean models, will be capable of modeling the biological and physical responses of the Earth system to global change, for example, increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Surface vibrational spectroscopy by sum-frequency generation was used to study hydrophobicity at the molecular level at various interfaces: water-surfactant-coated quartz, water-hexane, and water-air. In all cases, hydrophobicity was characterized by the appearance of dangling hydroxyl bonds on 25 percent of the surface water molecules. At the water-quartz interface, packing restrictions force the water surface layer to have a more ordered, ice-like structure. A partly wettable water-quartz interface was also studied.
Lipases belong to a class of esterases whose activity on triglycerides is greatly enhanced at lipid-water interfaces. This phenomenon, called interfacial activation, has a structural explanation: a hydrophobic lid, which at rest covers the catalytic site, is displaced on substrate or inhibitor binding and probably interacts with the lipid matrix. Fusarium solani pisi cutinase belongs to a group of homologous enzymes of relative molecular mass 22-25K (ref. 7) capable of degrading cutin, the insoluble lipid-polyester matrix covering the surface of plants, and hydrolysing triglycerides. Cutinases differ from classical lipases in that they do not exhibit interfacial activation; they are active on soluble as well as on emulsified triglycerides. Cutinases therefore establish a bridge between esterases and lipases. We report here the three-dimensional structure of a recombinant cutinase from F. solani pisi, expressed in Escherichia coli. Cutinase is an alpha-beta protein; the active site is composed of the triad Ser 120, His 188 and Asp 175. Unlike other lipases, the catalytic serine is not buried under surface loops, but is accessible to solvent. This could explain why cutinase does not display interfacial activation.
The injection of smoke and non-smoke gases into a perfusion chamber containing monolayers of strain L or HeLa cells in a fluid medium produces cellular changes. The most striking change is surface "blebbing," produced when gas bubbles pass over the surface of the cells. This reaction can be promptly reversed by the injection of fresh medium into the chamber.
One of the central challenges in nanotechnology is the development of flexible and efficient methods for creating ordered structures with nanometre precision over an extended length scale. Supramolecular self-assembly on surfaces offers attractive features in this regard: it is a 'bottom-up' approach and thus allows the simple and rapid creation of surface assemblies, which are readily tuned through the choice of molecular building blocks used and stabilized by hydrogen bonding, van der Waals interactions, pi-pi bonding or metal coordination between the blocks. Assemblies in the form of two-dimensional open networks are of particular interest for possible applications because well-defined pores can be used for the precise localization and confinement of guest entities such as molecules or clusters, which can add functionality to the supramolecular network. Another widely used method for producing surface structures involves self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), which have introduced unprecedented flexibility in our ability to tailor interfaces and generate patterned surfaces. But SAMs are part of a top-down technology that is limited in terms of the spatial resolution that can be achieved. We therefore rationalized that a particularly powerful fabrication platform might be realized by combining non-covalent self-assembly of porous networks and SAMs, with the former providing nanometre-scale precision and the latter allowing versatile functionalization. Here we show that the two strategies can indeed be combined to create integrated network-SAM hybrid systems that are sufficiently robust for further processing. We show that the supramolecular network and the SAM can both be deposited from solution, which should enable the widespread and flexible use of this combined fabrication method.
A variety of important dynamical phenomena at metal and semiconductor surfaces are now being investigated with the use of new ultrafast measurement techniques involving lasers and nonlinear optics. Understanding of the rates and mechanisms for relaxation of optical excitations of the surface itself as well as those of adsorbates on the surface is providing new insight into surface chemistry, surface phase transitions, and surface recombination of charge carriers in semiconductors.
Targeting the interfaces between proteins has huge therapeutic potential, but discovering small-molecule drugs that disrupt protein-protein interactions is an enormous challenge. Several recent success stories, however, indicate that protein-protein interfaces might be more tractable than has been thought. These studies discovered small molecules that bind with drug-like potencies to 'hotspots' on the contact surfaces involved in protein-protein interactions. Remarkably, these small molecules bind deeper within the contact surface of the target protein, and bind with much higher efficiencies, than do the contact atoms of the natural protein partner. Some of these small molecules are now making their way through clinical trials, so this high-hanging fruit might not be far out of reach.
The 2.8 A resolution three-dimensional structure of a complex between an antigen (lysozyme) and the Fab fragment from a monoclonal antibody against lysozyme has been determined and refined by x-ray crystallographic techniques. No conformational changes can be observed in the tertiary structure of lysozyme compared with that determined in native crystalline forms. The quaternary structure of Fab is that of an extended conformation. The antibody combining site is a rather flat surface with protuberances and depressions formed by its amino acid side chains. The antigen-antibody interface is tightly packed, with 16 lysozyme and 17 antibody residues making close contacts. The antigen contacting residues belong to two stretches of the lysozyme polypeptide chain: residues 18 to 27 and 116 to 129. All the complementarity-determining regions and two residues outside hypervariable positions of the antibody make contact with the antigen. Most of these contacts (10 residues out of 17) are made by the heavy chain, and in particular by its third complementarity-determining region. Antigen variability and antibody specificity and affinity are discussed on the basis of the determined structure.
C60 fullerides are challenging systems because both the electron-phonon and electron-electron interactions are large on the energy scale of the expected narrow band width. We report angle-resolved photoemission data on the band dispersion for an alkali-doped C60 monolayer and a detailed comparison with theory. Compared to the maximum bare theoretical band width of 170 meV, the observed 100-meV dispersion is within the range of renormalization by electron-phonon coupling. This dispersion is only a fraction of the integrated peak width, revealing the importance of many-body effects. Additionally, measurements on the Fermi surface indicate the robustness of the Luttinger theorem even for materials with strong interactions.
True lipases attach triacylglycerols and act at an oil-water interface; they constitute a ubiquitous group of enzymes catalysing a wide variety of reactions, many with industrial potential. But so far the three-dimensional structure has not been reported for any lipase. Here we report the X-ray structure of the Mucor miehei triglyceride lipase and describe the atomic model obtained at 3.1 A resolution and refined to 1.9 A resolution. It reveals a Ser..His..Asp trypsin-like catalytic triad with an active serine buried under a short helical fragment of a long surface loop.
Monoamines and diamines dissolved in cyclohexane solution reversibly enhance the band-edge photoluminescence (PL) intensity of immersed n-type cadmium sulfide (n-CdS) and n-type cadmium selenide (n-CdSe) substrates through adsorption. The magnitude of the PL increase is used to estimate amine-induced contractions in the semiconductor's depletion width, and the dependence of the PL intensity on amine concentration provides an estimate of the adduct formation constant. Two diamines, ethylenediamine and o-phenylenediamine, exhibit unusually low reductions in depletion width and substantially larger adduct equilibrium constants relative to the other amines studied, consistent with chelation to surface Cd(2+) ions. These studies demonstrate that PL can be used as a contactiess, in situ technique for characterizing the steric and electronic landscape of semiconductor surfaces and for correlating molecular and surface chemistry.
The structure of a heterotrimeric G protein reveals the mechanism of the nucleotide-dependent engagement of the alpha and beta gamma subunits that regulates their interaction with receptor and effector molecules. The interaction involves two distinct interfaces and dramatically alters the conformation of the alpha but not of the beta gamma subunits. The location of the known sites for post-translational modification and receptor coupling suggest a plausible orientation with respect to the membrane surface and an activated heptahelical receptor.
Protein structures are stabilized by hydrophobic and van der Waals forces, and by hydrogen bonds. The relation between these thermodynamic quantities and the actual three-dimensional structure of proteins can not be calculated precisely. However, certain empirical relations have been discovered. Hydrophobic energy is gained by the reduction of surface in contact with water. For monomeric proteins, the area of the surface accessible to solvent, and of that buried in the interior, is a simple function of molecular weight. Proteins with different shapes and secondary structures, but of the same molecular weight, have the same accessible surface area. It has been argued that there is no similar relationship for large oligomeric proteins. In this paper we show that the surface areas of oligomeric proteins, and the areas of the surface buried within them, are directly related to relative molecular mass. Although oligomers of the same molecular weight bury the same amounts of surface, the proportions buried within and between subunits vary. This has important implications for the role of subunit interfaces in the stability and activity of oligomeric proteins.
Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of omega-functionalized long-chain alkanethiolates on gold films are excellent model systems with which to study the interactions of proteins with organic surfaces. Monolayers containing mixtures of hydrophobic (methyl-terminated) and hydrophilic [hydroxyl-, maltose-, and hexa(ethylene glycol)-terminated] alkanethiols can be tailored to select specific degrees of adsorption: the amount of protein adsorbed varies monotonically with the composition of the monolayer. The hexa(ethylene glycol)-terminated SAMs are the most effective in resisting protein adsorption. The ability to create interfaces with similar structures and well-defined compositions should make it possible to test hypotheses concerning protein adsorption.
Regulation of cytoskeletal structure and motility by extracellular signals is essential for all directed forms of cell movement and underlies the developmental process of axonal guidance in neuronal growth cones. Interaction with polycationic microbeads can trigger morphogenic changes in neurons and muscle cells normally associated with formation of pre- and postsynaptic specializations. Furthermore, when various types of microscopic particles are applied to the lamellar surface of a neuronal growth cone or motile cell they often exhibit retrograde movement at rates of 1-6 microns min-1 (refs 3-6). There is strong evidence that this form of particle movement results from translocation of membrane proteins associated with cortical F-actin networks, not from bulk retrograde lipid flow and may be a mechanism behind processes such as cell locomotion, growth cone migration and capping of cell-surface antigens. Here we report a new form of motility stimulated by polycationic bead interactions with the growth-cone membrane surface. Bead binding rapidly induces intracellular actin filament assembly, coincident with a production of force sufficient to drive bead movements. These extracellular bead movements resemble intracellular movements of bacterial parasites known to redirect host cell F-actin assembly for propulsion. Our results suggest that site-directed actin filament assembly may be a widespread cellular mechanism for generating force at membrane-cytoskeletal interfaces.
Direct inhibition of transcription factor complexes remains a central challenge in the discipline of ligand discovery. In general, these proteins lack surface involutions suitable for high-affinity binding by small molecules. Here we report the design of synthetic, cell-permeable, stabilized alpha-helical peptides that target a critical protein-protein interface in the NOTCH transactivation complex. We demonstrate that direct, high-affinity binding of the hydrocarbon-stapled peptide SAHM1 prevents assembly of the active transcriptional complex. Inappropriate NOTCH activation is directly implicated in the pathogenesis of several disease states, including T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL). The treatment of leukaemic cells with SAHM1 results in genome-wide suppression of NOTCH-activated genes. Direct antagonism of the NOTCH transcriptional program causes potent, NOTCH-specific anti-proliferative effects in cultured cells and in a mouse model of NOTCH1-driven T-ALL.
Optimal immune responses require both an antigen-specific and a co-stimulatory signal. The shared ligands B7-1 and B7-2 on antigen-presenting cells deliver the co-stimulatory signal through CD28 and CTLA-4 on T cells. Signalling through CD28 augments the T-cell response, whereas CTLA-4 signalling attenuates it. Numerous animal studies and recent clinical trials indicate that manipulating these interactions holds considerable promise for immunotherapy. With the consequences of these signals well established, and details of the downstream signalling events emerging, understanding the molecular nature of these extracellular interactions becomes crucial. Here we report the crystal structure of the human CTLA-4/B7-1 co-stimulatory complex at 3.0 A resolution. In contrast to other interacting cell-surface molecules, the relatively small CTLA-4/B7-1 binding interface exhibits an unusually high degree of shape complementarity. CTLA-4 forms homodimers through a newly defined interface of highly conserved residues. In the crystal lattice, CTLA-4 and B7-1 pack in a strikingly periodic arrangement in which bivalent CTLA-4 homodimers bridge bivalent B7-1 homodimers. This zipper-like oligomerization provides the structural basis for forming unusually stable signalling complexes at the T-cell surface, underscoring the importance of potent inhibitory signalling in human immune responses.
The coupling of electron and nuclear motions in ultrafast charge transfer at molecule-semiconductor interfaces is central to many phenomena, including catalysis, photocatalysis, and molecular electronics. By using femtosecond laser excitation, we transferred electrons from a rutile titanium dioxide (110) surface into a CH3OH overlayer state that is 2.3 +/- 0.2 electron volts above the Fermi level. The redistributed charge was stabilized within 30 femtoseconds by the inertial motion of substrate ions (polaron formation) and, more slowly, by adsorbate molecules (solvation). According to a pronounced deuterium isotope effect (CH3OD), this motion of heavy atoms transforms the reverse charge transfer from a purely electronic process (nonadiabatic) to a correlated response of electrons and protons.
Semaphorins and their receptor plexins constitute a pleiotropic cell-signalling system that is used in a wide variety of biological processes, and both protein families have been implicated in numerous human diseases. The binding of soluble or membrane-anchored semaphorins to the membrane-distal region of the plexin ectodomain activates plexin's intrinsic GTPase-activating protein (GAP) at the cytoplasmic region, ultimately modulating cellular adhesion behaviour. However, the structural mechanism underlying the receptor activation remains largely unknown. Here we report the crystal structures of the semaphorin 6A (Sema6A) receptor-binding fragment and the plexin A2 (PlxnA2) ligand-binding fragment in both their pre-signalling (that is, before binding) and signalling (after complex formation) states. Before binding, the Sema6A ectodomain was in the expected 'face-to-face' homodimer arrangement, similar to that adopted by Sema3A and Sema4D, whereas PlxnA2 was in an unexpected 'head-on' homodimer arrangement. In contrast, the structure of the Sema6A-PlxnA2 signalling complex revealed a 2:2 heterotetramer in which the two PlxnA2 monomers dissociated from one another and docked onto the top face of the Sema6A homodimer using the same interface as the head-on homodimer, indicating that plexins undergo 'partner exchange'. Cell-based activity measurements using mutant ligands/receptors confirmed that the Sema6A face-to-face dimer arrangement is physiologically relevant and is maintained throughout signalling events. Thus, homodimer-to-heterodimer transitions of cell-surface plexin that result in a specific orientation of its molecular axis relative to the membrane may constitute the structural mechanism by which the ligand-binding 'signal' is transmitted to the cytoplasmic region, inducing GAP domain rearrangements and activation.
The termination of a solid induces changes in the locations of the outermost atoms of the solid. The changes can be minor or as dramatic as the rearrangement of the atoms into a different crystallographic group. Surface crystallography studies have determined that all surfaces are altered by forces induced at the solid-vacuum interface. At the least, the outermost atomic layers are displaced away from positions that they would have had in the bulk environment. Results from experimental and theoretical investigations for the Al(110) surface are discussed to illustrate present understanding of the surface atomic displacements. Some effects that the truncation- induced forces have on the surfaces of binary metal alloys are also discussed.
Low-field tunneling magnetoresistance was observed in films of half-metallic CrO2 that were grown by high-pressure thermal decomposition of CrO3. High-temperature annealing treatments modified the intergrain barriers of the as-grown films through surface decomposition of CrO2 into insulating Cr2O3, which led to a threefold enhancement of the low-field magnetoresistance. This enhancement indicates the potential of this simple method to directly control the interface barrier characteristics that determine the magnetotransport properties.
We present an ab initio molecular dynamics simulation of the aqueous liquid-vapor interface. Having successfully stabilized a region of bulk water in the center of a water slab, we were able to reproduce and further quantify the experimentally observed abundance of surface "acceptor-only"(19%) and "single-donor"(66%) moieties as well as substantial surface relaxation approaching the liquid-vapor interface. Examination of the orientational dynamics points to a faster relaxation in the interfacial region. Furthermore, the average value of the dipole decreases and the average value of the highest occupied molecular orbital for each water molecule increases approaching the liquid-vapor interface. Our results support the idea that the surface contains, on average, far more reactive states than the bulk.
Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of alkylsiloxanes on elastomeric PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) were used as model systems to study interactions between surfaces. Surface free energies (gammasv) of these chemically modified surfaces were estimated by measuring the deformations that resulted from the contact between small semispherical lenses and flat sheets of the elastomer under controlled loads. The measured surface free energies correlated with the surface chemical compositions of the SAMs and were commensurate with the values estimated from the measurements of contact angles. This study provides direct experimental evidence for the validity of estimates of the surface free energies of low-energy solids obtained from contact angles.
We report a flexible strategy for transducing ligand-binding events into electrochemical responses for a wide variety of proteins. The method exploits ligand-mediated hinge-bending motions, intrinsic to the bacterial periplasmic binding protein superfamily, to establish allosterically controlled interactions between electrode surfaces and redox-active, Ru(II)-labeled proteins. This approach allows the development of protein-based bioelectronic interfaces that respond to a diverse set of analytes. Families of these interfaces can be generated either by exploiting natural binding diversity within the superfamily or by reengineering the specificity of individual proteins. These proteins may have numerous medical, environmental, and defense applications.
Water plays a first-order role in basal sliding of glaciers and ice sheets and is often a key constituent of accelerated glacier motion. Subglacial water is known to occupy systems of cavities and conduits at the interface between ice and the underlying bed surface, depending upon the history of water input and the characteristics of the substrate. Full understanding of the extent and configuration of basal water is lacking, however, because direct observation is difficult. This limits our ability to simulate ice dynamics and the subsequent impacts on sea-level rise realistically. Here we show that the subglacial hydrological system can have a large volume of water occupying basal crevasses that extend upward from the bed into the overlying ice. Radar and seismic imaging combined with in situ borehole measurements collected on Bench Glacier, Alaska, reveal numerous water-filled basal crevasses with highly transmissive connections to the bed. Some crevasses extend many tens of metres above the bed and together they hold a volume of water equivalent to at least a decimetre layer covering the bed. Our results demonstrate that the basal hydrologic system can extend high into the overlying ice mass, where basal crevasses increase water-storage capacity and could potentially modulate basal water pressure. Because basal crevasses can form under commonly observed glaciological conditions, our findings have implications for interpreting and modelling subglacial hydrologic processes and related sliding accelerations of glaciers and ice sheets.
The Colorado plateau is a large, tectonically intact, physiographic province in the southwestern North American Cordillera that stands at ~1,800-2,000 m elevation and has long been thought to be in isostatic equilibrium. The origin of these high elevations is unclear because unlike the surrounding provinces, which have undergone significant Cretaceous-Palaeogene compressional deformation followed by Neogene extensional deformation, the Colorado plateau is largely internally undeformed. Here we combine new seismic tomography and receiver function images to resolve a vertical high-seismic-velocity anomaly beneath the west-central plateau that extends more than 200 km in depth. The upper surface of this anomaly is seismically defined by a dipping interface extending from the lower crust to depths of 70-90 km. The base of the continental crust above the anomaly has a similar shape, with an elevated Moho. We interpret these seismic structures as a continuing regional, delamination-style foundering of lower crust and continental lithosphere. This implies that Pliocene (2.6-5.3 Myr ago) uplift of the plateau and the magmatism on its margins are intimately tied to continuing deep lithospheric processes. Petrologic and geochemical observations indicate that late Cretaceous-Palaeogene (~90-40 Myr ago) low-angle subduction hydrated and probably weakened much of the Proterozoic tectospheric mantle beneath the Colorado plateau. We suggest that mid-Cenozoic (~35-25 Myr ago) to Recent magmatic infiltration subsequently imparted negative compositional buoyancy to the base and sides of the Colorado plateau upper mantle, triggering downwelling. The patterns of magmatic activity suggest that previous such events have progressively removed the Colorado plateau lithosphere inward from its margins, and have driven uplift. Using Grand Canyon incision rates and Pliocene basaltic volcanism patterns, we suggest that this particular event has been active over the past ~6 Myr.
Growth of an ultrathin lead oxide layer causes massive changes in the shape of lead crystallites. The dynamics of this process was investigated with time-lapsed scanning tunneling microscopy. Pure lead crystallites proved extremely resistant to oxidation. Once nucleated by surface impurities, monolayer films of lead oxide grew readily on lead (111) microfacets in an autocatalytic process. The anisotropic growth of orthorhombic lead oxide films (massicot structure) was most rapid along the direction of weakest lead-oxygen bonding, which suggests that the growth edge autocatalyzes oxygen dissociation by providing proximal sites for oxygen dissociation and attachment.
It is shown by angle-resolved x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy that cavitands derived from resorcin[4]arenes provided with four dialkylsulfide chains form stable monolayers on gold surfaces that are well organized by self-assembly. The cavitand headgroups at the surface of the resorcin[4]arene monolayer act as molecular recognition sites for small organic molecules with remarkable selectivity for perchloroethylene (C(2)Cl(4)). Comparative thermal desorption experiments indicate binding sites with high interaction energies of C(2)Cl(4) at the surface of the resorcin[4]arene monolayers. Fast and reversible "host-guest" interactions were found by the monitoring of extremely small mass changes (in the nanogram range) with a quartz microbalance oscillator provided with gold electrodes coated by resorcin[4]arene monolayers.
Targeting of newly synthesized membrane proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum is an essential cellular process. Most membrane proteins are recognized and targeted co-translationally by the signal recognition particle. However, nearly 5% of membrane proteins are 'tail-anchored' by a single carboxy-terminal transmembrane domain that cannot access the co-translational pathway. Instead, tail-anchored proteins are targeted post-translationally by a conserved ATPase termed Get3. The mechanistic basis for tail-anchored protein recognition or targeting by Get3 is not known. Here we present crystal structures of yeast Get3 in 'open' (nucleotide-free) and 'closed' (ADP.AlF(4)(-)-bound) dimer states. In the closed state, the dimer interface of Get3 contains an enormous hydrophobic groove implicated by mutational analyses in tail-anchored protein binding. In the open state, Get3 undergoes a striking rearrangement that disrupts the groove and shields its hydrophobic surfaces. These data provide a molecular mechanism for nucleotide-regulated binding and release of tail-anchored proteins during their membrane targeting by Get3.
We have considered several different types of records of long-period geomagnetic secular variation: direct measurements made in geomagnetic observatories; paleomagnetic measurements on Hawaiian lava flows with accurately known ages in the interval 0 to 200 years; paleomagentic measurements on Hawaiian lava flows with loosely determined ages within the interval 200 to 10,000 years ago; and worldwide paleomagnetic measurements of the average geomagnetic angular dispersion recorded in lava flows that formed during the past 0.7 million years. All these magnetic records indicate that, during this time, the nondipole component of the earth's field was lower in the central Pacific than elsewhere, as it is today. This, in turn, indicates that there is some type of inhomogeneity in the lower mantle which is coupled to the earth's core in such a way as to suppress the generation of the nondipole field beneath the central Pacific. With the present incomplete state of knowledge about the processes that give rise to the earth's field, it is uncertain whether undulations in the core-mantle interface or lateral variations in the composition and physical state of the lower mantle are ultimately responsible for the pattern of secular variation seen at the earth's surface.
Porous carbons that are three-dimensionally periodic on the scale of optical wavelengths were made by a synthesis route resembling the geological formation of natural opal. Porous silica opal crystals were sintered to form an intersphere interface through which the silica was removed after infiltration with carbon or a carbon precursor. The resulting porous carbons had different structures depending on synthesis conditions. Both diamond and glassy carbon inverse opals resulted from volume filling. Graphite inverse opals, comprising 40-angstrom-thick layers of graphite sheets tiled on spherical surfaces, were produced by surface templating. The carbon inverse opals provide examples of both dielectric and metallic optical photonic crystals. They strongly diffract light and may provide a route toward photonic band-gap materials.
A chemical description of the action of phospholipase A2 (PLA2) can now be inferred with confidence from three high-resolution x-ray crystal structures. The first is the structure of the PLA2 from the venom of the Chinese cobra (Naja naja atra) in a complex with a phosphonate transition-state analogue. This enzyme is typical of a large, well-studied homologous family of PLA2S. The second is a similar complex with the evolutionarily distant bee-venom PLA2. The third structure is the uninhibited PLA2 from Chinese cobra venom. Despite the different molecular architectures of the cobra and bee-venom PLA2s, the transition-state analogue interacts in a nearly identical way with the catalytic machinery of both enzymes. The disposition of the fatty-acid side chains suggests a common access route of the substrate from its position in the lipid aggregate to its productive interaction with the active site. Comparison of the cobra-venom complex with the uninhibited enzyme indicates that optimal binding and catalysis at the lipid-water interface is due to facilitated substrate diffusion from the interfacial binding surface to the catalytic site rather than an allosteric change in the enzyme's structure. However, a second bound calcium ion changes its position upon the binding of the transition-state analogue, suggesting a mechanism for augmenting the critical electrophile.
Mean field theories of ion distributions, such as the Gouy-Chapman theory that describes the distribution near a charged planar surface, ignore the molecular-scale structure in the liquid solution. The predictions of the Gouy-Chapman theory vary substantially from our x-ray reflectivity measurements of the interface between two electrolyte solutions. Molecular dynamics simulations, which include the liquid structure, were used to calculate the potential of mean force on a single ion. We used this potential of mean force in a generalized Poisson-Boltzmann equation to predict the full ion distributions. These distributions agree with our measurements without any adjustable parameters.
Large-scale conformational changes transform viral precursors into infectious virions. The structure of bacteriophage HK97 capsid, Head-II, was recently solved by crystallography, revealing a catenated cross-linked topology. We have visualized its precursor, Prohead-II, by cryoelectron microscopy and modeled the conformational change by appropriately adapting Head-II. Rigid-body rotations ( approximately 40 degrees) cause switching to an entirely different set of interactions; in addition, two motifs undergo refolding. These changes stabilize the capsid by increasing the surface area buried at interfaces and bringing the cross-link-forming residues, initially approximately 40 angstroms apart, close together. The inner surface of Prohead-II is negatively charged, suggesting that the transition is triggered electrostatically by DNA packaging.
Ice flow at a location in the equilibrium zone of the west-central Greenland Ice Sheet accelerates above the midwinter average rate during periods of summer melting. The near coincidence of the ice acceleration with the duration of surface melting, followed by deceleration after the melting ceases, indicates that glacial sliding is enhanced by rapid migration of surface meltwater to the ice-bedrock interface. Interannual variations in the ice acceleration are correlated with variations in the intensity of the surface melting, with larger increases accompanying higher amounts of summer melting. The indicated coupling between surface melting and ice-sheet flow provides a mechanism for rapid, large-scale, dynamic responses of ice sheets to climate warming.
A rational method for constructing highly oriented films of purple membrane (PM) has been established by using two kinds of bispecific antibodies with different antigen-binding sites, one binding to a specific side of bacteriorhodopsin and the other to a phospholipid hapten. A hapten monolayer deposited on a metal electrode was treated with a bispecific antibody solution and incubated with a PM suspension to produce a highly oriented PM film, as confirmed by electron microscopy in which an immunogold labeling technique was used. This antibody-mediated PM monolayer was then used in the construction of a light-sensing photoelectric device. A comparison of the two incorporated PM monolayers showed that highly efficient photocurrents were produced by the PM monolayer whose unidirectionally oriented cytoplasmic surface faces the electrode.
The assemblage of protein multilayers induced by molecular recognition, as seen, for example, in the immune cascade, has been mimicked by using streptavidin as a docking matrix. For these experiments, this protein matrix was organized on liposomes, monolayers at the air-water interface, and self-assembled layers on gold, all three containing biotin lipids. The docking of streptavidin to biotin at liposomal surfaces was confirmed by circular dichroism. Mixed double and triple layers of streptavidin, concanavalin A, antibody Fab fragments, and hormones are prepared at the air-water interface and on gold surfaces and were characterized by fluorescence microscopy and plasmon spectroscopy. With the use of biotin analogs that have lower binding constants it has been possible to achieve multiple formation and competitive replacement of the oriented protein assemblages.
Certain inflammatory stimuli render cultured human vascular endothelial cells hyperadhesive for neutrophils. This state is transient and reversible, in part because activated endothelial cells secrete a leukocyte adhesion inhibitor (LAI). LAI was identified as endothelial interleukin-8 (IL-8), the predominant species of which is an extended amino-terminal IL-8 variant. At nanomolar concentrations, purified endothelial IL-8 and recombinant human IL-8 inhibit neutrophil adhesion to cytokine-activated endothelial monolayers and protect these monolayers from neutrophil-mediated damage. These findings suggest that endothelial-derived IL-8 may function to attenuate inflammatory events at the interface between vessel wall and blood.
Streptococcus pyogenes (also known as group A Streptococcus, GAS), the agent of streptococcal sore throat and invasive soft-tissue infections, attaches to human pharyngeal or skin epithelial cells through specific recognition of its hyaluronic acid capsular polysaccharide by the hyaluronic-acid-binding protein CD44 (refs 1, 2). Because ligation of CD44 by hyaluronic acid can induce epithelial cell movement on extracellular matrix, we investigated whether molecular mimicry by the GAS hyaluronic acid capsule might induce similar cellular responses. Here we show that CD44-dependent GAS binding to polarized monolayers of human keratinocytes induced marked cytoskeletal rearrangements manifested by membrane ruffling and disruption of intercellular junctions. Transduction of the signal induced by GAS binding to CD44 on the keratinocyte surface involved Rac1 and the cytoskeleton linker protein ezrin, as well as tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins. Studies of bacterial translocation in two models of human skin indicated that cell signalling triggered by interaction of the GAS capsule with CD44 opened intercellular junctions and promoted tissue penetration by GAS through a paracellular route. These results support a model of host cytoskeleton manipulation and tissue invasion by an extracellular bacterial pathogen.
The adhesion strengths of a viscoelastic adhesive were measured on various substrates that were prepared by grafting silanes bearing organic functional groups to silicon wafers. Conventional theories predict that adhesion should be proportional to the surface free energy of the substrate; but adhesion on a fluorocarbon surface was significantly greater than on some of the hydrocarbon surfaces, although the fluorocarbon surface has the lowest surface free energy. This result could be explained by invoking a model of adhesion based on the slippage of the adhesive at the interface.
The formation of small crystallites is governed by two competing factors: the free energy gained upon transferring constituent atoms, molecules or colloidal particles from the metastable liquid to the more stable solid, and the free energy needed to create the surface area of the crystallite. Because the ratio of surface area to bulk is large for small particles, small crystallites dissolve spontaneously under conditions where larger crystallites are stable and macroscopic crystal growth occurs only if spontaneously formed crystallites exceed a critical minimum size. On theoretical grounds, the probability of forming such critical crystal nuclei is expected to increase rapidly with supersaturation. However, experiments show that the rate of crystal nucleation in many systems goes through a maximum as the supersaturation is increased. It is commonly assumed that the nucleation rate peaks because, even though the probability of forming critical nuclei increases with increasing concentration, the rate of growth of such nuclei decreases. Here we report simulations of crystal nucleation in suspensions of colloidal spheres with varying size distributions that show that the probability that critical nuclei will form itself goes through a maximum as the supersaturation is increased. We find that this effect, which is strongest for systems with the broadest particle size distribution, results from an increase with supersaturation of the solid-liquid interfacial free energy. The magnitude of this effect suggests that vitrification at high supersaturations should yield colloidal glasses that are truly amorphous, rather than nano-crystalline.
A thermomolecular pressure is associated with surface melting, and it can drive mass flow along an interface under a lateral temperature gradient. The pressure is a universal thermodynamic function in the limit of thick films. It may be responsible for frost heave in frozen ground.
General arguments suggest that first-order phase transitions become less sharp in the presence of weak disorder, while extensive disorder can transform them into second-order transitions; but the atomic level details of this process are not clear. The vortex lattice in superconductors provides a unique system in which to study the first-order transition on an inter-particle scale, as well as over a wide range of particle densities. Here we use a differential magneto-optical technique to obtain direct experimental visualization of the melting process in a disordered superconductor. The images reveal complex behaviour in nucleation, pattern formation, and solid-liquid interface coarsening and pinning. Although the local melting is found to be first-order, a global rounding of the transition is observed; this results from a disorder-induced broad distribution of local melting temperatures, at scales down to the mesoscopic level. We also resolve local hysteretic supercooling of microscopic liquid domains, a non-equilibrium process that occurs only at selected sites where the disorder-modified melting temperature has a local maximum. By revealing the nucleation process, we are able to experimentally evaluate the solid-liquid surface tension, which we find to be extremely small.
A detailed molecular model for ion transfer across the interface between water and 1,2-dichloroethane provides insight into the mechanism of the transfer across the interface between two immiscible liquids. Extensive molecular dynamics computer simulations underscore the roles of surface roughness and capillary distortions in this process, demonstrate that ion transfer is an activated rather than a simple diffusive process, and provide a test for the applicability of theoretical models.
It has been suggested that enhanced anion concentrations at the liquid/vapor interface of airborne saline droplets are important to aerosol reactions in the atmosphere. We report ionic concentrations in the surface of such solutions. Using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy operating at near ambient pressure, we have measured the composition of the liquid/vapor interface for deliquesced samples of potassium bromide and potassium iodide. In both cases, the surface composition of the saturated solution is enhanced in the halide anion compared with the bulk of the solution. The enhancement of anion concentration is more dramatic for the larger, more polarizable iodide anion. By varying photoelectron kinetic energies, we have obtained depth profiles of the liquid/vapor interface. Our results are in good qualitative agreement with classical molecular dynamics simulations. Quantitative comparison between the experiments and the simulations indicates that the experimental results exhibit more interface enhancement than predicted theoretically.
The reduction in the steady-state rate of evaporation of water by hexadecanol monolayers depends only on the air velocity above the surface and is independent of the absolute rate of evaporation up to air velocities of 40 centimeters per second. This indicates that the monolayer does not affect the vaporization step but increases the size of the diffusion boundary layer. The mechanism (the creation of a surface pressure gradient in the monolayer which reduces the net stress on the surface by the air) is discussed.
The lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of Gram negative bacteria is a well-known inducer of the innate immune response. Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 and myeloid differentiation factor 2 (MD-2) form a heterodimer that recognizes a common 'pattern' in structurally diverse LPS molecules. To understand the ligand specificity and receptor activation mechanism of the TLR4-MD-2-LPS complex we determined its crystal structure. LPS binding induced the formation of an m-shaped receptor multimer composed of two copies of the TLR4-MD-2-LPS complex arranged symmetrically. LPS interacts with a large hydrophobic pocket in MD-2 and directly bridges the two components of the multimer. Five of the six lipid chains of LPS are buried deep inside the pocket and the remaining chain is exposed to the surface of MD-2, forming a hydrophobic interaction with the conserved phenylalanines of TLR4. The F126 loop of MD-2 undergoes localized structural change and supports this core hydrophobic interface by making hydrophilic interactions with TLR4. Comparison with the structures of tetra-acylated antagonists bound to MD-2 indicates that two other lipid chains in LPS displace the phosphorylated glucosamine backbone by approximately 5 A towards the solvent area. This structural shift allows phosphate groups of LPS to contribute to receptor multimerization by forming ionic interactions with a cluster of positively charged residues in TLR4 and MD-2. The TLR4-MD-2-LPS structure illustrates the remarkable versatility of the ligand recognition mechanisms employed by the TLR family, which is essential for defence against diverse microbial infection.
Electrostatic interactions between charges on ligands and charges on proteins that are remote from the binding interface can influence the free energy of binding (delta Gb). The binding affinities between charged ligands and the members of a charge ladder of bovine carbonic anhydrase (CAII) constructed by random acetylation of the amino groups on its surface were measured by affinity capillary electrophoresis (ACE). The values of delta Gb derived from this analysis correlated approximately linearly with the charge. Opposite charges on the ligand and the members of the charge ladder of CAII were stabilizing; like charges were destabilizing. The combination of ACE and protein charge ladders provides a tool for quantitatively examining the contributions of electrostatics to free energies of molecular recognition in biology.
Pulmonary surfactant is a phospholipid-protein complex which serves to lower the surface tension at the air-liquid interface in the alveoli of the mammalian lung and is essential for normal respiration. Inadequate levels of surfactant at birth, a frequent situation in premature infants, results in respiratory failure. In all species examined, surfactant is composed primarily of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine and two major protein species of relative molecular mass (Mr) 32,000 (32K) and 10K (refs 2-5). Reconstitution in vitro of purified 32K pulmonary surfactant apoprotein (PSAP) with synthetic lipids forms a lipoprotein complex that lowers surface tension by spreading to create a thin interfacial film. Here we describe the cloning of the human PSAP gene and complementary DNA, and discuss features of the unusual encoded protein.
A model is presented to explain the formation and morphologies of surfactant-silicate mesostructures. Three processes are identified: multidentate binding of silicate oligomers to the cationic surfactant, preferential silicate polymerization in the interface region, and charge density matching between the surfactant and the silicate. The model explains present experimental data, including the transformation between lamellar and hexagonal mesophases, and provides a guide for predicting conditions that favor the formation of lamellar, hexagonal, or cubic mesostructures. Model Q(230) proposed by Mariani and his co-workers satisfactorily fits the x-ray data collected on the cubic mesostructure material. This model suggests that the silicate polymer forms a unique infinite silicate sheet sitting on the gyroid minimal surface and separating the surfactant molecules into two disconnected volumes.
The 14-3-3 family of proteins have recently been identified as regulatory elements in intracellular signalling pathways: 14-3-3 proteins bind to oncogene and proto-oncogene products, including c-Raf-1 (refs 2-5), c-Bcr (ref. 6) and polyomavirus middle-T antigen; overexpression of 14-3-3 activates Raf kinase in yeast and induces meiotic maturation in Xenopus oocytes. Here we report the crystal structure of the major isoform of mammalian 14-3-3 proteins at 2.9 A resolution. Each subunit of the dimeric protein consists of a bundle of nine antiparallel helices that form a palisade around an amphipathic groove. The groove is large enough to accommodate a tenth helix, and we propose that binding to an amphipathic helix represents a general mechanism for the interaction of 14-3-3 with diverse cellular proteins. The residues in the dimer interface and the putative ligand-binding surface are invariant among vertebrates, yeast and plants, suggesting a conservation of structure and function throughout the 14-3-3 family.
Unusually long reverberations were recorded from two lunar impacts by a seismic station installed on the lunar surface by the Apollo 12 astronauts. Seismic data from these impacts suggest that the lunar mare in the region of the Apollo 12 landing site consists of material with very low seismic velocities near the surface, with velocity increasing with depth to 5 to 6 kilometers per second (for compressional waves) at a depth of 20 kilometers. Absorption of seismic waves in this structure is extremely low relative to typical continental crustal materials on earth. It is unlikely that a major boundary similar to the crustmantle interface on earth exists in the outer 20 kilometers of the moon. A combination of dispersion and scattering of surface waves probably explains the lunar seismic reverberation. Scattering of these waves implies the presence of heterogeneity within the outer zone of the mare on a scale of from several hundred meters (or less) to several kilometers. Seismic signals from 160 events of natural origin have been recorded during the first 7 months of operation of the Apollo 12 seismic station. At least 26 of the natural events are small moonquakes. Many of the natural events are thought to be meteoroid impacts.
Lymph nodes prevent the systemic dissemination of pathogens such as viruses that infect peripheral tissues after penetrating the body's surface barriers. They are also the staging ground of adaptive immune responses to pathogen-derived antigens. It is unclear how virus particles are cleared from afferent lymph and presented to cognate B cells to induce antibody responses. Here we identify a population of CD11b+CD169+MHCII+ macrophages on the floor of the subcapsular sinus (SCS) and in the medulla of lymph nodes that capture viral particles within minutes after subcutaneous injection. Macrophages in the SCS translocated surface-bound viral particles across the SCS floor and presented them to migrating B cells in the underlying follicles. Selective depletion of these macrophages compromised local viral retention, exacerbated viraemia of the host, and impaired local B-cell activation. These findings indicate that CD169+ macrophages have a dual physiological function. They act as innate 'flypaper' by preventing the systemic spread of lymph-borne pathogens and as critical gatekeepers at the lymph-tissue interface that facilitate the recognition of particulate antigens by B cells and initiate humoral immune responses.
The Fermi surface that characterizes the electronic band structure of crystalline solids can be difficult to image experimentally in a way that reveals local variations. We show that Fermi surfaces can be imaged in real space with a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope when subsurface point scatterers are present: in this case, cobalt impurities under a copper surface. Even the very simple Fermi surface of copper causes strongly anisotropic propagation characteristics of bulk electrons that are confined in beamlike paths on the nanoscale. The induced charge density oscillations on the nearby surface can be used for mapping buried defects and interfaces and some of their properties.
Flood basalts appear to form during the initiation of hotspot magmatism. The Columbia River basalts (CRB) represent the largest volume of flood basalts associated with the Yellowstone hotspot, yet their source appears to be in the vicinity of the Wallowa Mountains, about 500 km north of the projected hotspot track. These mountains are composed of a large granitic pluton intruded into a region of oceanic lithosphere affinity. The elevation of the interface between Columbia River basalts and other geological formations indicates that mild pre-eruptive subsidence took place in the Wallowa Mountains, followed by syn-eruptive uplift of several hundred metres and a long-term uplift of about 2 km. The mapped surface uplift mimics regional topography, with the Wallowa Mountains in the centre of a 'bull's eye' pattern of valleys and low-elevation mountains. Here we present the seismic velocity structure of the mantle underlying this region and erosion-corrected elevation maps of lava flows, and show that an area of reduced mantle melt content coincides with the 200-km-wide topographic uplift. We conclude that convective downwelling and detachment of a compositionally dense plutonic root can explain the timing and magnitude of Columbia River basalt magmatism, as well as the surface uplift and existence of the observed melt-depleted mantle.
Fluorescent x-ray interference patterns have been observed from monolayers of both a metal-containing protein (ferritin) and a nonmetal-containing protein [bovine serum albumin (BSA)] bound on a gold substrate. These interference patterns have been used to determine structure data. The nonmetal-containing protein was first reacted with metal ions by means of a chelate compound to place the necessary chromophore in the molecule. The size of the ferritin core measured by a scanning electron microscope agrees with the value obtained from the x-ray interference experiments. In the BSA molecule, the measured interference fringe is consistent with the model in which the short axes of BSA molecules are perpendicular to the surface substrate.
The self-assembly mechanism of alkanethiol monolayers on the (111) surface of gold was discovered with the use of an ultrahigh-vacuum scanning tunneling microscope. Monolayer formation follows a two-step process that begins with condensation of low-density crystalline islands, characterized by surface-aligned molecular axes, from a lower density lattice-gas phase. At saturation coverage of this phase, the monolayer undergoes a phase transition to a denser phase by realignment of the molecular axes with the surface normal. These studies reveal the important role of molecule-substrate and molecule-molecule interactions in the self-assembly of these technologically important material systems.
Adsorption and segregation of n-hexadecane molecules from an equal by weight mixture of n-hexadecane and n-hexane to an Au(001) surface at 315 kelvin are studied with the use of molecular dynamics simulations. Preferential adsorption of n-hexadecane at the solid-to-liquid interface together with subsequent layer-by-layer growth of an ordered, wetting interface were observed. The long chains penetrate and adsorb at the interfacial layer by means of a sequential segmental mechanism involving end-segment anchoring and displacive desorption of preadsorbed n-hexane molecules.
The interaction of polymers with their environment depends largely on the functional groups they carry. Interfaces between different polymers or between polymers and other surfaces can be strengthened through the design of molecular interactions such as hydrogen bonding and through the control of polymer architecture. The placement of functional groups at polymer chain ends or in well-defined segments can determine the ultimate properties. Three-dimensional synthetic polymers such as dendrimers can be fashioned to encapsulate reactive sites or provide highly controlled surfaces and interfaces.
Distinguishing self from non-self is a fundamental biological challenge. Many pathogens exploit the challenge of self discrimination by employing mimicry to subvert key cellular processes including the cell cycle, apoptosis and cytoskeletal dynamics. Other mimics interfere with immunity. Poxviruses encode K3L, a mimic of eIF2alpha, which is the substrate of protein kinase R (PKR), an important component of innate immunity in vertebrates. The PKR-K3L interaction exemplifies the conundrum imposed by viral mimicry. To be effective, PKR must recognize a conserved substrate (eIF2alpha) while avoiding rapidly evolving substrate mimics such as K3L. Using the PKR-K3L system and a combination of phylogenetic and functional analyses, we uncover evolutionary strategies by which host proteins can overcome mimicry. We find that PKR has evolved under intense episodes of positive selection in primates. The ability of PKR to evade viral mimics is partly due to positive selection at sites most intimately involved in eIF2alpha recognition. We also find that adaptive changes on multiple surfaces of PKR produce combinations of substitutions that increase the odds of defeating mimicry. Thus, although it can seem that pathogens gain insurmountable advantages by mimicking cellular components, host factors such as PKR can compete in molecular 'arms races' with mimics because of evolutionary flexibility at protein interaction interfaces challenged by mimicry.
The organization of inorganic nanostructures within self-assembled organic or biological templates is receiving the attention of scientists interested in developing functional hybrid materials. Previous efforts have concentrated on using such scaffolds to spatially arrange nanoscopic elements as a strategy for tailoring the electrical, magnetic or photonic properties of the material. Recent theoretical arguments have suggested that synergistic interactions between self-organizing particles and a self-assembling matrix material can lead to hierarchically ordered structures. Here we show that mixtures of diblock copolymers and either cadmium selenide- or ferritin-based nanoparticles exhibit cooperative, coupled self-assembly on the nanoscale. In thin films, the copolymers assemble into cylindrical domains, which dictate the spatial distribution of the nanoparticles; segregation of the particles to the interfaces mediates interfacial interactions and orients the copolymer domains normal to the surface, even when one of the blocks is strongly attracted to the substrate. Organization of both the polymeric and particulate entities is thus achieved without the use of external fields, opening a simple and general route for fabrication of nanostructured materials with hierarchical order.
Etch-decoration reveals that the rate of removal of carbon atoms exposed at monolayer steps on graphite surfaces is very different from the rate of removal, under identical conditions, at multilayer steps. At 1113 degrees K and a pressure of 1.33 newtons per square meter of oxygen, the rate of oxidation (along the layer planes) is less by a factor of nearly 100 than that at multilayer steps.
Condensation of a vapor to a liquid on a cold surface that is not wet completely by this liquid leads to the formation of an array of droplets. If the surface is heterogeneous in its physical properties (especially its interfacial free energy), the patterns of these arrays reflect this heterogeneity. The distribution of droplets of water (condensation figures or CFs) observed by optical microscopy on a surface can be correlated with the molecular structure of that surface. The substrates used to investigate the formation and morphology of the CFs were patterned, self-assembled monolayers of different alkanethiolates on gold and of alkyl siloxanes on glass. Analysis of CFs is a valuable nondestructive technique for characterizing heterogeneities in surfaces.
Thin films of molecular organic semiconductors are attracting much interest for use in electronic and optoelectronic applications. The electronic properties of these materials and their interfaces are therefore worth investigating intensively, particularly the degree of electron delocalization that can be achieved. If the delocalization is appreciable, it should be accompanied by an observable electronic band dispersion. But so far only limited experimental data on the intermolecular dispersion of electronic states in molecular materials is available, and the mechanism(s) of electron delocalization in molecular materials are also not well understood. Here we report scanning tunnelling spectroscopy observations of an organic monolayer film on a silver substrate, revealing a completely delocalized two-dimensional band state that is characterized by a metal-like parabolic dispersion with an effective mass of m* = 0.47m(e), where m(e) is the bare electron mass. This dispersion is far stronger than expected for the organic film alone, and arises as a result of strong substrate-mediated coupling between the molecules within the monolayer.
Although ice melts and water freezes under equilibrium conditions at 0 degrees C, water can be supercooled under homogeneous conditions in a clean environment down to -40 degrees C without freezing. The influence of the electric field on the freezing temperature of supercooled water (electrofreezing) is of topical importance in the living and inanimate worlds. We report that positively charged surfaces of pyroelectric LiTaO3 crystals and SrTiO3 thin films promote ice nucleation, whereas the same surfaces when negatively charged reduce the freezing temperature. Accordingly, droplets of water cooled down on a negatively charged LiTaO3 surface and remaining liquid at -11 degrees C freeze immediately when this surface is heated to -8 degrees C, as a result of the replacement of the negative surface charge by a positive one. Furthermore, powder x-ray diffraction studies demonstrated that the freezing on the positively charged surface starts at the solid/water interface, whereas on a negatively charged surface, ice nucleation starts at the air/water interface.
The Ser-His-Asp triad is a well known structural feature of the serine proteases. It has also been directly observed in the catalytic sites of two lipases, whose high-resolution three-dimensional structures have been determined 1,2. Lipases show a wide variety of sizes, substrate and positional specificities, and catalytic rates 3. They achieve maximal catalytic rates at oil-water interfaces. The fungus Geotrichum candidum produces several different forms of lipases, two of which have been purified to homogeneity 4,5. Two lipase genes have been identified, cloned and sequenced 6,7. Both code for proteins of 544 amino acids with a total relative molecular mass of about 60,000 (Mr 60K). The two forms are 86% identical. Their isoelectric points differ slightly, being between 4.3 and 4.6. About 7% of the total Mr is carbohydrate. Until now, only a low resolution structure of GCL has been reported 8, but no high resolution structure has followed. We now report the three-dimensional structure of a lipase from G. candidum (GCL) at 2.2 A resolution. Unlike the other lipases and serine proteases, the catalytic triad of GCL is Ser-His-Glu, with glutamic acid replacing the usual aspartate. Although the sequence similarity with the other two lipases is limited to the region near the active-site serine, there is some similarity in their three-dimensional structures. The GCL is also an alpha/beta protein with a central mixed beta sheet whose topology is similar to that of the N-terminal domain of human pancreatic lipase. As in the other lipases 1,2, the catalytic site is buried under surface loops. Sequence comparisons with proteins from the cholinesterase family suggest that they also contain the Ser-His-Glu triad.
Epifluorescence optical microscopy has been used to show the formation of solid phase domains from fluid phase domains on compression of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) monolayers at the air-water interface. These monolayers can be transferred to solid substrates, and in certain conditions exhibit X-ray diffraction characteristic of highly ordered two-dimensional crystals. In previous work, the crystal domains, visualized by the exclusion of fluorescent lipid probes, were often round and arrayed within a continuous fluid phase domain in a hexagonal pattern. We report here that when DPPC monolayers are more rapidly compressed, at a rate of the order of a 2% decrease in area per second, chiral solid domains of lipid are formed. The handedness of the solid domains is directly related to the enantiomorphic configuration of the lipids composing the monolayer. The shape of these domains provides direct visual evidence for long range orientational order in two-dimensional crystals.
Vibrational spectra for a single molecule adsorbed on a solid surface have been obtained with a scanning tunneling microscope (STM). Inelastic electron tunneling spectra for an isolated acetylene (C2H2) molecule adsorbed on the copper (100) surface showed an increase in the tunneling conductance at 358 millivolts, resulting from excitation of the C-H stretch mode. An isotopic shift to 266 millivolts was observed for deuterated acetylene (C2D2). Vibrational microscopy from spatial imaging of the inelastic tunneling channels yielded additional data to further distinguish and characterize the two isotopes. Single-molecule vibrational analysis should lead to better understanding and control of surface chemistry at the atomic level.
Two-dimensional molecular patterns were obtained by the adsorption of long-chain alkanes, alcohols, fatty acids, and a dialkylbenzene from organic solutions onto the basal plane of graphite. In situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) studies revealed that these molecules organize in lamellae with the extended alkyl chains oriented parallel to a lattice axis within the basal plane of graphite. The planes of the carbon skeletons, however, can be oriented either predominantly perpendicular to or predominantly parallel with the substrate surface, causing the lamellar lattice to be either in or near registry with the substrate (alkanes and alcohols) or not in registry (fatty acids and dialkylbenzenes). In the case of the alcohols and the dialkylbenzene the molecular axes are tilted by +30 degrees or -30 degrees with respect to an axis normal to the lamella boundaries, giving rise to molecularly well-defined domain boundaries. Fast STM image recording allowed the spontaneous switch between the two tilt angles to be observed in the alcohol monolayers on a time scale of a few milliseconds.
The three-dimensional structure of an active, disulfide cross-linked dimer of the ligand-binding domain of the Salmonella typhimurium aspartate receptor and that of an aspartate complex have been determined by x-ray crystallographic methods at 2.4 and 2.0 angstrom (A) resolution, respectively. A single subunit is a four-alpha-helix bundle with two long amino-terminal and carboxyl-terminal helices and two shorter helices that form a cylinder 20 A in diameter and more than 70 A long. The two subunits in the disulfide-bonded dimer are related by a crystallographic twofold axis in the apo structure, but by a noncrystallographic twofold axis in the aspartate complex structure. The latter structure reveals that the ligand binding site is located more than 60 A from the presumed membrane surface and is at the interface of the two subunits. Aspartate binds between two alpha helices from one subunit and one alpha helix from the other in a highly charged pocket formed by three arginines. The comparison of the apo and aspartate complex structures shows only small structural changes in the individual subunits, except for one loop region that is disordered, but the subunits appear to change orientation relative to each other. The structures of the two forms of this protein provide a step toward understanding the mechanisms of transmembrane signaling.
Aqueous films on terrestrial litter are inhabited by numerous microorganisms; the surfaces of such films are covered by monolayer-forming substances. The spreading pressure of the latter can result in transport of floating and submerged organisms to adjacent water films with clean surfaces. The clean surfaces, produced by rain or possibly dew, permit rapid vertical and horizontal dispersal of microorganisms onto newly fallen leaves and other plant materials.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is an immunoregulatory cytokine that activates a cell-surface signaling assembly composed of IL-6, the IL-6 alpha-receptor (IL-6Ralpha), and the shared signaling receptor gp130. The 3.65 angstrom-resolution structure of the extracellular signaling complex reveals a hexameric, interlocking assembly mediated by a total of 10 symmetry-related, thermodynamically coupled interfaces. Assembly of the hexameric complex occurs sequentially: IL-6 is first engaged by IL-6Ralpha and then presented to gp130in the proper geometry to facilitate a cooperative transition into the high-affinity, signaling-competent hexamer. The quaternary structures of other IL-6/IL-12 family signaling complexes are likely constructed by means of a similar topological blueprint.
Entrapment of small air bubbles is a problem for continuous liquid-film coatings processes. The coating of any surface requires that the surrounding air in contact with it be displaced by an advancing liquid interface. Studies of dynamic wetting suggest that if the interface motion is too rapid, the air is not completely removed and it becomes entrained in the coating material. This process, which can lead to undesirable flaws in the form of bubbles, blemishes or voids, limits the speed at which the substrate can be moved in the production of uniform precision coatings. However, the entrapment process is not understood in detail. Here we report an experimental investigation of air entrapment in high-speed coating operations. Tip streaming--a phenomenon well known in emulsification technology, involving the ejection of a fine filament from the cusped interface between two immiscible fluids--is shown to be the precursor of air entrainment. We demonstrate that tip-streaming air filaments emanating from the contact zone of a dynamic liquid interface give rise to minute (approximately 10 microm) bubbles.
We report a new mechanism of self-organization that can lead to robust surface ordering. We have quantitatively analyzed the thermal motion of holes created by sulfur atoms in a silver monolayer on a ruthenium surface, which we observed in real time with scanning tunneling microscopy. We find that the stability of the array of holes is determined by the arrangement and structure of misfit dislocations in the film.
The ice-rich south polar layered deposits of Mars were probed with the Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionospheric Sounding on the Mars Express orbiter. The radar signals penetrate deep into the deposits (more than 3.7 kilometers). For most of the area, a reflection is detected at a time delay that is consistent with an interface between the deposits and the substrate. The reflected power from this interface indicates minimal attenuation of the signal, suggesting a composition of nearly pure water ice. Maps were generated of the topography of the basal interface and the thickness of the layered deposits. A set of buried depressions is seen within 300 kilometers of the pole. The thickness map shows an asymmetric distribution of the deposits and regions of anomalous thickness. The total volume is estimated to be 1.6 x 10(6) cubic kilometers, which is equivalent to a global water layer approximately 11 meters thick.
The concept of chirality dates back to 1848, when Pasteur manually separated left-handed from right-handed sodium ammonium tartrate crystals. Crystallization is still an important means for separating chiral molecules into their two different mirror-image isomers (enantiomers), yet remains poorly understood. For example, there are no firm rules to predict whether a particular pair of chiral partners will follow the behaviour of the vast majority of chiral molecules and crystallize together as racemic crystals, or as separate enantiomers. A somewhat simpler and more tractable version of this phenomenon is crystallization in two dimensions, such as the formation of surface structures by adsorbed molecules. The relatively simple spatial molecular arrangement of these systems makes it easier to study the effects of specific chiral interactions; moreover, chiral assembly and recognition processes can be observed directly and with molecular resolution using scanning tunnelling microscopy. The enantioseparation of chiral molecules in two dimensions is expected to occur more readily because planar confinement excludes some bulk crystal symmetry elements and enhances chiral interactions; however, many surface structures have been found to be racemic. Here we show that the chiral hydrocarbon heptahelicene on a Cu111 surface does not undergo two-dimensional spontaneous resolution into enantiomers, but still shows enantiomorphism on a mesoscopic length scale that is readily amplified. That is, we observe formation of racemic heptahelicene domains with non-superimposable mirror-like lattice structures, with a small excess of one of the heptahelicene enantiomers suppressing the formation of one domain type. Similar to the induction of homochirality in achiral enantiomorphous monolayers by a chiral modifier, a small enantiomeric excess suffices to ensure that the entire molecular monolayer consists of domains having only one of two possible, non-superimposable, mirror-like lattice structures.
The ability to manipulate and monitor a single-electron spin using electron spin resonance is a long-sought goal. Such control would be invaluable for nanoscopic spin electronics, quantum information processing using individual electron spin qubits and magnetic resonance imaging of single molecules. There have been several examples of magnetic resonance detection of a single-electron spin in solids. Spin resonance of a nitrogen-vacancy defect centre in diamond has been detected optically, and spin precession of a localized electron spin on a surface was detected using scanning tunnelling microscopy. Spins in semiconductors are particularly attractive for study because of their very long decoherence times. Here we demonstrate electrical sensing of the magnetic resonance spin-flips of a single electron paramagnetic spin centre, formed by a defect in the gate oxide of a standard silicon transistor. The spin orientation is converted to electric charge, which we measure as a change in the source/drain channel current. Our set-up may facilitate the direct study of the physics of spin decoherence, and has the practical advantage of being composed of test transistors in a conventional, commercial, silicon integrated circuit. It is well known from the rich literature of magnetic resonance studies that there sometimes exist structural paramagnetic defects near the Si/SiO2 interface. For a small transistor, there might be only one isolated trap state that is within a tunnelling distance of the channel, and that has a charging energy close to the Fermi level.
Self-assembled monolayer chemistry was used in combination with either multistream laminar flow or photolithography to pattern surface free energies inside microchannel networks. Aqueous liquids introduced into these patterned channels are confined to the hydrophilic pathways, provided the pressure is maintained below a critical value. The maximum pressure is determined by the surface free energy of the liquid, the advancing contact angle of the liquid on the hydrophobic regions, and the channel depth. Surface-directed liquid flow was used to create pressure-sensitive switches inside channel networks. The ability to confine liquid flow inside microchannels with only two physical walls is expected to be useful in applications where a large gas-liquid interface is critical, as demonstrated here by a gas-liquid reaction.
Boundary lubrication, in which the rubbing surfaces are coated with molecular monolayers, has been studied extensively for over half a century. Such monolayers generally consist of amphiphilic surfactants anchored by their polar headgroups; sliding occurs at the interface between the layers, greatly reducing friction and especially wear of the underlying substrates. This process, widespread in engineering applications, is also predicted to occur in biological lubrication via phospholipid films, though few systematic studies on friction between surfactant layers in aqueous environments have been carried out. Here we show that the frictional stress between two sliding surfaces bearing surfactant monolayers may decrease, when immersed in water, to as little as one per cent or less of its value in air (or oil). We attribute this to the shift of the slip plane from between the surfactant layers, to the surfactant/substrate interface. The low friction would then be due to the fluid hydration layers surrounding the polar head groups attached to the substrate. These results may have implications for future technological and biomedical applications.
Microcontact printing (mu CP) has been used to produce patterned self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) with submicrometer features on curved substrates with radii of curvature as small as 25 micrometers. Wet-chemical etching that uses the patterned SAMs as resists transfers the patterns formed by mu CP into gold. At present, there is no comparable method for microfabrication on curved surfaces.
Single crystals are usually faceted solids with homogeneous chemical compositions. Biogenic and synthetic calcite single crystals, however, have been found to incorporate macromolecules, spurring investigations of how large molecules are distributed within the crystals without substantially disrupting the crystalline lattice. Here, electron tomography reveals how random, three-dimensional networks of agarose nanofibers are incorporated into single crystals of synthetic calcite by allowing both high- and low-energy fiber/crystal interface facets to satisfy network curvatures. These results suggest that physical entrapment of polymer aggregates is a viable mechanism by which macromolecules can become incorporated inside inorganic single crystals. As such, this work has implications for understanding the structure and formation of biominerals as well as toward the development of new high-surface area, single-crystal composite materials.
Living systems exhibit form and function on multiple length scales and at multiple locations. In order to mimic such natural structures, it is necessary to develop efficient strategies for assembling hierarchical materials. Conventional photolithography, although ubiquitous in the fabrication of microelectronics and microelectromechanical systems, is impractical for defining feature sizes below 0.1 micrometres and poorly suited to pattern chemical functionality. Recently, so-called 'soft' lithographic approaches have been combined with surfactant and particulate templating procedures to create materials with multiple levels of structural order. But the materials thus formed have been limited primarily to oxides with no specific functionality, and the associated processing times have ranged from hours to days. Here, using a self-assembling 'ink' we combine silica-surfactant self-assembly with three rapid printing procedures--pen lithography, ink-jet printing, and dip-coating of patterned self-assembled monolayers--to form functional, hierarchically organized structures in seconds. The rapid-prototyping procedures we describe are simple, employ readily available equipment, and provide a link between computer-aided design and self-assembled nanostructures. We expect that the ability to form arbitrary functional designs on arbitrary surfaces will be of practical importance for directly writing sensor arrays and fluidic or photonic systems.
Etch-decoration reveals that the rate of removal of carbon atoms exposed at monolayer steps on graphite surfaces depends on the population density of these edge atoms (the rate is higher at a low-density surface) and that carbon removal continues for a prolonged period after the oxygen supply in the gas phase has been shut off. The edge carbons are removed by both oxygen from the gas phase and oxygen in the adsorbed oxides which migrate from the neighboring basal carbon atoms.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is involved in a variety of processes involving signalling, such as cell differentiation and survival, growth cessation and apoptosis of neurons. These events are mediated by NGF as a result of binding to its two cell-surface receptors, TrkA and p75. TrkA is a receptor with tyrosine kinase activity that forms a high-affinity binding site for NGF. Of the five domains comprising its extracellular portion, the immunoglobulin-like domain proximal to the membrane (TrkA-d5 domain) is necessary and sufficient for NGF binding. Here we present the crystal structure of human NGF in complex with human TrkA-d5 at 2.2 A resolution. The ligand-receptor interface consists of two patches of similar size. One patch involves the central beta-sheet that forms the core of the homodimeric NGF molecule and the loops at the carboxy-terminal pole of TrkA-d5. The second patch comprises the amino-terminal residues of NGF, which adopt a helical conformation upon complex formation, packing against the 'ABED' sheet of TrkA-d5. The structure is consistent with results from mutagenesis experiments for all neurotrophins, and indicates that the first patch may constitute a conserved binding motif for all family members, whereas the second patch is specific for the interaction between NGF and TrkA.
Turbulence can greatly influence reaction and heat transfer rates in fluids. The topology of the three-dimensional interface between mixing fluids directly determines the location and degree of reaction. The time-resolved measurement of the three-dimensional concentration field in a transitional gas jet is reported. A thin sheet of laser light was swept through the flow volume by a rotating mirror in a time brief enough that motion of the gas was minimal. The light sheet illuminated different parallel planes within the flow, and light scattered from particles seeding the jet was imaged onto a detector. The series of two-dimensional measurements made during one scan of the flow volume constituted a full three-dimensional mapping of structures within the flow. Computer graphics software was used to reconstruct and visualize three-dimensional surfaces of constant concentration and the magnitude of the concentration gradient vector over such surfaces.
Vertebrate epithelial cells in monolayers are asymmetrical in that their apical and basal membranes differ in morphology and function. That this cell polarity depends on the presence of tight junctions can be demonstrated by labelling one surface of a cell monolayer in culture with fluorescent lectins and lipid probes, and subsequently observing whether the labels disperse to the opposite cell surfaces. Here we report on a differential distribution of binding sites for the lectin wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) on the cells of Drosophila melanogaster larval fat body, and show that the pattern is correlated with the structural association between the cell surfaces and their overlying basement membrane.
We studied the microwave reflectivity of a structured, near perfectly conducting substrate that was designed to verify the existence of a theoretically proposed new class of surface mode. Measurements of the mode's dispersion curve show that it correctly approaches the predicted asymptotic frequency; the curve also agrees well with that derived from a computer simulation. Modeling of the field distribution on resonance provides evidence of strong localization of the electric field at the interface and substantial power flow along the interface, thus verifying the surface plasmon-like nature of the mode.
Distinguishing self from non-self is a fundamental biological challenge. Many pathogens exploit the challenge of self discrimination by employing mimicry to subvert key cellular processes including the cell cycle, apoptosis and cytoskeletal dynamics. Other mimics interfere with immunity. Poxviruses encode K3L, a mimic of eIF2alpha, which is the substrate of protein kinase R (PKR), an important component of innate immunity in vertebrates. The PKR-K3L interaction exemplifies the conundrum imposed by viral mimicry. To be effective, PKR must recognize a conserved substrate (eIF2alpha) while avoiding rapidly evolving substrate mimics such as K3L. Using the PKR-K3L system and a combination of phylogenetic and functional analyses, we uncover evolutionary strategies by which host proteins can overcome mimicry. We find that PKR has evolved under intense episodes of positive selection in primates. The ability of PKR to evade viral mimics is partly due to positive selection at sites most intimately involved in eIF2alpha recognition. We also find that adaptive changes on multiple surfaces of PKR produce combinations of substitutions that increase the odds of defeating mimicry. Thus, although it can seem that pathogens gain insurmountable advantages by mimicking cellular components, host factors such as PKR can compete in molecular 'arms races' with mimics because of evolutionary flexibility at protein interaction interfaces challenged by mimicry.
Many fundamental questions in crystal-growth behavior remain unanswered because of the difficulties encountered in simultaneously observing phases and determining elemental concentrations and redistributions while crystals nucleate and grow at the nanoscale. We show that these obstacles can be overcome by performing energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy on partially molten Al-Si-Cu-Mg alloy particles during in situ heating in a transmission electron microscope. Using this technique, we were able to (i) determine that the aluminum and silicon concentrations change in a complementary and symmetric manner about the solid-liquid interface as a function of temperature; (ii) directly measure the solid- and liquid-phase compositions at equilibrium and in highly undercooled conditions for quantitative comparison with thermodynamic calculations of the liquidus and solidus phase boundaries; and (iii) provide direct evidence for homogeneous nucleation of the aluminum-rich solid.
Electrostatic fields of up to 7000 volt/cm have been applied across air/solution interfaces by means of parallel-plate electrodes, and the resulting surface tension changes were obtained by measuring, through a balance linkage, the deflection of mica plates floating on the surface. Surface tension changes (always negative) of up to 0.5 dyne/cm have been observed in both distilled water and dilute sodium chloride solutions.
Images of the assembly of surfactants and synthetic lipids on the surface of carbon nanotubes were obtained by transmission electron microscopy. Above the critical micellar concentration, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) forms supramolecular structures made of rolled-up half-cylinders on the nanotube surface. Depending on the symmetry and the diameter of the carbon nanotube, we observed rings, helices, or double helices. Similar self-assemblies were also obtained with several synthetic single-chain lipids designed for the immobilization of histidine-tagged proteins. At the nanotube-water interface, permanent assemblies were produced from mixed micelles of SDS and different water-insoluble double-chain lipids after dialysis of the surfactant. Such arrangements could be further exploited for the development of new biosensors and bioelectronic nanomaterials.
Self-assembled molecular nanolayers (MNLs) composed of short organic chains and terminated with desired functional groups are attractive for modifying surface properties for a variety of applications. For example, organosilane MNLs are used as lubricants, in nanolithography, for corrosion protection and in the crystallization of biominerals. Recent work has explored uses of MNLs at thin-film interfaces, both as active components in molecular devices, and as passive layers, inhibiting interfacial diffusion, promoting adhesion and toughening brittle nanoporous structures. The relatively low stability of MNLs on surfaces at temperatures above 350-400 degrees C (refs 12, 13), as a result of desorption or degradation, limits the use of surface MNLs in high-temperature applications. Here we harness MNLs at thin-film interfaces at temperatures higher than the MNL desorption temperature to fortify copper-dielectric interfaces relevant to wiring in micro- and nano-electronic devices. Annealing Cu/MNL/SiO2 structures at 400-700 degrees C results in interfaces that are five times tougher than pristine Cu/SiO2 structures, yielding values exceeding approximately 20 J m(-2). Previously, similarly high toughness values have only been obtained using micrometre-thick interfacial layers. Electron spectroscopy of fracture surfaces and density functional theory modelling of molecular stretching and fracture show that toughening arises from thermally activated interfacial siloxane bridging that enables the MNL to be strongly linked to both the adjacent layers at the interface, and suppresses MNL desorption. We anticipate that our findings will open up opportunities for molecular-level tailoring of a variety of interfacial properties, at processing temperatures higher than previously envisaged, for applications where microlayers are not a viable option-such as in nanodevices or in thermally resistant molecular-inorganic hybrid devices.
Despite its compactness, the human eye can easily focus on different distances by adjusting the shape of its lens with the help of ciliary muscles. In contrast, traditional man-made optical systems achieve focusing by physical displacement of the lenses used. But in recent years, advances in miniaturization technology have led to optical systems that no longer require complicated mechanical systems to tune and adjust optical performance. These systems have found wide use in photonics, displays and biomedical systems. They are either based on arrays of microlenses with fixed focal lengths, or use external control to adjust the microlens focal length. An intriguing example is the tunable liquid lens, where electrowetting or external pressure manipulates the shape of a liquid droplet and thereby adjusts its optical properties. Here we demonstrate a liquid lens system that allows for autonomous focusing. The central component is a stimuli-responsive hydrogel integrated into a microfluidic system and serving as the container for a liquid droplet, with the hydrogel simultaneously sensing the presence of stimuli and actuating adjustments to the shape--and hence focal length--of the droplet. By working at the micrometre scale where ionic diffusion and surface tension scale favourably, we can use pinned liquid-liquid interfaces to obtain stable devices and realize response times of ten to a few tens of seconds. The microlenses, which can have a focal length ranging from -infinity to +infinity (divergent and convergent), are also readily integrated into arrays that may find use in applications such as sensing, medical diagnostics and lab-on-a-chip technologies.
The adhesion and friction of smooth polymer surfaces were studied below the glass transition temperature by use of a surface forces apparatus. The friction force of a crosslinked polymer was orders of magnitude less than that of an uncrosslinked polymer. In contrast, after chain scission of the outermost layers, the adhesion hysteresis and friction forces increase substantially. These results show that polymer-polymer adhesion hysteresis and friction depend on the dynamic rearrangement of the outermost polymer segments at shearing interfaces, and that both increase as a transition is made from crosslinked surfaces to surfaces with long chains to surfaces with quasi-free ends. The results suggest new ways for manipulating the adhesion and friction of polymer surfaces by adjusting the state of the surface chains.
Recent advances in strategies for synthesizing nanoparticles--such as semiconductor quantum dots, magnets and noble-metal clusters--have enabled the precise control of composition, size, shape, crystal structure, and surface chemistry. The distinct properties of the resulting nanometre-scale building blocks can be harnessed in assemblies with new collective properties, which can be further engineered by controlling interparticle spacing and by material processing. Our study is motivated by the emerging concept of metamaterials-materials with properties arising from the controlled interaction of the different nanocrystals in an assembly. Previous multi-component nanocrystal assemblies have usually resulted in amorphous or short-range-ordered materials because of non-directional forces or insufficient mobility during assembly. Here we report the self-assembly of PbSe semiconductor quantum dots and Fe2O3 magnetic nanocrystals into precisely ordered three-dimensional superlattices. The use of specific size ratios directs the assembly of the magnetic and semiconducting nanoparticles into AB13 or AB2 superlattices with potentially tunable optical and magnetic properties. This synthesis concept could ultimately enable the fine-tuning of material responses to magnetic, electrical, optical and mechanical stimuli.
The three-dimensional structure of poliovirus has been determined at 2.9 A resolution by x-ray crystallographic methods. Each of the three major capsid proteins (VP1, VP2, and VP3) contains a "core" consisting of an eight-stranded antiparallel beta barrel with two flanking helices. The arrangement of beta strands and helices is structurally similar and topologically identical to the folding pattern of the capsid proteins of several icosahedral plant viruses. In each of the major capsid proteins, the "connecting loops" and NH2- and COOH-terminal extensions are structurally dissimilar. The packing of the subunit "cores" to form the virion shell is reminiscent of the packing in the T = 3 plant viruses, but is significantly different in detail. Differences in the orientations of the subunits cause dissimilar contacts at protein-protein interfaces, and are also responsible for two major surface features of the poliovirion: prominent peaks at the fivefold and threefold axes of the particle. The positions and interactions of the NH2- and COOH-terminal strands of the capsid proteins have important implications for virion assembly. Several of the "connecting loops" and COOH-terminal strands form prominent radial projections which are the antigenic sites of the virion.
An in situ microcosm study of the influence of surface-adhering bacteria on silicate diagenesis in a shallow petroleum-contaminated aquifer showed that minerals were colonized by indigenous bacteria and chemically weathered at a rate faster than theoretically predicted. Feldspar and quartz fragments were placed in anoxic, organic-rich ground water, left for 14 months, recovered, and compared to unreacted controls with scanning electron microscopy. Ground-water geochemistry was characterized before and after the experiment. Localized mineral etching probably occurred in a reaction zone at the bacteria-mineral interface where high concentrations of organic acids, formed by bacteria during metabolism of hydrocarbon, selectively mobilized silica and aluminum from the mineral surface.
The Vibrio cholerae bacterium causes devastating diarrhea when it infects the human intestine. The key event is adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosylation of the human signaling protein GSalpha, catalyzed by the cholera toxin A1 subunit (CTA1). This reaction is allosterically activated by human ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs), a family of essential and ubiquitous G proteins. Crystal structures of a CTA1:ARF6-GTP (guanosine triphosphate) complex reveal that binding of the human activator elicits dramatic changes in CTA1 loop regions that allow nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) to bind to the active site. The extensive toxin:ARF-GTP interface surface mimics ARF-GTP recognition of normal cellular protein partners, which suggests that the toxin has evolved to exploit promiscuous binding properties of ARFs.
Interactions between recognition molecules on the surface of neuronal growth cones and guidance cues present in the local cellular environment are thought to account for the growth of neurites in the highly stereospecific manner that contributes to correct target cell innervation. In vitro assays have been used to identify candidate molecular components of this system, either directly by demonstrating their ability to promote neurite outgrowth, or indirectly by the ability of specific antibodies to inhibit neurite outgrowth. The role of the neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) in pathway finding is not fully understood. Some immunological studies support a positive role; others do not, and it has been reported that purified NCAM does not support neurite outgrowth. We have previously shown that an arbitrary biochemical index of neurite outgrowth, the relative level of immunoreactive neurofilament protein, is increased when human and rat dorsal root ganglion neurons are cultured on monolayers of cells expressing transfected human NCAM. But, the complexity of growth precluded a simple morphological analysis and we did not determine the 'dose-response' relationship between NCAM expression and neuronal response. Here, we report on the morphology of rat cerebellar neurons cultured on monolayers of 3T3 cells transfected with complementary DNAs encoding all of the main NCAM isoforms found in cells such as astrocytes, Schwann cells and skeletal muscle. The data indicate that both transmembrane and glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol linked NCAM isoforms are potent substrates for neurite extension. A critical threshold value of NCAM expression is required for increased neurite outgrowth. Above this threshold, small increases in NCAM induce substantial increases in neurite outgrowth.
Water confined between adjoining hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces (a Janus interface) is found to form stable films of nanometer thickness whose responses to shear deformations are extraordinarily noisy. The power spectrum of this noise is quantified. In addition, the frequency dependence of the complex shear modulus is a power law with slope one-half, indicating a distribution of relaxation processes rather than any dominant one. The physical picture emerges that whereas surface energetics encourage water to dewet the hydrophobic side of the interface, the hydrophilic side constrains water to be present, resulting in a flickering, fluctuating complex.
The effective regulation of T cell responses is dependent on opposing signals transmitted through two related cell-surface receptors, CD28 and cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4). Dimerization of CTLA-4 is required for the formation of high-avidity complexes with B7 ligands and for transmission of signals that attenuate T cell activation. We determined the crystal structure of the extracellular portion of CTLA-4 to 2.0 angstrom resolution. CTLA-4 belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily and displays a strand topology similar to Valpha domains, with an unusual mode of dimerization that places the B7 binding sites distal to the dimerization interface. This organization allows each CTLA-4 dimer to bind two bivalent B7 molecules and suggests that a periodic arrangement of these components within the immunological synapse may contribute to the regulation of T cell responsiveness.
Tissue factor is a cell-surface glycoprotein receptor which initiates the blood coagulation cascade after vessel injury by interacting with blood clotting factor VII/VIIa and which is implicated in various pathological processes. When bound to tissue factor, factor VII is readily converted to the active protease factor VIIa by trace amounts of factors Xa, IXa or VIIa. Human tissue factor consists of 263 residues, the first 219 of which comprise the extracellular region. We have determined the crystal structure of the extracellular region at a resolution of 2.2 A. Tissue factor consists of two immunoglobulin-like domains associated through an extensive, novel, interdomain interface region. The binding site for factor VII lies at the interface region and involves residues from domain 1 and an extended loop (binding 'finger') of domain 2. This is the first reported structure of a representative of the class 2 cytokine receptor family, which also includes interferon-alpha, interferon-gamma (refs 2, 3) and interleukin-10 (ref. 4) receptors.
We show that elastomeric surfaces can be tailored using "mechanically assembled monolayers" (MAMs), structures that are fabricated by combining self-assembly of surface grafting molecules with mechanical manipulation of the grafting points in the underlying elastic surface. The versatility of this surface modification method is demonstrated by fabricating MAMs with semifluorinated (SF) molecules. These SF-MAMs have superior nonwetting and barrier properties in that they are "superhydrophobic" and nonpermeable. We also establish that these material characteristics do not deteriorate even after prolonged exposure to water, which usually causes surface reconstruction in conventionally prepared SF self-assembled monolayers.
Semiconductor heterostructures with modulated composition and/or doping enable passivation of interfaces and the generation of devices with diverse functions. In this regard, the control of interfaces in nanoscale building blocks with high surface area will be increasingly important in the assembly of electronic and photonic devices. Core-shell heterostructures formed by the growth of crystalline overlayers on nanocrystals offer enhanced emission efficiency, important for various applications. Axial heterostructures have also been formed by a one-dimensional modulation of nanowire composition and doping. However, modulation of the radial composition and doping in nanowire structures has received much less attention than planar and nanocrystal systems. Here we synthesize silicon and germanium core-shell and multishell nanowire heterostructures using a chemical vapour deposition method applicable to a variety of nanoscale materials. Our investigations of the growth of boron-doped silicon shells on intrinsic silicon and silicon-silicon oxide core-shell nanowires indicate that homoepitaxy can be achieved at relatively low temperatures on clean silicon. We also demonstrate the possibility of heteroepitaxial growth of crystalline germanium-silicon and silicon-germanium core-shell structures, in which band-offsets drive hole injection into either germanium core or shell regions. Our synthesis of core-multishell structures, including a high-performance coaxially gated field-effect transistor, indicates the general potential of radial heterostructure growth for the development of nanowire-based devices.
Crystallization of concentrated colloidal suspensions was studied in real space with laser scanning confocal microscopy. Direct imaging in three dimensions allowed identification and observation of both nucleation and growth of crystalline regions, providing an experimental measure of properties of the nucleating crystallites. By following their evolution, we identified critical nuclei, determined nucleation rates, and measured the average surface tension of the crystal-liquid interface. The structure of the nuclei was the same as the bulk solid phase, random hexagonal close-packed, and their average shape was rather nonspherical, with rough rather than faceted surfaces.
The pre-T-cell antigen receptor (pre-TCR), expressed by immature thymocytes, has a pivotal role in early T-cell development, including TCR b-selection, survival and proliferation of CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative thymocytes, and subsequent ab T-cell lineage differentiation. Whereas abTCR ligation by the peptide-loaded major histocompatibility complex initiates T-cell signalling, pre-TCR-induced signalling occurs by means of a ligand-independent dimerization event. The pre-TCR comprises an invariant a-chain (pre-Ta) that pairs with any TCR b-chain (TCRb) following successful TCR b-gene rearrangement. Here we provide the basis of pre-Ta-TCRb assembly and pre-TCR dimerization. The pre-Ta chain comprised a single immunoglobulin-like domain that is structurally distinct from the constant (C) domain of the TCR a-chain; nevertheless, the mode of association between pre-Ta and TCRb mirrored that mediated by the Ca-Cb domains of the abTCR. The pre-TCR had a propensity to dimerize in solution, and the molecular envelope of the pre-TCR dimer correlated well with the observed head-to-tail pre-TCR dimer. This mode of pre-TCR dimerization enabled the pre-Ta domain to interact with the variable (V) b domain through residues that are highly conserved across the Vb and joining (J) b gene families, thus mimicking the interactions at the core of the abTCR's Va-Vb interface. Disruption of this pre-Ta-Vb dimer interface abrogated pre-TCR dimerization in solution and impaired pre-TCR expression on the cell surface. Accordingly, we provide a mechanism of pre-TCR self-association that allows the pre-Ta chain to simultaneously 'sample' the correct folding of both the V and C domains of any TCR b-chain, regardless of its ultimate specificity, which represents a critical checkpoint in T-cell development. This unusual dual-chaperone-like sensing function of pre-Ta represents a unique mechanism in nature whereby developmental quality control regulates the expression and signalling of an integral membrane receptor complex.
Thin interdigitated films composed of a long-chain, water-insoluble chiral acid (p-pentadecylmandelic acid of absolute configuration R) and a water-soluble chiral base (phenylethylamine, R') were constructed at the air-solution interface. The (R, R') structure was characterized to near-atomic resolution by grazing-incidence x-ray diffraction (GIXD). The two diastereomeric systems, (R, R') and (R, S'), demonstrate similar surface pressure-molecular area isotherms, but their structures are completely different on the molecular level, as monitored by GIXD. Complementary data on these two architectures were provided by atomic force microscopy.
Nanofabricated photonic materials offer opportunities for crafting the propagation and dispersion of light in matter. We demonstrate an experimental realization of a two-dimensional negative-index material in the blue-green region of the visible spectrum, substantiated by direct geometric visualization of negative refraction. Negative indices were achieved with the use of an ultrathin Au-Si3N4-Ag waveguide sustaining a surface plasmon polariton mode with antiparallel group and phase velocities. All-angle negative refraction was observed at the interface between this bimetal waveguide and a conventional Ag-Si3N4-Ag slot waveguide. The results may enable the development of practical negative-index optical designs in the visible regime.
The self-assembly of monodisperse gold and silver colloid particles into monolayers on polymer-coated substrates yields macroscopic surfaces that are highly active for surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). Particles are bound to the substrate through multiple bonds between the colloidal metal and functional groups on the polymer such as cyanide (CN), amine (NH(2)), and thiol (SH). Surface evolution, which can be followed in real time by ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy and SERS, can be controlled to yield high reproducibility on both the nanometer and the centimeter scales. On conducting substrates, colloid monolayers are electrochemically addressable and behave like a collection of closely spaced microelectrodes. These favorable properties and the ease of monolayer construction suggest a widespread use for metal colloid-based substrates.
Optical second harmonic generation was used to study the in-plane alignment of self-assembled silane monolayers attached to a glass surface under mechanical loading. The measurements allow correlation of the macroscopic forces acting on the monolayer with the average orientation and the azimuthal molecular alignment of the terminal molecular entity. Compression and shear forces lead to an alignment of the initially randomly oriented molecules on a macroscopic length scale. The change in azimuthal alignment of molecules under mechanical stress was found to be irreversible on the time scale of 12 hours, whereas changes of the molecular tilt angle were reversible.
Lithography can be performed with beams of neutral atoms in metastable excited states to pattern self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of alkanethiolates on gold. An estimated exposure of a SAM of dodecanethiolate (DDT) to 15 to 20 metastable argon atoms per DDT molecule damaged the SAM sufficiently to allow penetration of an aqueous solution of ferricyanide to the surface of the gold. This solution etched the gold and transformed the patterns in the SAMs into structures of gold; these structures had edge resolution of less than 100 nanometers. Regions of SAMs as large as 2 square centimeters were patterned by exposure to a beam of metastable argon atoms. These observations suggest that this system may be useful in new forms of micro- and nanolithography.
The formation of the protein-protein interface by the insulin dimer, the trypsin-PTI complex and the alphabeta oxyhaemoglobin dimer removes 1,130-1,720 A2 of accessible surface from contact with water. The residues forming the interface are close packed: each occupies the same volume as it does in crystals of amino acids. These results indicate that hydrophobicity is the major factor stabilising protein-protein association, while complementarily plays a selective role in deciding which proteins may associate.
Understanding crystal growth is essential for controlling the crystallization used in industrial separation and purification processes. Because solids interact through their surfaces, crystal shape can influence both chemical and physical properties. The thermodynamic morphology can readily be predicted, but most particle shapes are actually controlled by the kinetics of the atomic growth processes through which assembly occurs. Here we study the urea-solvent interface at the nanometre scale and report kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of the micrometre-scale three-dimensional growth of urea crystals. These simulations accurately reproduce experimentally observed crystal growth. Unlike previous models of crystal growth, no assumption is made that the morphology can be constructed from the results for independently growing surfaces or from an a priori specification of surface defect concentration. This approach offers insights into the role of the solvent, the degree of supersaturation, and the contribution that extended defects (such as screw dislocations) make to crystal growth. It also connects observations made at the nanometre scale, through in situ atomic force microscopy, with those made at the macroscopic level. If extended to include additives, the technique could lead to the computer-aided design of crystals.
Measurements of the complete angular distribution of Auger electrons emitted from well-defined platinum[111] single-crystal surfaces have led to the discovery that the distributions are composed of "silhouettes" of surface atoms "back lit" by emission from atoms deeper in the solid. Theoretical simulations of Auger electron angular distributions based upon atomic point emitters and spherical atomic scatterers of uniform cross section are in close agreement with these experimental results, but opposite to previous theoretical predictions. In view of the definitive results obtained and the straightforward agreement between theory and experiment, angular distribution Auger microscopy (ADAM) is useful for direct imaging of interfacial structure and investigation of electron-solid interactions in the physical and biological sciences and engineering. Applicability of ADAM is illustrated by images obtained for monolayers of silver and iodine on platinum[111].
Mechanical milling is an effective technique for the preparation of fine metallic and ceramic powders and can also be used to drive a wide range of chemical reactions. Milling devices include planetary machines, attritors and vibrational mills; products include amorphous, nanocrystalline and quasicrystalline materials, supersaturated solid solutions, reduced minerals, high-surface-area catalysts and reactive chemicals. During milling, solid-solid, solid-liquid and solid-gas reactions are initiated through repeated deformation and fracture of powder particles. A separate materials synthesis and processing technique involves reacting a material in a gas atmosphere under an electrical discharge. Here we show that the application of low-current, high-voltage electrical impulses during milling can result in both faster reactions and new synthesis and processing routes. We demonstrate the effects of glow (cold) and spark (hot) discharge milling on particle fracture for brittle, low-conductivity materials and ductile metals. Glow discharge milling was found to promote solid-gas reactions whereas spark discharge milling promotes fast fracturing, recrystallization, mineral reduction and solid-solid reactions.
After extensive field experiments, we developed SPAM, a comprehensive mathematical model that simulates energy and material exchange in the plantair layer at the earth's interface. The model is based upon the conservation of energy, where the sun is the driving force. Our understanding and deficiencies were gauged initially by testing model predictions against actual experience with a relatively simple system-a cornfield. Climatic predictions are physically and biologically good enough for many applications, but they reveal inadequacies in our understanding of the fluid dynamics of airflow within the plant stand. Our present inability to measure or predict the degree of wetness of the soil surface hampers correct prediction of evaporation. Probably the most difficult problem to resolve is that of predicting how stomates open and close under drought stress, thus affecting both evaporation and photosynthesis in leaves. Along with resolution of these problems, the basic framework of the model can be adapted to more complex systems in nature, where variability is much greater than in an agricultural crop. The model in its present form can be used, with caution, as a powerful tool to help man order his priorities of plant community traits for whatever outcome he desires, be it food production, nature and water conservation, climate modification, or esthetic enjoyment.
Ratios of the lipid monolayer area to the erythrocyte surface area are 2:1 at low surface pressures and approach 1: 1 at collapse pressures. Un saturated phospholipids in cholesterol-phospholipid complexes of membrane ex tracts resemble their saturated derivatives at collapse pressures. Area ratio and phospholipid area data are related by an equation that tests hypothetical values for molecular areas used in membrane models.
Previous research suggests that interferon binds to the cell surface, possibly by attachment to gangliosides. A two-component receptor system consisting of binding and activation sites has been proposed. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that interferon inhibits binding of cholera toxin and thyrotropin to their receptors suggesting possible common receptor sites. Moreover, an antiserum against cell surface components of interferon-sensitive cells has been shown to inhibit the action of interferon. However, to understand the interaction of interferon with the cell surface requires direct ligand-binding studies. I present here direct evidence that high-affinity binding of interferon to a specific cell surface receptor is an initial step in interferon action using biologically active purified 125I-labelled mouse interferon. Labelled interferon binds specifically to interferon-sensitive mouse leukaemia L1210 cells, whereas binding to interferon-resistant L1210 cells is nonspecific. Furthermore, specific binding to monolayer cultures of mouse L929 cells is compared with nonspecific binding to chick embryo fibroblasts insensitive to the action of mouse interferon.
During T cell activation, the engagement of costimulatory molecules is often crucial to the development of an effective immune response, but the mechanism by which this is achieved is not known. Here, it is shown that beads attached to the surface of a T cell translocate toward the interface shortly after the start of T cell activation. This movement appears to depend on myosin motor proteins and requires the engagement of the major costimulatory receptor pairs, B7-CD28 and ICAM-1-LFA-1. This suggests that the engagement of costimulatory receptors triggers an active accumulation of molecules at the interface of the T cell and the antigen-presenting cell, which then increases the overall amplitude and duration of T cell signaling.
Steep negative concentration gradients of dissolved zinc are present between the overlying waters and the anoxic pore waters of two acid lakes. In the anoxic pore waters, the low zinc concentrations can be explained as due to the formation of relatively insoluble zinc sulfide minerals. Downward diffusive fluxes of dissolved zinc account for at least 50 to 75 percent of the recent zinc deposition to the sediments of these lakes. This downward diffusion occurs to a depth of 2 to 3 centimeters below the sediment water interface, where pronounced maxima in total zinc are observed. These subsurface peaks in total zinc have been interpreted as an indication of recent lake acidification. The present observations indicate that such subsurface peaks may also result from a diagenetic activity unrelated to recent changes in lake acidity.
The equatorial Medusae Fossae Formation (MFF) is enigmatic and perhaps among the youngest geologic deposits on Mars. They are thought to be composed of volcanic ash, eolian sediments, or an ice-rich material analogous to polar layered deposits. The Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionospheric Sounding (MARSIS) instrument aboard the Mars Express Spacecraft has detected nadir echoes offset in time-delay from the surface return in orbits over MFF material. These echoes are interpreted to be from the subsurface interface between the MFF material and the underlying terrain. The delay time between the MFF surface and subsurface echoes is consistent with massive deposits emplaced on generally planar lowlands materials with a real dielectric constant of approximately 2.9 +/- 0.4. The real dielectric constant and the estimated dielectric losses are consistent with a substantial component of water ice. However, an anomalously low-density, ice-poor material cannot be ruled out. If ice-rich, the MFF must have a higher percentage of dust and sand than polar layered deposits. The volume of water in an ice-rich MFF deposit would be comparable to that of the south polar layered deposits.
A C4-symmetric tetrameric aldolase was used to produce a quadratic network consisting of the enzyme as a rigid four-way connector and stiff streptavidin rods as spacers. Each aldolase subunit was furnished with a His6 tag for oriented binding to a planar surface and two tethered biotins for binding streptavidin in an oriented manner. The networks were improved by starting with composite units and also by binding to nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid-lipid monolayers. The mesh was adjustable in 5-nanometer increments. The production of a net with switchable mesh was initiated with the use of a calcium ion-containing beta-helix spacer that denatured on calcium ion depletion.
Multiphoton resonance ionization has been combined with energetic ion bombardment to examine dopant concentrations ofindium on the surface of silicon. The results yield a linear relation between the indium concentration and the known bulk values and a detection limit of 9 parts per trillion, at a mass resolution exceeding 160. This measurement, which surpasses the limits of any previous surface analysis by a factor of 100, has been made possible with an experimental configuration that optimizes sampling and detection efficiency while reducing background noise to virtually zero. During the analysis, submonolayer quantities of the surface are removed, so that as few as 180 surface atoms may be counted.
The structure of organic monolayers on liquid surfaces depends sensitively on the details of the molecular interactions. The structure of a stearic acid film on a mercury surface was measured as a function of coverage with angstrom resolution. Unlike monolayers on water, the molecules were found here to undergo a transition from surface-parallel to surface-normal orientation with increasing coverage. At high coverage, two condensed hexatic phases of standing-up molecules were found. At low coverage, a two-dimensional (2D) gas phase and condensed single- and double-layered phases of flat-lying molecular dimers were revealed, exhibiting a 1D longitudinal positional order. This system should provide a broader tunability range for nanostructure construction than solid-supported self-assembled monolayers.
Although the physics of materials at surfaces and edges has been extensively studied, the movement of individual atoms at an isolated edge has not been directly observed in real time. With a transmission electron aberration-corrected microscope capable of simultaneous atomic spatial resolution and 1-second temporal resolution, we produced movies of the dynamics of carbon atoms at the edge of a hole in a suspended, single atomic layer of graphene. The rearrangement of bonds and beam-induced ejection of carbon atoms are recorded as the hole grows. We investigated the mechanism of edge reconstruction and demonstrated the stability of the "zigzag" edge configuration. This study of an ideal low-dimensional interface, a hole in graphene, exhibits the complex behavior of atoms at a boundary.
Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy is a useful technique for the study of vibrational modes of molecules adsorbed on the surface of oxide layers in a metal-insulator-metal tunnel junction. The technique involves studying the effects of adsorbed molecules on the tunneling spectrum of such junctions. The data give useful information about the structure, bonding, and orientation of adsorbed molecules. One of the major advantages of inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy is its sensitivity. It is capable of detecting on the order of 10(10) molecules (a fraction of a monolayer) on a 1-square-millimeter junction. It has been successfully used in studies of catalysis, biology, trace impurity detection, and electronic excitations. Because of its high sensitivity, this technique shows great promise in the area of solid-state electronic chemical sensing.
Selective non-covalent interactions have been widely exploited in solution-based chemistry to direct the assembly of molecules into nanometre-sized functional structures such as capsules, switches and prototype machines. More recently, the concepts of supramolecular organization have also been applied to two-dimensional assemblies on surfaces stabilized by hydrogen bonding, dipolar coupling or metal co-ordination. Structures realized to date include isolated rows, clusters and extended networks, as well as more complex multi-component arrangements. Another approach to controlling surface structures uses adsorbed molecular monolayers to create preferential binding sites that accommodate individual target molecules. Here we combine these approaches, by using hydrogen bonding to guide the assembly of two types of molecules into a two-dimensional open honeycomb network that then controls and templates new surface phases formed by subsequently deposited fullerene molecules. We find that the open network acts as a two-dimensional array of large pores of sufficient capacity to accommodate several large guest molecules, with the network itself also serving as a template for the formation of a fullerene layer.
Inverse melting or disordering, in which the disordered phase forms upon cooling, is known for a few cases in bulk systems under high pressure. We show that inverse disordering also occurs in two dimensions: For a monolayer of 1,4,5,8-naphthalene-tetracarboxylic dianhydride on Ag(111), a completely reversible order-disorder transition appears upon cooling. The transition is driven by strongly anisotropic interactions within the layer versus with the metal substrate. Spectroscopic data reveal changes in the electronic structure of the system corresponding to a strengthening of the interface bonding at low temperatures. We demonstrate that the delicate, temperature-dependent balance between the vertical and lateral forces is the key to understanding this unconventional phase transition.
The Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and their membrane-anchored ephrin ligands are important in regulating cell-cell interactions as they initiate a unique bidirectional signal transduction cascade whereby information is communicated into both the Eph-expressing and the ephrin-expressing cells. Initially identified as regulators of axon pathfinding and neuronal cell migration, Ephs and ephrins are now known to have roles in many other cell-cell interactions, including those of vascular endothelial cells and specialized epithelia. Here we report the crystal structure of the complex formed between EphB2 and ephrin-B2, determined at 2.7 A resolution. Each Eph receptor binds an ephrin ligand through an expansive dimerization interface dominated by the insertion of an extended ephrin loop into a channel at the surface of the receptor. Two Eph-Ephrin dimers then join to form a tetramer, in which each ligand interacts with two receptors and each receptor interacts with two ligands. The Eph and ephrin molecules are precisely positioned and orientated in these complexes, promoting higher-order clustering and the initiation of bidirectional signalling.
Graphene, a single atomic layer of carbon connected by sp(2) hybridized bonds, has attracted intense scientific interest since its recent discovery. Much of the research on graphene has been directed towards exploration of its novel electronic properties, but the structural aspects of this model two-dimensional system are also of great interest and importance. In particular, microscopic corrugations have been observed on all suspended and supported graphene sheets studied so far. This rippling has been invoked to explain the thermodynamic stability of free-standing graphene sheets. Many distinctive electronic and chemical properties of graphene have been attributed to the presence of ripples, which are also predicted to give rise to new physical phenomena that would be absent in a planar two-dimensional material. Direct experimental study of such novel ripple physics has, however, been hindered by the lack of flat graphene layers. Here we demonstrate the fabrication of graphene monolayers that are flat down to the atomic level. These samples are produced by deposition on the atomically flat terraces of cleaved mica surfaces. The apparent height variation in the graphene layers observed by high-resolution atomic force microscopy (AFM) is less than 25 picometres, indicating the suppression of any existing intrinsic ripples in graphene. The availability of such ultraflat samples will permit rigorous testing of the impact of ripples on various physical and chemical properties of graphene.
A high-velocity stream of nitrogen is used to simultaneously disrupt myocardial cells in monolayer culture and fractionate their sarcolemmal membranes. The membranes show a high degree of ultrastructural and enzymatic purity, with less than 1 percent intracellular residuum. They are produced in less than 1 second and remain as tightly adherent sheets on the surface on which the cells were grown. The cells are exposed to no agent other than nitrogen gas during the preparative procedure.
The atomic force microscope (AFM) was used to image an electrode surface at atomic resolution while the electrode was under potential control in a fluid electrolyte. A new level of subtlety was observed for each step of a complete electrochemical cycle that started with an Au(111) surface onto which bulk Cu was electrodeposited. The Cu was stripped down to an underpotential-deposited monolayer and finally returned to a bare Au(111) surface. The images revealed that the underpotential-deposited monolayer has different structures in different electrolytes. Specifically, for a perchloric acid electrolyte the Cu atoms are in a close-packed lattice with a spacing of 0.29 +/- 0.02 nanometer (nm). For a sulfate electrolyte they are in a more open lattice with a spacing of 0.49 +/- 0.02 nm. As the deposited Cu layer grew thicker, the Cu atoms converged to a (111)-oriented layer with a lattice spacing of 0.26 +/- 0.02 nm for both electrolytes. A terrace pattern was observed during dissolution of bulk Cu. Images were obtained of an atomically resolved Cu monolayer in one region and an atomically resolved Au substrate in another in which a 30 degrees rotation of the Cu monolayer lattice from the Au lattice is clearly visible.
Thin gold films placed in contact on compliant elastomeric poly(dimethylsiloxane) supports weld together. This ;;cold welding'' is remarkable both for the low loads required and for the fact that it occurs under ambient laboratory conditions, conditions in which the gold surfaces are covered with films of weakly adsorbed organic impurities. These impurities are probably displaced laterally during the welding. Welding can be prevented by the presence of a self-assembled gold(I) alkylthiolate monolayer on the gold surfaces. The welded contacts have low electrical resistivity and can be made thin enough to transmit light. This system is a promising one with which to study interaction between interfaces.
The surface waters of the western Atlantic are supersaturated with respect to the partial pressure of carbon monoxide in the atmosphere. Under these conditions, the net transport of carbon monoxide across the air-sea interface must be from the sea into the atmosphere. Thus, the ocean appears to act as a source of carbon monoxide. The ocean may be the largest known natural source of this gas, contributing possibly as much as 5 percent of the amount generated by burning of fuels by man.
X-ray measurements reveal a crystalline monolayer at the surface of the eutectic liquid Au82Si18, at temperatures above the alloy's melting point. Surface-induced atomic layering, the hallmark of liquid metals, is also found below the crystalline monolayer. The layering depth, however, is threefold greater than that of all liquid metals studied to date. The crystallinity of the surface monolayer is notable, considering that AuSi does not form stable bulk crystalline phases at any concentration and temperature and that no crystalline surface phase has been detected thus far in any pure liquid metal or nondilute alloy. These results are discussed in relation to recently suggested models of amorphous alloys.
Electrochemical control of the oxidation state of ferrocene-decorated electrodes leads to surface-driven changes in the orientations of thermotropic liquid crystals. When the electrodes possess nanometer-scale topography, voltages of 0.0 to 0.3 volts (versus a counter electrode in a two-electrode cell) can drive changes in the orientation of the liquid crystals in the plane and/or out of the plane of the electrodes. Electrodes not supporting ferrocene do not lead to surface-driven orientational transitions. The in-plane transitions are driven by the reorganization of the monolayer of ferrocene upon oxidation of ferrocene to ferrocenium. The out-of-plane transition reflects a dielectric coupling between the liquid crystal and the diffuse part of an electrical double layer that evolves upon oxidation of ferrocene to ferrocenium. These results suggest new ways to couple the orientations of liquid crystals to chemical and electrical stimuli in electro-optical devices and chemical sensors.
Specular neutron reflection has been used to determine the structure and composition of bovine beta-casein adsorbed on a solid surface from an aqueous phosphate-buffered solution at pH 7. The protein was adsorbed on a hydrophobic monolayer self-assembled from deuterated octadecyltrichlorosilane solution on a silicon (111) surface. A two-layer structure formed consisting of one dense layer of thickness 23 +/- 1 angstroms and a surface coverage of 1.9 milligrams per square meter adjacent to the surface and an external layer protruding into the solution of thickness 35 +/- 1 angstroms and 12 percent protein volume fraction. The structure of the (beta-casein) layer is explained in terms of the charge distribution in the protein.
Defects in the layering of Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) films can be eliminated by depositing from the appropriate monolayer phase at the air-water interface. LB films deposited from the hexagonal phase of cadmium arachidate (CdA2) at pH 7 spontaneously transform into the bulk soap structure, a centrosymmetric bilayer with an orthorhombic herringbone packing. A large wavelength folding mechanism accelerates the conversion between the two structures, leading to a disruption of the desired layering. At pH > 8.5, though it is more difficult to draw LB films, almost perfect layering is obtained due to the inability to convert from the as-deposited structure to the equilibrium one.
Monolayers of stearic and behenic acids were transferred to quartz slides by the Blodgett technique. Troughs of different depths were cut into these multilayers (substrata), and additional monolayers were superimposed. When cultured and fresh embryonic cells were grown on these substrata, the cells were entrapped within troughs whose depths were as small as 60 angstroms. The results demonstrate cellular responses to molecular changes in contact surfaces.
Chemokine receptors are critical regulators of cell migration in the context of immune surveillance, inflammation, and development. The G protein-coupled chemokine receptor CXCR4 is specifically implicated in cancer metastasis and HIV-1 infection. Here we report five independent crystal structures of CXCR4 bound to an antagonist small molecule IT1t and a cyclic peptide CVX15 at 2.5 to 3.2 angstrom resolution. All structures reveal a consistent homodimer with an interface including helices V and VI that may be involved in regulating signaling. The location and shape of the ligand-binding sites differ from other G protein-coupled receptors and are closer to the extracellular surface. These structures provide new clues about the interactions between CXCR4 and its natural ligand CXCL12, and with the HIV-1 glycoprotein gp120.
Sediments of deep Canadian shield lakes have a firm mud-water interface and an intricately structured, oxygenated surface. Surface relief is not uniform, but is broken by small ridges and upright chironomid tubes. The sedimentary material behaves like a weak jelly and becomes flocculent only when violently disturbed. Sculpins were observed to rest on and, when started, to hide in the oxygenated layers. Sequestering of nutrients in the bottom sediments is enhanced by the structuring of the substrate surface below 10 meters, and may inhibit nutrient recycling at overturn.
The membranes from normal and Plasmodium knowlesi-infected rhesus monkey erythrocytes (90 to 95 percent infected with early ring stage) were analyzed for transbilayer distribution of phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), and phosphatidylserine (PS), by means of chemical and enzymatic probes. The external monolayer of the normal red cell membrane contained at least 68 to 72 percent of the total phosphatidylcholine and 15 to 20 percent of the total phosphatidylethanolamine. In the infected cell, the transmembrane phosphatidylcholine distribution appeared to be reversed, with only 20 to 30 percent of it being externally localized, whereas roughly equal amounts of phosphatidylethanolamine were present in the outer and inner surfaces. However, total phosphatidylethanolamine were present in the outer and inner surfaces. However, total phosphatidylserine in both the infected and normal red cells was exclusively internal. Unlike that in the normal intact cell, external phosphatidylethanolamine in the parasitized cell was readily accessible to phospholipase A2. These results indicate that significant changes in molecular architecture of the host cell membrane are the result of parasitization.
CRM1 (also known as XPO1 and exportin 1) mediates nuclear export of hundreds of proteins through the recognition of the leucine-rich nuclear export signal (LR-NES). Here we present the 2.9 A structure of CRM1 bound to snurportin 1 (SNUPN). Snurportin 1 binds CRM1 in a bipartite manner by means of an amino-terminal LR-NES and its nucleotide-binding domain. The LR-NES is a combined alpha-helical-extended structure that occupies a hydrophobic groove between two CRM1 outer helices. The LR-NES interface explains the consensus hydrophobic pattern, preference for intervening electronegative residues and inhibition by leptomycin B. The second nuclear export signal epitope is a basic surface on the snurportin 1 nucleotide-binding domain, which binds an acidic patch on CRM1 adjacent to the LR-NES site. Multipartite recognition of individually weak nuclear export signal epitopes may be common to CRM1 substrates, enhancing CRM1 binding beyond the generally low affinity LR-NES. Similar energetic construction is also used in multipartite nuclear localization signals to provide broad substrate specificity and rapid evolution in nuclear transport.
Corrosion destroys more than three per cent of the world's GDP. Recently, the electrochemical decomposition of metal alloys has been more productively harnessed to produce porous materials with diverse technological potential. High-resolution insight into structure formation during electrocorrosion is a prerequisite for an atomistic understanding and control of such electrochemical surface processes. Here we report atomic-scale observations of the initial stages of corrosion of a Cu3Au111 single crystal alloy within a sulphuric acid solution. We monitor, by in situ X-ray diffraction with picometre-scale resolution, the structure and chemical composition of the electrolyte/alloy interface as the material decomposes. We reveal the microscopic structural changes associated with a general passivation phenomenon of which the origin has been hitherto unclear. We observe the formation of a gold-enriched single-crystal layer that is two to three monolayers thick, and has an unexpected inverted (CBA-) stacking sequence. At higher potentials, we find that this protective passivation layer dewets and pure gold islands are formed; such structures form the templates for the growth of nanoporous metals. Our experiments are carried out on a model single-crystal system. However, the insights should equally apply within a crystalline grain of an associated polycrystalline electrode fabricated from many other alloys exhibiting a large difference in the standard potential of their constituents, such as stainless steel (see ref. 5 for example) or alloys used for marine applications, such as CuZn or CuAl.
Highly uniform and conformal coatings can be made by the alternating exposures of a surface to vapors of two reactants, in a process commonly called atomic layer deposition (ALD). The application of ALD has, however, been limited because of slow deposition rates, with a theoretical maximum of one monolayer per cycle. We show that alternating exposure of a surface to vapors of trimethylaluminum and tris(tert-butoxy)silanol deposits highly conformal layers of amorphous silicon dioxide and aluminum oxide nanolaminates at rates of 12 nanometers (more than 32 monolayers) per cycle. This process allows for the uniform lining or filling of long, narrow holes. We propose that these ALD layers grow by a previously unknown catalytic mechanism that also operates during the rapid ALD of many other metal silicates. This process should allow improved production of many devices, such as trench insulation between transistors in microelectronics, planar waveguides, microelectromechanical structures, multilayer optical filters, and protective layers against diffusion, oxidation, or corrosion.
A constitutive equation based on stress-strain models of bulk solids was adapted to relate the surface pressure, compression rate, and temperature of an insoluble monolayer of monodendrons during collapse at the air-water interface. A power law relation between compression rate and surface pressure and an Arrhenius temperature dependence of the steady-state creep rate were observed in data from compression rate and creep experiments in the collapse region. These relations were combined into a single constitutive equation to calculate the temperature dependence of the collapse pressure with a maximum error of 5 percent for temperatures ranging from 10 degrees to 25 degrees C.
Molecular dynamics simulations have previously described how the physical properties across immiscible liquid-liquid interfaces should converge from aqueous to organic limits, but these predictions have largely gone untested, owing to difficulties associated with probing buried interfaces. X-ray and neutron scattering experiments have created detailed pictures of molecular structure at these boundaries, but such scattering studies cannot probe how surface-altered solvent structures affect interfacial solvating properties. Given that surface-mediated solvent properties control interfacial solute concentrations and reactivities, identifying the characteristic dimensions of interfacial solvation is essential for formulating predictive models of solution phase surface chemistry. Here we use specially synthesized solvatochromic surfactants that act as 'molecular rulers' and resonance-enhanced second-harmonic generation to measure the dipolar width of weakly and strongly associating liquid-liquid interfaces. Dipolar width describes the distance required for a dielectric environment to change from one phase to another. Our results show that polarity converges to a nonpolar limit on subnanometre length scales across a water-cyclohexane interface. However, polarity across the strongly associating, water-1-octanol interface is dominated by a nonpolar, alkane-like region. These data call into question the use of continuum descriptions of liquids to characterize interfacial solvation, and demonstrate that interfacial environments can vary in a non-additive manner from bulk solution limits.
The transition from rest to sliding contact of atomically smooth solids separated by molecularly thin liquid films was studied. The films could be deformed nearly reversibly to a large fraction of the film thickness. The modulus of elasticity and yield stress were low, considerably less than for a molecular crystal or glass in the bulk. The transition to dissipative sliding was typically (but not always) discontinuous. The dissipative stress was then nearly velocity-independent. The similar response of monolayers strongly attached to the solid surfaces, presenting a well-defined interface for sliding, suggests that the physical mechanism of sliding may involve wall slip.
The average air temperature at the Earth's surface has increased by 0.06 degrees C per decade during the 20th century, and by 0.19 degrees C per decade from 1979 to 1998. Climate models generally predict amplified warming in polar regions, as observed in Antarctica's peninsula region over the second half of the 20th century. Although previous reports suggest slight recent continental warming, our spatial analysis of Antarctic meteorological data demonstrates a net cooling on the Antarctic continent between 1966 and 2000, particularly during summer and autumn. The McMurdo Dry Valleys have cooled by 0.7 degrees C per decade between 1986 and 2000, with similar pronounced seasonal trends. Summer cooling is particularly important to Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems that are poised at the interface of ice and water. Here we present data from the dry valleys representing evidence of rapid terrestrial ecosystem response to climate cooling in Antarctica, including decreased primary productivity of lakes (6-9% per year) and declining numbers of soil invertebrates (more than 10% per year). Continental Antarctic cooling, especially the seasonality of cooling, poses challenges to models of climate and ecosystem change.
Regulation of T-cell activity is dependent on antigen-independent co-stimulatory signals provided by the disulphide-linked homodimeric T-cell surface receptors, CD28 and CTLA-4 (ref. 1). Engagement of CD28 with B7-1 and B7-2 ligands on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) provides a stimulatory signal for T-cell activation, whereas subsequent engagement of CTLA-4 with these same ligands results in attenuation of the response. Given their central function in immune modulation, CTLA-4- and CD28-associated signalling pathways are primary therapeutic targets for preventing autoimmune disease, graft versus host disease, graft rejection and promoting tumour immunity. However, little is known about the cell-surface organization of these receptor/ligand complexes and the structural basis for signal transduction. Here we report the 3.2-A resolution structure of the complex between the disulphide-linked homodimer of human CTLA-4 and the receptor-binding domain of human B7-2. The unusual dimerization properties of both CTLA-4 and B7-2 place their respective ligand-binding sites distal to the dimer interface in each molecule and promote the formation of an alternating arrangement of bivalent CTLA-4 and B7-2 dimers that extends throughout the crystal. Direct observation of this CTLA-4/B7-2 network provides a model for the periodic organization of these molecules within the immunological synapse and suggests a distinct mechanism for signalling by dimeric cell-surface receptors.
In typical semiconductor solar cells, photons with energies above the semiconductor bandgap generate hot charge carriers that quickly cool before all of their energy can be captured, a process that limits device efficiency. Although fabricating the semiconductor in a nanocrystalline morphology can slow this cooling, the transfer of hot carriers to electron and hole acceptors has not yet been thoroughly demonstrated. We used time-resolved optical second harmonic generation to observe hot-electron transfer from colloidal lead selenide (PbSe) nanocrystals to a titanium dioxide (TiO2) electron acceptor. With appropriate chemical treatment of the nanocrystal surface, this transfer occurred much faster than expected. Moreover, the electric field resulting from sub-50-femtosecond charge separation across the PbSe-TiO2 interface excited coherent vibrations of the TiO2 surface atoms, whose motions could be followed in real time.
The 2.5 A crystal structure of a TATA-box complex with yeast TBP shows that the eight base pairs of the TATA box bind to the concave surface of TBP by bending towards the major groove with unprecedented severity. This produces a wide open, underwound, shallow minor groove which forms a primarily hydrophobic interface with the entire under-surface of the TBP saddle. The severe bend and a positive writhe radically alter the trajectory of the flanking B-form DNA.
A movable quartz micropipette, whose tip is sealed with a polymer plug, is used as a liquid-vacuum interface to a mass spectrometer. A light microscope allows observation of, and positioning of, the micropipette tip on the surface of a sample mounted in a perfusion chamber. This forms the basis of an instrument which enables one to study, in vitro, the localization of transepithelial transport of water and other molecules. Some preliminary results from the use of this instrument are presented.
The binding of a T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) to peptide antigen presented by major histocompatibility antigens (pMHC) on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) is a central event in adaptive immune responses. The mechanism by which TCR-pMHC ligation initiates signalling, a process termed TCR triggering, remains controversial. It has been proposed that TCR triggering is promoted by segregation at the T cell-APC interface of cell-surface molecules with small ectodomains (such as TCR-pMHC and accessory receptors) from molecules with large ectodomains (such as the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases CD45 and CD148). Here we show that increasing the dimensions of the TCR-pMHC interaction by elongating the pMHC ectodomain greatly reduces TCR triggering without affecting TCR-pMHC ligation. A similar dependence on receptor-ligand complex dimensions was observed with artificial TCR-ligand systems that span the same dimensions as the TCR-pMHC complex. Interfaces between T cells and APCs expressing elongated pMHC showed an increased intermembrane separation distance and less depletion of CD45. These results show the importance of the small size of the TCR-pMHC complex and support a role for size-based segregation of cell-surface molecules in TCR triggering.
Juxtaposition between endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria is a common structural feature, providing the physical basis for intercommunication during Ca(2+) signalling; yet, the molecular mechanisms controlling this interaction are unknown. Here we show that mitofusin 2, a mitochondrial dynamin-related protein mutated in the inherited motor neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth type IIa, is enriched at the ER-mitochondria interface. Ablation or silencing of mitofusin 2 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts and HeLa cells disrupts ER morphology and loosens ER-mitochondria interactions, thereby reducing the efficiency of mitochondrial Ca(2+) uptake in response to stimuli that generate inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate. An in vitro assay as well as genetic and biochemical evidences support a model in which mitofusin 2 on the ER bridges the two organelles by engaging in homotypic and heterotypic complexes with mitofusin 1 or 2 on the surface of mitochondria. Thus, mitofusin 2 tethers ER to mitochondria, a juxtaposition required for efficient mitochondrial Ca(2+) uptake.
Radar observations of Ganymede, at X-band, show that the surface is unusually bright and has unusual polarization properties. A model of the surface based on large numbers of random ice facets (hence vacuum-ice interfaces) is able to account for these characteristics.
A novel application of x-ray absorption spectroscopy has provided structural information for ions sorbed at oxide-water interfaces. As an example, in situ extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements of adsorbed selenate and selenite ions at ah alpha-FeOOH(goethite)-water interface have been performed; these measurements show that selenate forms a weakly bonded, outer-sphere complex and that selenite forms a strongly bonded, inner-sphere complex. The selenite ion is bonded directly to the goethite surface in a bidentate fashion with two iron atoms 3.38 angstroms from the selenium atom. Adsorbed selenate has no iron atom in the second coordination shell of selenium, which indicates retention of its hydration sphere upon sorption. This method provides direct structural information for adsorbed species at solid-liquid interfaces.
Thin liquid films, such as soap bubbles, have been studied extensively for over a century because they are easily formed and mediate a wide range of transport processes in physics, chemistry and engineering. When a bubble on a liquid-gas or solid-gas interface (referred to herein as an interfacial bubble) ruptures, the general expectation is that the bubble vanishes. More precisely, the ruptured thin film is expected to retract rapidly until it becomes part of the interface, an event that typically occurs within milliseconds. The assumption that ruptured bubbles vanish is central to theories on foam evolution and relevant to health and climate because bubble rupture is a source for aerosol droplets. Here we show that for a large range of fluid parameters, interfacial bubbles can create numerous small bubbles when they rupture, rather than vanishing. We demonstrate, both experimentally and numerically, that the curved film of the ruptured bubble can fold and entrap air as it retracts. The resulting toroidal geometry of the trapped air is unstable, leading to the creation of a ring of smaller bubbles. The higher pressure associated with the higher curvature of the smaller bubbles increases the absorption of gas into the liquid, and increases the efficiency of rupture-induced aerosol dispersal.
The ability to pattern surfaces on a microscopic length scale is of importance for technological applications such as the fabrication of microelectronic circuits and digital storage media. Devices fabricated entirely from polymers are now available, opening up the possibility of adapting polymer processing technologies to fabricate cheap, large-area devices using non-lithographic techniques--for example, by exploiting dewetting and phase separation in thin films. But the final pattern adopted by the polymer film using such approaches requires a template printed onto the substrate by optical lithography, microcontact printing or vapour deposition. Here we describe a simple process for patterning surfaces that does not require a template. Our method involves the spinodal dewetting of a polymer surface by a thin polymer film, in which a liquid film breaks up owing to the amplification of thermal fluctuations in film thickness induced by dispersion forces. A preferred orientation is imposed on the dewetting process simply by rubbing the substrate, and this gives rise to patterns of remarkably well-aligned polymer lines. The width of these lines is well-defined, and is controlled by the magnitude of the dispersion forces at the interface, which in turn can be varied by varying the thickness of the polymer substrate. We expect that further work will make it possible to optimize the degree of order in the final morphology.
Angstrom-resolution atomic force microscope images of Langmuir-Blodgett monolayers and multilayers of cadmium arachidate in air and under water show a dramatic change from a disordered arrangement to a crystalline lattice by the addition or removal of a single layer of molecules. The disordered surface is less stable than the ordered one to mechanical stresses such as atomic force microscopy tip forces or at the air-water contact line during contact angle measurements. The difference in the degree of order in the alkyl chains is attributed to the strong attractive interaction between headgroups in the presence of the divalent cation.
The microfabrication technologies of the semiconductor industry have made it possible to integrate increasingly complex electronic and mechanical functions, providing us with ever smaller, cheaper and smarter sensors and devices. These technologies have also spawned microfluidics systems for containing and controlling fluid at the micrometre scale, where the increasing importance of viscosity and surface tension profoundly affects fluid behaviour. It is this confluence of available microscale engineering and scale-dependence of fluid behaviour that has revolutionized our ability to precisely control fluid/fluid interfaces for use in fields ranging from materials processing and analytical chemistry to biology and medicine.
Ground water of both terrestrial and marine origin flows into coastal surface waters as submarine groundwater discharge, and constitutes an important source of nutrients, contaminants and trace elements to the coastal ocean. Large saline discharges have been observed by direct measurements and inferred from geochemical tracers, but sufficient seawater inflow has not been observed to balance this outflow. Geochemical tracers also suggest a time lag between changes in submarine groundwater discharge rates and the seasonal oscillations of inland recharge that drive groundwater flow towards the coast. Here we use measurements of hydraulic gradients and offshore fluxes taken at Waquoit Bay, Massachusetts, together with a modelling study of a generalized coastal groundwater system to show that a shift in the freshwater-saltwater interface-controlled by seasonal changes in water table elevation-can explain large saline discharges that lag inland recharge cycles. We find that sea water is drawn into aquifers as the freshwater-saltwater interface moves landward during winter, and discharges back into coastal waters as the interface moves seaward in summer. Our results demonstrate the connection between the seasonal hydrologic cycle inland and the saline groundwater system in coastal aquifers, and suggest a potentially important seasonality in the chemical loading of coastal waters.
Cell-cell interactions are of critical importance during neural development, particularly since the migration of neural cells and the establishment of functional interactions between growing axons and their target cells has been suggested to depend upon cell recognition processes. Neurone-neurone adhesion has been well studied in vitro, and is mediated in part by the neural cell adhesion molecule N-CAM. N-CAM-mediated cell-cell adhesion has been postulated to occur by a homophilic binding mechanism, in which N-CAM on the surface of one cell binds to N-CAM on a neighbouring cell. Studies in our laboratory have identified a cell surface glycoprotein, now known to be N-CAM, which participates in cell-substratum interactions in the developing chicken nervous system. Although this adhesion involves a homophilic binding mechanism, the binding of the cell surface proteoglycan heparan sulphate to the glycoprotein is also required. This raises the question of whether the binding of heparan sulphate to N-CAM is also required for cell-cell adhesion. Here we show that the binding of retinal probe cells to retinal cell monolayers is inhibited by heparin, a functional analogue of heparan sulphate, but not by chondroitin sulphate. Monoclonal antibodies that recognize two different domains on N-CAM, the homophilic-binding and heparin-binding domains, inhibit cell-cell adhesion. The heparin-binding domain isolated from N-CAM by selective proteolysis also inhibits cell-cell adhesion when bound to the probe cells.
The ores of chromite, nickel, copper, and zinc show a wide distribution over geologic time, but those of iron, titanium, lead, uranium, gold, silver, molybdenum, tungsten, and tin are more restricted. Many of the limitations to specific time intervals are probably imposed by the evolving tectonic history of Earth interacting with the effects of the biomass on the evolution of the earth's s surface chemistry. Photosynthetic generation of free oxygen and "carbon" contributes significantlly to the diversity of redox potentials in both sedimentary and igneous-related processes of ore formation, influencing the selection of metals at the source, during transport, and at the site of ore deposition.
Carbon films with a diamondlike structure that are chemically bonded to surfaces have been deposited by means of low-energy C(+) ion beams. When mass-selected C(+) beams at energies in the range from 20 to 200 electron volts impinge on atomically clean surfaces, the first carbon monolayer grows as a carbide structure that is chemically bonded to the surface. As deposition continues, the structure evolves over the next several atomic layers into a diamondlike structure. These pure carbon films are strongly adhered to the surface through the carbide bonds, which also provide for an intimate interface. There are significant applications for such films, particularly as insulators and doped semiconductors.
Bacteriorhodopsin is a transmembrane protein that uses light energy, absorbed by its chromophore retinal, to pump protons from the cytoplasm of bacteria such as Halobacterium salinarium into the extracellular space. It is made up of seven alpha-helices, and in the bacterium forms natural, two-dimensional crystals called purple membranes. We have analysed these crystals by electron cryo-microscopy to obtain images of bacteriorhodopsin at 3.0 A resolution. The structure covers nearly all 248 amino acids, including loops outside the membrane, and reveals the distribution of charged residues on both sides of the membrane surface. In addition, analysis of the electron-potential map produced by this method allows the determination of the charge status of these residues. On the extracellular side, four glutamate residues surround the entrance to the proton channel, whereas on the cytoplasmic side, four aspartic acids occur in a plane at the boundary of the hydrophobic-hydrophilic interface. The negative charges produced by these aspartate residues is encircled by areas of positive charge that may facilitate accumulation and lateral movement of protons on this surface.
In the context of materials science, texture describes the statistical distribution of grain orientations. It is an important characteristic of the microstructure of polycrystalline films, determining various electrical, magnetic and mechanical properties. Three types of texture component are usually distinguished in thin films: random texture, when grains have no preferred orientation; fibre texture, for which one crystallographic axis of the film is parallel to the substrate normal, while there is a rotational degree of freedom around the fibre axis; and epitaxial alignment (or in-plane texture) on single-crystal substrates, where an in-plane alignment fixes all three axes of the grain with respect to the substrate. Here we report a fourth type of texture--which we call axiotaxy--identified from complex but symmetrical patterns of lines on diffraction pole figures for thin films formed by solid-state reactions. The texture is characterized by the alignment of planes in the film and substrate that share the same d-spacing. This preferred alignment of planes across the interface manifests itself as a fibre texture lying off-normal to the sample surface, with the fibre axis perpendicular to certain planes in the substrate. This texture forms because it results in an interface, which is periodic in one dimension, preserved independently of interfacial curvature. This new type of preferred orientation may be the dominant type of texture for a wide class of materials and crystal structures.
Satellite images have long revealed the surface expression of large amplitude internal waves that propagate along density interfaces beneath the sea surface. Internal waves are typically the most energetic high-frequency events in the coastal ocean, displacing water parcels by up to 100 m and generating strong currents and turbulence that mix nutrients into near-surface waters for biological utilization. While internal waves are known to be generated by tidal currents over ocean-bottom topography, they have also been observed frequently in the absence of any apparent tide-topography interactions. Here we present repeated measurements of velocity, density and acoustic backscatter across the Columbia River plume front. These show how internal waves can be generated from a river plume that flows as a gravity current into the coastal ocean. We find that the convergence of horizontal velocities at the plume front causes frontal growth and subsequent displacement downward of near-surface waters. Individual freely propagating waves are released from the river plume front when the front's propagation speed decreases below the wave speed in the water ahead of it. This mechanism generates internal waves of similar amplitude and steepness as internal waves from tide-topography interactions observed elsewhere, and is therefore important to the understanding of coastal ocean mixing.
Highly localized chemical catalysis was carried out on the surface groups of a self-assembled monolayer with a scanning probe device. With the use of a platinum-coated atomic force microscope tip, the terminal azide groups of the monolayer were catalytically hydrogenated with high spatial resolution. The newly created amino groups were then covalently modified to generate new surface structures. By varying the nature of the catalyst and the chemical composition of the surface, it may be possible to synthesize molecular assemblies not readily produced by existing microfabrication techniques.
Recent and subfossil calcareous structures resembling cystose and subclathrate Paleozoic stromatoporoids have been discovered in a sea-linked, stratified, alkaline crater lake on Satonda Island, Indonesia. The structures are produced by mats of coccoid cyanobacteria growing along the lakeshore from the water surface down to the O(2)-H(2)S interface located at a depth of 22.8 meters. Calcification of the mats is controlled by seasonal changes in calcium carbonate supersaturation in the epilimnion. The internally complex structures are a product of two different calcification processes: (i) periodic in vivo calcification of the surficial cyanobacterial layers by low-Mg calcite, and (ii) early postmortem calcification of the cyanobacterial aggregates below the mat surface by microbially precipitated aragonite. The finding supports the idea that Paleozoic stromatoporoids represent fossilized cyanobacteria (stromatolites). It also implies that the stromatoporoid-generating epicontinental seas during the early Paleozoic may have been more alkaline and had a higher carbonate mineral supersaturation than modern seawater.
High-resolution transmission electron microscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy have been combined to examine the structure of the thin "native" oxide that forms on silicon surfaces at room temperature. Differences in the cleaning procedures for silicon wafers may affect the morphology of this oxide and critically influence further processing on the silicon substrates. An etch that ended with a dip in hydrofluoric acid provided a thinner oxide and a lower interface step density than did a sulfuric peroxide treatment. The availability of complementary information from high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy is discussed.
Materials containing organic-inorganic interfaces usually display a combination of molecular and solid-state properties, which are of interest for applications ranging from chemical sensing to microelectronics and catalysis. Thiols--organic compounds carrying a SH group--are widely used to anchor organic layers to gold surfaces, because gold is catalytically sufficiently active to replace relatively weak S-H bonds with Au-S bonds, yet too inert to attack C-C and C-H bonds in the organic layer. But although several methods of functionalizing the surfaces of semiconductors, oxides and metals are known, it remains difficult to attach a wide range of more complex organic species. Organic layers could, in principle, be formed on the surfaces of metals that are capable of inserting into strong bonds, but such surfaces catalyse the decomposition of organic layers at temperatures above 400 to 600 K, through progressive C-H and C-C bond breaking. Here we report that cycloketones adsorbed on molybdenum carbide, a material known to catalyse a variety of hydrocarbon conversion reactions, transform into surface-bound alkylidenes stable to above 900 K. We expect that this chemistry can be used to create a wide range of exceptionally stable organic layers on molybdenum carbide.
The Proterozoic aeon (2,500-540 million years ago) saw episodic increases in atmospheric oxygen content, the evolution of multicellular life and, at its close, an enormous radiation of animal diversity.  These profound biological and environmental changes must have been linked, but the underlying mechanisms have been obscure.  Here we show that hydrocarbons extracted from Proterozoic sediments in several locations worldwide are derived mainly from bacteria or other heterotrophs rather than from photosynthetic organisms.  Biodegradation of algal products in sedimenting matter was therefore unusually complete, indicating that organic material was extensively reworked as it sank slowly through the water column.  We propose that a significant proportion of this reworking will have been mediated by sulphate-reducing bacteria, forming sulphide.  The production of sulphide and consumption of oxygen near the ocean surface will have inhibited transport of O2 to the deep ocean.  We find that preservation of algal-lipid skeletons improves at the beginning of the Cambrian, reflecting the increase in transport by rapidly sinking faecal pellets.  We suggest that this rapid removal of organic matter will have increased oxygenation of surface waters, leading to a descent of the O2-sulphide interface to the sea floor and to marked changes in the marine environment, ultimately contributing to the Cambrian radiation.
At the level of individual molecules, familiar concepts of heat transport no longer apply. When large amounts of heat are transported through a molecule, a crucial process in molecular electronic devices, energy is carried by discrete molecular vibrational excitations. We studied heat transport through self-assembled monolayers of long-chain hydrocarbon molecules anchored to a gold substrate by ultrafast heating of the gold with a femtosecond laser pulse. When the heat reached the methyl groups at the chain ends, a nonlinear coherent vibrational spectroscopy technique detected the resulting thermally induced disorder. The flow of heat into the chains was limited by the interface conductance. The leading edge of the heat burst traveled ballistically along the chains at a velocity of 1 kilometer per second. The molecular conductance per chain was 50 picowatts per kelvin.
The resistance of the gastric mucosa to acid and peptic injury is reflected by a resistance to the back-diffusion of H+ from gastric lumen to blood. The nature of this 'barrier', however, remains undefined. Using Ussing chambers, we have now studied the acid-barrier function of monolayers prepared from dispersed canine fundic chief cells. These monolayers secrete pepsinogen in response to stimulation. We found that, on acidification of the apical solution to pH 2, transepithelial resistance (R) increased 2.6-fold and the monolayers maintained this 1:100,000 H+ concentration gradient for more than 4 h. The addition of aspirin to the acidified apical solution caused a rapid decay in R, as did acidification of the basolateral solution to a pH less than 5.5. Ouabain-treated monolayers displayed the rise in R expected with apical acidification, while potential difference (V) and short-circuit current (Isc) decreased essentially to zero, indicating impermeability to H+. However, if the integrity of the ouabain-treated monolayers was disrupted by low apical pH, H+ permeation occurred, reflected by an Isc that was dependent on the H+ gradient across monolayers. These data indicate that the apical surface of chief cells is a very tight barrier to H+ diffusion and may be an important element resisting acid-peptic injury.
Despite the requirement for a functional signal sequence in protein export, little is known of the conformational properties and membrane interactions of these highly hydrophobic amino terminal extensions on nearly all exported proteins. The Escherichia coli lambda phage receptor signal sequence was studied in phospholipid monolayers by circular dichroism and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy; the signal peptide was shown to prefer an alpha-helical conformation when inserted into the lipid phase. However, interaction with the lipid surface without insertion induced the signal sequence, which is unstructured in bulk aqueous solution, to adopt a beta structure. These observations are combined in a model for the initial steps in signal sequence-membrane interaction in vivo.
Dislocations are common defects in solids, yet all crystals begin as dislocation-free nuclei. The mechanisms by which dislocations form during early growth are poorly understood. When nanocrystalline materials grow by oriented attachment at crystallographically specific surfaces and there is a small misorientation at the interface, dislocations result. Spiral growth at two or more closely spaced screw dislocations provides a mechanism for generating complex polytypic and polymorphic structures. These results are of fundamental importance to understanding crystal growth.
The air-water interface is perhaps the most common liquid interface. It covers more than 70 per cent of the Earth's surface and strongly affects atmospheric, aerosol and environmental chemistry. The air-water interface has also attracted much interest as a model system that allows rigorous tests of theory, with one fundamental question being just how thin it is. Theoretical studies have suggested a surprisingly short 'healing length' of about 3 angstroms (1 A = 0.1 nm), with the bulk-phase properties of water recovered within the top few monolayers. However, direct experimental evidence has been elusive owing to the difficulty of depth-profiling the liquid surface on the angstrom scale. Most physical, chemical and biological properties of water, such as viscosity, solvation, wetting and the hydrophobic effect, are determined by its hydrogen-bond network. This can be probed by observing the lineshape of the OH-stretch mode, the frequency shift of which is related to the hydrogen-bond strength. Here we report a combined experimental and theoretical study of the air-water interface using surface-selective heterodyne-detected vibrational sum frequency spectroscopy to focus on the 'free OD' transition found only in the topmost water layer. By using deuterated water and isotopic dilution to reveal the vibrational coupling mechanism, we find that the free OD stretch is affected only by intramolecular coupling to the stretching of the other OD group on the same molecule. The other OD stretch frequency indicates the strength of one of the first hydrogen bonds encountered at the surface; this is the donor hydrogen bond of the water molecule straddling the interface, which we find to be only slightly weaker than bulk-phase water hydrogen bonds. We infer from this observation a remarkably fast onset of bulk-phase behaviour on crossing from the air into the water phase.
There is evidence from atomic force microscopy for a long-range attractive force between hydrophobic surfaces that is virtually identical to that observed with the surface forces apparatus. This force is present in the nonaqueous solvent ethylene glycol. A possible molecular mechanism involves in-plane polarized domains of solid-like monolayers adsorbed on mica, and a theoretical model has been developed that accounts for many of the observations.
Fractal surfaces can be used to characterize the roughness or irregularity of protein surfaces. The degree of irregularity of a surface may be described by the fractal dimension D. For protein surfaces defined with probes in the range of 1.0 to 3.5 angstroms in radius, D is approximately 2.4 or intermediate between the value for a completely smooth surface (D = 2) and that for a completely space-filling surface (D = 3). Individual regions of proteins show considerable variation in D. These variations may be related to structural features such as active sites and subunit interfaces, suggesting that surface texture may be a factor influencing molecular interactions.
Cholera toxin coupled to peroxidase yielded a highly specific ultrastructural marker of plasma membrane monosialogangliosides. Studies with cultures of brain and brain tumors suggested that long-term culture of tissue in monolayers results in eventual loss of surface monosialogangliosides.
The formation of intricate nanostructures will require the ability to maintain surface registry during several patterning steps. A scanning probe method, dip-pen nanolithography (DPN), can be used to pattern monolayers of different organic molecules down to a 5-nanometer separation. An "overwriting" capability of DPN allows one nanostructure to be generated and the areas surrounding that nanostructure to be filled in with a second type of "ink."
Strong friction anisotropy is found when the twofold surface of an atomically clean aluminum-nickel-cobalt quasicrystal slides against a thiol-passivated titanium-nitride tip. Friction along the aperiodic direction is one-eighth as much as that along the periodic direction. This anisotropy, which is about three times as large as the highest value observed in anisotropic crystalline surfaces, disappears after the surface is oxidized in air. These results reveal a strong connection between interface atomic structure and the mechanisms by which energy is dissipated, which likely include electronic or phononic contributions, or both.
The molecular complexity of tissues and the inaccessibility of most cells within a tissue limit the discovery of key targets for tissue-specific delivery of therapeutic and imaging agents in vivo. Here, we describe a hypothesis-driven, systems biology approach to identifying a small subset of proteins induced at the tissue-blood interface that are inherently accessible to antibodies injected intravenously. We use subcellular fractionation, subtractive proteomics and bioinformatics to identify endothelial cell surface proteins exhibiting restricted tissue distribution and apparent tissue modulation. Expression profiling and gamma-scintigraphic imaging with antibodies establishes two of these proteins, aminopeptidase-P and annexin A1, as selective in vivo targets for antibodies in lungs and solid tumours, respectively. Radio-immunotherapy to annexin A1 destroys tumours and increases animal survival. This analytical strategy can map tissue- and disease-specific expression of endothelial cell surface proteins to uncover novel accessible targets useful for imaging and therapy.
Members of the epidermal growth factor receptor family (EGFR/ERBB1, ERBB2/HER2, ERBB3/HER3 and ERBB4/HER4) are key targets for inhibition in cancer therapy. Critical for activation is the formation of an asymmetric dimer by the intracellular kinase domains, in which the carboxy-terminal lobe (C lobe) of one kinase domain induces an active conformation in the other. The cytoplasmic protein MIG6 (mitogen-induced gene 6; also known as ERRFI1) interacts with and inhibits the kinase domains of EGFR and ERBB2 (refs 3-5). Crystal structures of complexes between the EGFR kinase domain and a fragment of MIG6 show that a approximately 25-residue epitope (segment 1) from MIG6 binds to the distal surface of the C lobe of the kinase domain. Biochemical and cell-based analyses confirm that this interaction contributes to EGFR inhibition by blocking the formation of the activating dimer interface. A longer MIG6 peptide that is extended C terminal to segment 1 has increased potency as an inhibitor of the activated EGFR kinase domain, while retaining a critical dependence on segment 1. We show that signalling by EGFR molecules that contain constitutively active kinase domains still requires formation of the asymmetric dimer, underscoring the importance of dimer interface blockage in MIG6-mediated inhibition.
Relatively simple atmospheric electrical instrumentation carried on a small aircraft constitutes a flexible and sensitive system for detecting organized convection. Data can be obtained close to the sea surface, and low-velocity flight enhances the spatial resolution. With a slow-flying airplane or powered glider, it may be possible to trace the circulation of individual convection cells and to investigate the trajectory of air which forms cumulus clouds, one of the major unsolved problems in tropical meteorology. Since space charge near the ocean surface was found on some days to be organized on a horizontal scale equivalent to the cumulus cloud scale, this suggests that some of the air which forms maritime cumulus clouds may come from within a few meters of the ocean and that atmospheric electrical instrumentation may have the potential for tracing air from the sea surface to the clouds. Although the atmospheric electrical instrumentation technique described here cannot be used for direct measurement of air velocity, it may be possible to develop model that can be used to calculate air velocities from electric field data. Even though with the technique described here it is not possible to make direct measurements of wind velocity, airborne electric field records can provide useful information about convection by delineating patterns in the wind field and structural features of thermals (rising bodies of relatively warm air) and by making possible the remote detection of thermals (29). Future plans include attempting to trace interfaces between adjacent roll vortices from the sea surface through the depth of the mixed layer (i) by flying the aircraft parallel to the wind so as to nullify the horizontal electric field (measured between wing-tip probes) while ascending and descending along the interface between adjacent roll vortices and (ii) by measuring vertical and horizontal potential gradient variations at different flight levels (30). The sensitivity of atmospheric electrical instrumentation to the top of the mixed layer and structure within it can be used to explore another important problem in boundary layer convection-why convective cloud cover and oceanic rainfall are greater at night than during the day(31). Workers in atmospheric electricity have long recognized that their domain is strongly controlled by turbulence in the lower atmosphere, and many have believed that the most effective use of atmospheric electrical techniques to assist meteorological research would be in studying exchange processes. Reiter [see (8)] effectively extended atmospheric electrical studies of boundary layer phenomena through a height range by mounting instruments on cable cars traveling between the valley floor and mountain tops in the Alps. The airborne measurements described here extend this approach. Relating the electrical structure of the atmosphere to its dynamic structure poses an interesting problem which may contribute to our understanding of the atmosphere.
Basement membranes are fundamental to tissue organization and physiology in all metazoans. The interaction between laminin and nidogen is crucial to the assembly of basement membranes. The structure of the interacting domains reveals a six-bladed Tyr-Trp-Thr-Asp (YWTD) beta-propeller domain in nidogen bound to laminin epidermal-growth-factor-like (LE) modules III3-5 in laminin (LE3-5). Laminin LE module 4 binds to an amphitheatre-shaped surface on the pseudo-6-fold axis of the beta-propeller, and LE module 3 binds over its rim. A Phe residue that shutters the water-filled central aperture of the beta-propeller, the rigidity of the amphitheatre, and high shape complementarity enable the construction of an evolutionarily conserved binding surface for LE4 of unprecedentedly high affinity for its small size. Hypermorphic mutations in the Wnt co-receptor LRP5 (refs 6-9) suggest that a similar YWTD beta-propeller interface is used to bind ligands that function in developmental pathways. A related interface, but shifted off-centre from the pseudo-6-fold axis and lacking the shutter over the central aperture, is used in the low-density lipoprotein receptor for an intramolecular interaction that is regulated by pH in receptor recycling.
The crystal structure of the yeast TFIIA/TBP/TATA promoter complex was solved to 3 angstrom resolution by double-edge multiple wavelength anomalous diffraction from two different species of anomalous scattering elements in the same crystal. The large and small subunits of TFIIA associate intimately to form both domains of a two-domain folding pattern. TFIIA binds as a heterodimer to the side of the TBP/TATA complex opposite to the side that binds TFIIB and does not alter the TBP/DNA interaction. The six-stranded beta-sandwich domain interacts with the amino-terminal end of TBP through a stereospecific parallel beta-strand interface and with the backbone of the TATA box and the 5'-flanking B-DNA segment. The four-helix-bundle domain projects away from the TBP/TATA complex, thereby presenting a substantial surface for further protein-protein interactions.
The crystal structure of a ternary protein complex has been determined at 2.4 angstrom resolution. The complex is composed of three electron transfer proteins from Paracoccus denitrificans, the quinoprotein methylamine dehydrogenase, the blue copper protein amicyanin, and the cytochrome c551i. The central region of the c551i is folded similarly to several small bacterial c-type cytochromes; there is a 45-residue extension at the amino terminus and a 25-residue extension at the carboxyl terminus. The methylamine dehydrogenase-amicyanin interface is largely hydrophobic, whereas the amicyanin-cytochrome interface is more polar, with several charged groups present on each surface. Analysis of the simplest electron transfer pathways between the redox partners points out the importance of other factors such as energetics in determining the electron transfer rates.
Long-chain omegahydroxyalkanethiols [HS(CH(2))nOH] coordinate to gold surfaces through the sulfur atom and produce ordered, hydrophilic monolayers in which the hydroxyl groups are exposed at the outer surface. Coadsorption of two omega-hydroxyalkanethiols of different chain lengths n resulted in the formation of a monolayer having a disordered surface region that was markedly less hydrophilic than the homogeneous, hydroxylic surface formed from either pure compound. By controlling the composition of the monolayer, it was also possible to control simultaneously the degree of order in the surface and its hydrophilicity. In the monolayers containing a mixture of alkanethiol components, these components apparently did not phase-segregate into macroscopic islands, but were dispersed on a molecular scale. assistance and many useful discussions.
The magnitude of the hydrophobic effect, as measured from the surface area dependence of the solubilities of hydrocarbons in water, is generally thought to be about 25 calories per mole per square angstrom (cal mol-1 A-2). However, the surface tension at a hydrocarbon-water interface, which is a "macroscopic" measure of the hydrophobic effect, is approximately 72 cal mol-1 A-2. In an attempt to reconcile these values, alkane solubility data have been reevaluated to account for solute-solvent size differences, leading to a revised "microscopic" hydrophobic effect of 47 cal mol-1 A-2. This value, when used in a simple geometric model for the curvature dependence of the hydrophobic effect, predicts a macroscopic alkane-water surface tension that is close to the macroscopic value.
The local point symmetry of the short-range order in simple monatomic liquids remains a fundamental open question in condensed-matter science. For more than 40 years it has been conjectured that liquids with centrosymmetric interactions may be composed of icosahedral building blocks. But these proposed mobile, randomly orientated structures have remained experimentally inaccessible owing to the unavoidable averaging involved in scattering experiments, which can therefore determine only the isotropic radial distribution function. Here we overcome this limitation by capturing liquid fragments at a solid-liquid interface, and observing the scattering of totally internally reflected (evanescent) X-rays, which are sensitive only to the liquid structure at the interface. Using this method, we observe five-fold local symmetry in liquid lead adjacent to a silicon wall, and obtain an experimental portrait of the icosahedral fragments that are predicted to occur in all close-packed monatomic liquids. By shedding new light on local bond order in disordered structures such as liquids and glasses, these results should lead to a better microscopic understanding of melting, freezing and supercooling.
Both C/EBP and GCN4 are sequence-specific DNA binding proteins that control gene expression. Recent evidence implicates C/EBP as a transcriptional regulator of genes involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. The C/EBP protein binds avidly to the dyad symmetric sequence 5'-ATTGCGCAAT-3'; GCN4 regulates the transcription of genes that control amino acid biosynthesis in yeast, and binds avidly to the dyad symmetric sequence 5'-ATGA(G/C)TCAT-3'. Both C/EBP and GCN4 bind DNA via the same structural motif. This motif has been predicted to be bipartite, consisting of a dimerization interface termed the "leucine zipper" and a DNA contact surface termed the "basic region." Specificity of DNA binding has been predicted to be imparted by the basic region. As a test of this hypothesis, recombinant proteins were created wherein the basic regions and leucine zippers of GCN4 and C/EBP were reciprocally exchanged. In both of the recombinant polypeptides, DNA binding specificity is shown to track with the basic region.
Polarization of plasma membrane domains is an essential feature of secretory epithelial cells from exocrine glands. The surface of exocrine cells (a typical example is the acinar cell of the pancreas) is separated into an apical domain, where secretion occurs by exocytosis, and a basolateral domain, which senses variations of the internal milieu and is enriched with receptors for various hormones and secretagogues. It is unknown whether secretion is polarized in endocrine cells (except for thyroid follicular cells, which are organized into cavitary structures). To determine whether distinct plasma membrane domains exist in endocrine cells, we infected monolayer cultures of pancreatic endocrine cells with enveloped RNA viruses known to bud selectively from either the apical or basolateral domain in polarized epithelial cells. This asymmetrical budding is thought to reflect the polarized nature of the infected cells, as in non-polarized cells such as fibroblasts, the same viruses bud nonselectively from the entire cell surface. We show here that influenza virus and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) emerge asymmetrically from cultured pancreatic islet cells; this represents the first evidence for polarization of plasma membrane domains in pancreatic endocrine cells.
Living organisms construct various forms of laminated nanocomposites through directed nucleation and growth of inorganics at self-assembled organic templates at temperatures below 100&deg;C and in aqueous solutions. Recent research has focused on the use of functionalized organic surfaces to form continuous thin films of single-phase ceramics. Continuous thin films of mesostructured silicates have also been formed on hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces through a two-step mechanism. First, under acidic conditions, surfactant micellar structures are self-assembled at the solid/liquid interface, and second, inorganic precursors condense to form an inorganic-organic nanocomposite. Epitaxial coordination of adsorbed surfactant tubules is observed on mica and graphite substrates, whereas a random arrangement is observed on amorphous silica. The ability to process ceramic-organic nanocomposite films by these methods provides new technological opportunities.
The generation of membrane domains with distinct protein constituents is a hallmark of cell polarization. In epithelia, segregation of membrane proteins into apical and basolateral compartments is critical for cell morphology, tissue physiology and cell signalling. Drosophila proteins that confer apical membrane identity have been found, but the mechanisms that restrict these determinants to the apical cell surface are unknown. Here we show that a laterally localized protein is required for the apical confinement of polarity determinants. Mutations in Drosophila scribble (scrib), which encodes a multi-PDZ (PSD-95, Discs-large and ZO-1) and leucine-rich-repeat protein, cause aberrant cell shapes and loss of the monolayer organization of embryonic epithelia. Scrib is localized to the epithelial septate junction, the analogue of the vertebrate tight junction, at the boundary of the apical and basolateral cell surfaces. Loss of scrib function results in the misdistribution of apical proteins and adherens junctions to the basolateral cell surface, but basolateral protein localization remains intact. These phenotypes can be accounted for by mislocalization of the apical determinant Crumbs. Our results show that the lateral domain of epithelia, particularly the septate junction, functions in restricting apical membrane identity and correctly placing adherens junctions.
Atomic force microscope images of Langmuir-Blodgett films of lead and manganese fatty acid salts show that these monolayers have long-range order and are oriented with respect to the mica substrate, although the lattice symmetries of the monolayers and substrate are dramatically different. The surface lattice of sequentially thicker films evolves toward the bulk structure while retaining the substrate alignment. This behavior is in distinct contrast to films of cadmium fatty acid salts on mica, or all films on amorphous silicon oxide, in which the monolayer structure is disordered and a three-layer-thick film displays the bulk structure.
Theoretical work on the magnetohydrodynamics of the earth's liquid core indicates (a) that horizontal variations in the properties of the core-mantle interface that would escape detection by modern seismological methods might nevertheless produce measurable geomagnetic effects; (b) that the rate of drift, relative to the earth's surface, of nonaxisymmetric features of the main geomagnetic field might be much faster than the average zonal speed of hydrodynamic motion of core material relative to the surrounding mantle; and (c) why magnetic astronomical bodies usually rotate. Among the consequences of (a) and (b) are the possibilities that (i) the shortest interval of time that can be resolved in paleomagnetic studies of the geocentric axial dipole component of the earth's magnetic field might be very much longer than the value often assumed by many paleomagnetic workers, (ii) reversals in sign of the geomagnetic dipole might be expected to show some degree of correlation with processes due to motions in the mantle (for example, tectonic activity, polar wandering), and (iii) variations in the length of the day that have hitherto been tentatively attributed to core motions may be due to some other cause.
Monolayers formed at the interface between air and water can be seen with fluorescence microscopy. This allows the phase behavior of these monolayers to be determined by direct observation and opens up the possibility of following the kinetics of phase transformations in two-dimensional systems. Some unexpected morphologies have been discovered that provide information about the nature of monolayer phases and have connections to pattern formation in other systems.
The tip-surface region of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) emits light when the energy of the tunneling electrons is sufficient to excite luminescent processes. These processes provide access to dynamic aspects of the local electronic structure that are not directly amenable to conventional STM experiments. From monolayer films of carbon-60 fullerenes on gold(110) surfaces, intense emission is observed when the STM tip is placed above an individual molecule. The diameter of this emission spot associated with carbon-60 is approximately 4 angstroms. These results demonstrate the highest spatial resolution of light emission to date with a scanning probe technique.
Nanoparticles can be used as the building blocks for materials such as supracrystals or ionic liquids. However, they lack the ability to bond along specific directions as atoms and molecules do. We report a simple method to place target molecules specifically at two diametrically opposed positions in the molecular coating of metal nanoparticles. The approach is based on the functionalization of the polar singularities that must form when a curved surface is coated with ordered monolayers, such as a phase-separated mixture of ligands. The molecules placed at these polar defects have been used as chemical handles to form nanoparticle chains that in turn can generate self-standing films.
Natriuretic peptides (NPs) are vasoactive cyclic-peptide hormones important in blood pressure regulation through interaction with natriuretic cell-surface receptors. We report the hormone-binding thermodynamics and crystal structures at 2.9 and 2.0 angstroms, respectively, of the extracellular domain of the unliganded human NP receptor (NPR-C) and its complex with CNP, a 22-amino acid NP. A single CNP molecule is bound in the interface of an NPR-C dimer, resulting in asymmetric interactions between the hormone and the symmetrically related receptors. Hormone binding induces a 20 angstrom closure between the membrane-proximal domains of the dimer. In each monomer, the opening of an interdomain cleft, which is tethered together by a linker peptide acting as a molecular spring, is likely a conserved allosteric trigger for intracellular signaling by the natriuretic receptor family.
There is a difference between adhesion at the molecular level and adhesion in engineering. There is no doubt that molecules of solid materials stick together and can be separated mechanically. The problem is explaining the connection between molecular attractions and mechanical measurements. False ideas such as keying and gluing require critical assessment because they confuse molecules and mechanics. Mechanisms such as adhesive hysteresis, stringing, and clustering deserve evaluation. A rational theory of these phenomena should be based on the theoretical concept of reversible work of adhesion and on the measured quantity of adhesive energy, which includes the extra energy required to restructure the interface as surfaces move.
The rate constant of the electron-transfer reaction between a gold electrode and an electroactive ferrocene group has been measured at a structurally well-defined metal-electrolyte interface at temperatures from 1 degrees to 47 degrees C and reaction free energies from -1.0 to +0.8 electron volts (eV). The ferrocene group was positioned a fixed distance from the gold surface by the self-assembly of a mixed thiol monolayer of (eta(5)C(5)H(5))Fe(eta(5)C(5)H(4))CO(2)(CH(2))(16)SH and CH(3)(CH(2))(15)SH. Rate constants from 1 per second (s(-1)) to 2 x 10(4) s(-1) in 1 molar HClO(4) are reasonably fit with a reorganization energy of 0.85 eV and a prefactor for electron tunneling of 7 x 10(4) s(-1) eV(-1). Such self-assembled monolayers can be used to systematically probe the dependence of electron-transfer rates on distance, medium, and spacer structure, and to provide an empirical basis for the construction of interfacial devices such as sensors and transducers that utilize macroscopically directional electron-transfer reactions.
Structure sizes of approximately 180 nm are now standard in microelectronics, and state-of-the-art fabrication techniques can reduce these to just a few tens of nanometres. But at these length scales, the strain induced at interfaces can locally distort the crystal lattice, which may in turn affect device performance in an unpredictable way. A means of non-destructively characterizing such strain fields with high spatial resolution and sensitivity is therefore highly desirable. One approach is to use Raman spectroscopy, but this is limited by the intrinsic approximately 0.5-microm resolution limit of visible light probes. Techniques based on electron-beam diffraction can achieve the desired nanometre-scale resolution. But either they require complex sample preparation procedures (which may alter the original strain field) or they are sensitive to distortional (but not dilational) strain within only the top few tens of nanometres of the sample surface. X-rays, on the other hand, have a much greater penetration depth, but have not hitherto achieved strain analysis with sub-micrometre resolution. Here we describe a magnifying diffraction imaging procedure for X-rays which achieves a spatial resolution of 100nm in one dimension and a sensitivity of 10(-4) for relative lattice variations. We demonstrate the suitability of this procedure for strain analysis by measuring the strain depth profiles beneath oxidized lines on silicon crystals.
C/EBP is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein that regulates gene expression in certain mammalian cells. The region of the C/EBP polypeptide required for specific recognition of DNA is related in amino acid sequence to other regulatory proteins, including the Fos and Jun transforming proteins. It has been proposed that these proteins bind DNA via a bipartite structural motif, consisting of a dimerization interface termed the "leucine zipper" and a DNA contact surface termed the "basic region." An evaluation of the properties of conserved amino acids within the basic region of 11 deduced protein sequences, coupled with the observation that they are located at an invariant distance from the leucine zipper, has led to the formulation of a "scissors-grip" model for DNA binding. The architectural features of this model are well suited for interaction with directly abutted, dyadsymmetric DNA sequences. Data supportive of the model were obtained with chemical probes of protein: DNA complexes.
In this work, the charge dynamics characteristics of injection, transport and decay in porous and non-porous polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) film electrets were investigated by means of corona charging, isothermal and thermal stimulating surface-potential decay measurements. The results showed that the initial surface potential, whether positively or negatively charging, is much higher in non-porous PTFE than in porous PTFE. For porous film the value of initial surface potentials increases with increase of film thickness. Higher charging temperature can remarkably improve charge stability. The charge dynamics are correlated to materials microstructure according to their scanning electron micrographs. For non-porous PTFE films, polarizability change of C-F bonds is the main origin of electret charges; but for porous PTFE film a large number of bulk and interface type traps are expected because of the greater area of interface and higher crystallinity.
Depending on the wind regime, sand dunes exhibit linear, crescent-shaped or star-like forms resulting from the interaction between dune morphology and sand transport. Small-scale dunes form by destabilization of the sand bed with a wavelength (a few tens of metres) determined by the sand transport saturation length. The mechanisms controlling the formation of giant dunes, and in particular accounting for their typical time and length scales, have remained unknown. Using a combination of field measurements and aerodynamic calculations, we show here that the growth of aeolian giant dunes, ascribed to the nonlinear interaction between small-scale superimposed dunes, is limited by the confinement of the flow within the atmospheric boundary layer. Aeolian giant dunes and river dunes form by similar processes, with the thermal inversion layer that caps the convective boundary layer in the atmosphere acting analogously to the water surface in rivers. In both cases, the bed topography excites surface waves on the interface that in turn modify the near-bed flow velocity. This mechanism is a stabilizing process that prevents the scale of the pattern from coarsening beyond the resonant condition. Our results can explain the mean spacing of aeolian giant dunes ranging from 300 m in coastal terrestrial deserts to 3.5 km. We propose that our findings could serve as a starting point for the modelling of long-term evolution of desert landscapes under specific wind regimes.
Surface tension measurements reveal surface freezing in liquid n-alkanes. A solid monolayer of molecules is found to exist up to 30 degrees C above the bulk freezing point. This surface phase exists only for carbon numbers 14 n </= 50. The measured carbon number and temperature dependence of the surface tension is interpreted within a simple thermodynamical model based on known bulk latent heat data and surface energy considerations. The vanishing of the surface phase for n </= 14 is a possible transition from surface freezing to surface melting behavior.
Results from the San Francisco Bay area seismic imaging experiment (BASIX) reveal the presence of a prominent lower crustal reflector at a depth of approximately 15 kilometers beneath San Francisco and San Pablo bays. Velocity analyses indicate that this reflector marks the base of Franciscan assemblage rocks and the top of a mafic lower crust. Because this compositional contrast would imply a strong rheological contrast, this interface may correspond to a lower crustal detachment surface. If so, it may represent a subhorizontal segment of the North America and Pacific plate boundary proposed by earlier thermo-mechanical and geological models.
Differences in the two-dimensional packing arrangements of racemic and enantiomeric crystalline self-assemblies on the water surface of amphiphilic activated analogs of lysine and glutamic acid have been used to prepare oligopeptides of homochiral sequence and oligopeptides of single handedness from chiral nonracemic mixtures. The crystalline structures on the water surface were determined by grazing incidence x-ray diffraction and the diastereomeric composition of the oligopeptides by matrix-assisted laser desorption time-of-flight mass spectrometry with enantio-labeling. These results suggest that reactivity of ordered clusters at interfaces might have played a role in the generation of early homochiral biopolymers.
A measurement and interpretation on a molecular level of a phase transition in an ordered Langmuir monolayer is reported. The diagram of surface pressure (pi) versus molecular area of a monolayer of chiral (S)-[CF(3)-(CF(2))(9)-(CH(2))(2)-OCO-CH(2)-CH (NH(3)(+))CO(2)(-)] over water shows a change in slope at about pi(s)= 25 millinewtons per meter. Grazing-incidence x-ray diffraction and specular reflectivity measurements indicate a solid-solid phase transition at pi(s). The diffraction pattren at low pressures reveals two diffraction peaks of equal intensities, with lattice spacings d of 5.11 and 5.00 angstroms; these coalesce for pi >/=pi(s). Structural models that fit the diffraction data show that at pi> pi(s) the molecules pack in a two-dimensional crystal with the molecules aligned vertically. At pi < pi(s) there is a molecular tilt of 16 degrees +/- 7 degrees . Independent x-ray reflectivity data yield a tilt of 26 degrees +/- 7 degrees . Concomitant with the tilt, the diffraction data indicate a transition from a hexagonal to a distorted-hexagonal lattice. The hexagonal arrangement is favored because the -(CF(2))(9)CF(3) moiety adopts a helical conformation. Compression to 70 millinewtons per meter yields a unit cell with increased crystallinity and a coherence length exceeding 1000 angstroms.
In the crystal structure of the membrane-embedded rotor ring of the sodium ion-translocating adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) synthase of Ilyobacter tartaricus at 2.4 angstrom resolution, 11 c subunits are assembled into an hourglass-shaped cylinder with 11-fold symmetry. Sodium ions are bound in a locked conformation close to the outer surface of the cylinder near the middle of the membrane. The structure supports an ion-translocation mechanism in the intact ATP synthase in which the binding site converts from the locked conformation into one that opens toward subunit a as the rotor ring moves through the subunit a/c interface.
Sunlight is directly converted to chemical energy in hydrogen-evolving photoelectrochemical cells with semiconductor electrodes. Their Gibbs free energy efficiency of solar-to-hydrogen conversion, 13.3 percent, exceeds the solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency of green plants and approaches the solar-to-electrical conversion efficiency of the best p-n junction cells. In hydrogen-evolving photoelectrodes, electron-hole pairs photogenerated in the semiconductor are separated at electrical microcontacts between the semiconductor and group VIII metal catalyst islands. Conversion is efficient when the island diameters are small relative to the wave-lengths of sunlight exciting the semiconductor; when the island spacings are smaller than the diffusion length of electrons at the semiconductor surface; when the height of the potential energy barriers that separate the photogenerated electrons from holes at the semiconductor surface is raised by hydrogen alloying of the islands; when radiationless recombination of electron-hole pairs at the semiconductor-solution interface between the islands is suppressed by controlling the semiconductor surface chemistry; and when the semiconductor has an appropriate band gap (1.0 to 1.8 electron volts) for efficient solar conversion.
Comparison of amino acid sequences from human epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and avian erythroblastosis virus erbB oncogene product suggests that v-erbB represents a truncated avian EGF receptor gene product. Although both proteins are transmembrane tyrosine kinases, the v-erbB protein lacks most of the extracellular ligand-binding domain and a 32-amino acid cytoplasmic sequence present in the human EGF receptor. To test the validity of the proposed origin of v-erbB and to investigate the functional significance of the deleted extracellular sequences, a chimeric gene encoding the extracellular and the transmembrane domain of the human EGF receptor joined to sequences coding for the cytoplasmic domain of the avian erbB oncogene product was constructed. When expressed in Rat1 fibroblasts, this reconstituted gene product (HER-erbB) was transported to the cell surface and bound EGF. Its autophosphorylation activity was stimulated by interaction with the ligand. Expression of the HER-erbB chimera led to anchorage-independent cell growth in soft agar and EGF-induced focus formation in Rat1 monolayers. Thus, it appears that v-erbB protein sequences in the chimeric receptor retain their transforming activity under the influence of the human extracellular EGF-binding domain.
The molecular architecture of-and biochemical processes within--cell membranes play important roles in all living organisms, with many drugs and infectious disease agents targeting membranes. Experimental studies of biochemical reactions on membrane surfaces are challenging, as they require a membrane environment that is fluid (like cell membranes) but nevertheless allows for the efficient detection and characterization of molecular interactions. One approach uses lipid membranes supported on solid substrates such as silica or polymers: although the membrane is trapped near the solid interface, it retains natural fluidity and biological functionality and can be implanted with membrane proteins for functional studies. But the detection of molecular interactions involving membrane-bound species generally requires elaborate techniques, such as surface plasmon resonance or total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy. Here we demonstrate that colloidal phase transitions of membrane-coated silica beads provide a simple and label-free method for monitoring molecular interactions on lipid membrane surfaces. By adjusting the lipid membrane composition and hence the pair interaction potential between the membrane-supporting silica beads, we poise our system near a phase transition so that small perturbations on the membrane surface induce dramatic changes in the macroscopic organization of the colloid. We expect that this approach, used here to probe with high sensitivity protein binding events at membrane surfaces, can be applied to study a broad range of cell membrane processes.
Scanning tunneling microscopy is based on the flow of an electrical current and thus cannot be used to directly image insulating material. It has been found, however, that a very thin film of water (about one monolayer) adsorbed to a surface exhibits a surprisingly high conductivity that is sufficient to allow scanning tunneling microscope imaging at currents below 1 picoampere. Hydrophilic insulators, such as glass and mica, can thus be imaged in humid air. The same is true for biological specimens deposited on such surfaces, as demonstrated by the scanning tunneling microscope imaging of plasmid DNA on mica.
In many polymer-metal systems, chemical bonds are formed that involve metal-oxygen-carbon complexes. Infrared and Mossbauer spectroscopic studies indicate that carboxylate groups play an important role in some systems. The oxygen sources may be the polymer, the oxygen present in the oxide on the metal surface, or atmospheric oxygen. Diffusion of metal ions from the substrate into the polymer interphase may occur in some systems that are cured at elevated temperatures. It is unclear whether a similar, less extensive diffusion occurs over long time periods in systems maintained at room temperature. The interfacial region is dynamic, and chemical changes occur with aging at room temperature. Positron annihilation spectroscopy may have application to characterizing the voids at the metal-polymer interface.
Since the original theoretical insights of Bardeen and Shockley about 40 years ago, the progress of solid-state electronics has been paced by the ability to control chemical bonding structures, particularly at surfaces and interfaces. The functioning of solid-state devices depends on being able to produce interfacial structures with a minimum number of defective chemical bonds. A series of chemical discoveries and insights, on germanium (Ge) and silicon (Si) surfaces and gallium arsenide-aluminum arsenide (GaAs-AlAs) interfaces, has brought the electronics revolution to its present state of development. In most cases, the technological consequences of these accidental discoveries could not be accurately foreseen. With that caution, the technological prognosis for some current research is also reviewed.
The converse piezoelectric effect, in which an electric field applied across a piezoelectric material induces a stress in that material, has spurred many recent developments in mass measurement techniques. These methods commonly rely on the changes in the vibrational resonant frequency of piezoelectric quartz oscillators that result from changes in mass on the surface of the oscillator. The dependence of frequency on mass has been exploited extensively for mass measurements in vacuum or gas phase, for example, thickness monitors for thin-film preparation and sensors for chemical agents. Advances in piezoelectric methodology in the last decade now allow dynamic measurements of minute mass changes (< 10(-9) grams per square centimeter) at surfaces, thin films, and electrode interfaces in liquid media as well. Mass measurements associated with a diverse collection of interfacial processes can be readily performed, including chemical and biological sensors, reactions catalyzed by enzymes immobilized on surfaces, electron transfer at and ion exchange in thin polymer films, and doping reactions of conducting polymers.
At interfaces of metal oxide and water, partially hydrated or "wet-electron" states represent the lowest energy pathway for electron transfer. We studied the photoinduced electron transfer at the H2O/TiO2(110) interface by means of time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy and electronic structure theory. At approximately 1-monolayer coverage of water on partially hydroxylated TiO2 surfaces, we found an unoccupied electronic state 2.4 electron volts above the Fermi level. Density functional theory shows this to be a wet-electron state analogous to that reported in water clusters and which is distinct from hydrated electrons observed on water-covered metal surfaces. The decay of electrons from the wet-electron state to the conduction band of TiO2 occurs in </=15 femtoseconds.
The interface between antibody and antigen is often depicted as a lock and key, suggesting that an antibody surface can accommodate only one antigen. Here, we describe an antibody with an antigen binding site that binds two distinct proteins with high affinity. We isolated a variant of Herceptin, a therapeutic monoclonal antibody that binds the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), on the basis of its ability to simultaneously interact with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Crystallographic and mutagenesis studies revealed that distinct amino acids of this antibody, called bH1, engage HER2 and VEGF energetically, but there is extensive overlap between the antibody surface areas contacting the two antigens. An affinity-improved version of bH1 inhibits both HER2- and VEGF-mediated cell proliferation in vitro and tumor progression in mouse models. Such "two-in-one" antibodies challenge the monoclonal antibody paradigm of one binding site, one antigen. They could also provide new opportunities for antibody-based therapy.
We have developed a transparent organic polymeric material that can repeatedly mend or "re-mend" itself under mild conditions. The material is a tough solid at room temperature and below with mechanical properties equaling those of commercial epoxy resins. At temperatures above 120 degrees C, approximately 30% (as determined by solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy) of "intermonomer" linkages disconnect but then reconnect upon cooling, This process is fully reversible and can be used to restore a fractured part of the polymer multiple times, and it does not require additional ingredients such as a catalyst, additional monomer, or special surface treatment of the fractured interface.
Lipases are hydrolytic enzymes which break down triacylglycerides into free fatty acids and glycerols. They have been classified as serine hydrolases owing to their inhibition by diethyl p-nitrophenyl phosphate. Lipase activity is greatly increased at the lipid-water interface, a phenomenon known as interfacial activation. X-ray analysis has revealed the atomic structures of two triacylglycerol lipases, unrelated in sequence: the human pancreatic lipase (hPL)4, and an enzyme isolated from the fungus Rhizomucor (formerly Mucor) miehei (RmL). In both enzymes the active centres contain structurally analogous Asp-His-Ser triads (characteristic of serine proteinases), which are buried completely beneath a short helical segment, or 'lid'. Here we present the crystal structure (at 3 A resolution) of a complex of R. miehei lipase with n-hexylphosphonate ethyl ester in which the enzyme's active site is exposed by the movement of the helical lid. This movement also increases the nonpolarity of the surface surrounding the catalytic site. We propose that the structure of the enzyme in this complex is equivalent to the activated state generated by the oil-water interface.
Auxin is a pivotal plant hormone that controls many aspects of plant growth and development. Perceived by a small family of F-box proteins including transport inhibitor response 1 (TIR1), auxin regulates gene expression by promoting SCF ubiquitin-ligase-catalysed degradation of the Aux/IAA transcription repressors, but how the TIR1 F-box protein senses and becomes activated by auxin remains unclear. Here we present the crystal structures of the Arabidopsis TIR1-ASK1 complex, free and in complexes with three different auxin compounds and an Aux/IAA substrate peptide. These structures show that the leucine-rich repeat domain of TIR1 contains an unexpected inositol hexakisphosphate co-factor and recognizes auxin and the Aux/IAA polypeptide substrate through a single surface pocket. Anchored to the base of the TIR1 pocket, auxin binds to a partially promiscuous site, which can also accommodate various auxin analogues. Docked on top of auxin, the Aux/IAA substrate peptide occupies the rest of the TIR1 pocket and completely encloses the hormone-binding site. By filling in a hydrophobic cavity at the protein interface, auxin enhances the TIR1-substrate interactions by acting as a 'molecular glue'. Our results establish the first structural model of a plant hormone receptor.
The dynamics of two-dimensional small-polaron formation at ultrathin alkane layers on a silver(111) surface have been studied with femtosecond time- and angle-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy. Optical excitation creates interfacial electrons in quasi-free states for motion parallel to the interface. These initially delocalized electrons self-trap as small polarons in a localized state within a few hundred femtoseconds. The localized electrons then decay back to the metal within picoseconds by tunneling through the adlayer potential barrier. The energy dependence of the self-trapping rate has been measured and modeled with a theory analogous to electron transfer theory. This analysis determines the inter- and intramolecular vibrational modes of the overlayer responsible for self-trapping as well as the relaxation energy of the overlayer molecular lattice. These results for a model interface contribute to the fundamental picture of electron behavior in weakly bonded solids and can lead to better understanding of carrier dynamics in many different systems, including organic light-emitting diodes.
As silicon is the basis of conventional electronics, so strontium titanate (SrTiO(3)) is the foundation of the emerging field of oxide electronics. SrTiO(3) is the preferred template for the creation of exotic, two-dimensional (2D) phases of electron matter at oxide interfaces that have metal-insulator transitions, superconductivity or large negative magnetoresistance. However, the physical nature of the electronic structure underlying these 2D electron gases (2DEGs), which is crucial to understanding their remarkable properties, remains elusive. Here we show, using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, that there is a highly metallic universal 2DEG at the vacuum-cleaved surface of SrTiO(3) (including the non-doped insulating material) independently of bulk carrier densities over more than seven decades. This 2DEG is confined within a region of about five unit cells and has a sheet carrier density of ~0.33 electrons per square lattice parameter. The electronic structure consists of multiple subbands of heavy and light electrons. The similarity of this 2DEG to those reported in SrTiO(3)-based heterostructures and field-effect transistors suggests that different forms of electron confinement at the surface of SrTiO(3) lead to essentially the same 2DEG. Our discovery provides a model system for the study of the electronic structure of 2DEGs in SrTiO(3)-based devices and a novel means of generating 2DEGs at the surfaces of transition-metal oxides.
An extremely small, conically shaped Pt microelectrode tip (with a radius of 30 nanometers) and the precise positioning capabilities of the scanning electrochemical microscope were used to penetrate a thin (200 nanometers) polymer film and obtain directly the standard potential and kinetic parameters of an electrode reaction within the film. The thickness of the film was determined while it was immersed in and swollen by an electrolyte solution. The film studied was the perfluorosulfonate Nafion containing Os(bpy)(3)(2+) (bpy, 2,2'-bipyridine) cast on an indium tin oxide surface. The steady-state response at the ultramicroelectrode allowed direct determination of the rate constant for heterogeneous electron transfer K(o) and the diffusion coefficient D without complications caused by transport in the liquid phase, charge exchange at the liquid-polymer interface, and resistive drop.
Coordinatively unsaturated ferrous (CUF) sites confined in nanosized matrices are active centers in a wide range of enzyme and homogeneous catalytic reactions. Preparation of the analogous active sites at supported catalysts is of great importance in heterogeneous catalysis but remains a challenge. On the basis of surface science measurements and density functional calculations, we show that the interface confinement effect can be used to stabilize the CUF sites by taking advantage of strong adhesion between ferrous oxides and metal substrates. The interface-confined CUF sites together with the metal supports are active for dioxygen activation, producing reactive dissociated oxygen atoms. We show that the structural ensemble was highly efficient for carbon monoxide oxidation at low temperature under typical operating conditions of a proton-exchange membrane fuel cell.
It has been assumed that Himalayan earthquakes are driven by the release of compressional strain accumulating close to the Greater Himalaya. However, elastic models of the Indo-Asian collision using recently imaged subsurface interface geometries suggest that a substantial fraction of the southernmost 500 kilometres of the Tibetan plateau participates in driving great ruptures. We show here that this Tibetan reservoir of elastic strain energy is drained in proportion to Himalayan rupture length, and that the consequent growth of slip and magnitude with rupture area, when compared to data from recent earthquakes, can be used to infer a approximately 500-year renewal time for these events. The elastic models also illuminate two puzzling features of plate boundary seismicity: how great earthquakes can re-rupture regions that have already ruptured in recent smaller earthquakes and how mega-earthquakes with greater than 20 metres slip may occur at millennia-long intervals, driven by residual strain following many centuries of smaller earthquakes.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play key roles in activating immune responses during infection. The human TLR3 ectodomain structure at 2.1 angstroms reveals a large horseshoe-shaped solenoid assembled from 23 leucine-rich repeats (LRRs). Asparagines conserved in the 24-residue LRR motif contribute extensive hydrogen-bonding networks for solenoid stabilization. TLR3 is largely masked by carbohydrate, but one face is glycosylation-free, which suggests its potential role in ligand binding and oligomerization. Highly conserved surface residues and a TLR3-specific LRR insertion form a homodimer interface in the crystal, whereas two patches of positively charged residues and a second insertion would provide an appropriate binding site for double-stranded RNA.
A superconducting point contact is used to determine the spin polarization at the Fermi energy of several metals. Because the process of supercurrent conversion at a superconductor-metal interface (Andreev reflection) is limited by the minority spin population near the Fermi surface, the differential conductance of the point contact can reveal the spin polarization of the metal. This technique has been applied to a variety of metals where the spin polarization ranges from 35 to 90 percent: Ni0.8Fe0.2, Ni, Co, Fe, NiMnSb, La0.7Sr0.3MnO3, and CrO2.
Ribosomes crystallize on endoplasmic reticulum membranes in oocytes of the southern Italian lizard, Lacerta sicula, during winter. Electron crystallographic studies of the crystals have been made to elucidate the arrangement of the ribosomal subunits on the membrane surface. We have now obtained more extensive and better ordered crystals of the same habit, grown from chick embryo ribosomes, and report here on their native structure preserved by rapid freezing of the crystals in thin aqueous films. The three-dimensional map reveals new details of the protein and ribosomal RNA distribution within the ribosome. Most striking is a region of low density within the large subunit which extends from the subunit interface towards an area on the membrane-facing surface identified by others as the exit site of the nascent protein. This region of low density appears to delineate the path taken by the growing polypeptide through the ribosome to the external surface.
Near-atomic resolution images of a two-dimensional heteroepitaxial crystal composed of the relatively "functionally rich" chiral liquid crystal mesogen MDW 74 on graphite have been obtained by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). This work is aimed at developing an improved understanding of the commercially crucial phenomenon of liquid crystal alignment by studying well-characterized surfaces. Herein is reported molecular-level characterization of the surface underlying a ferroelectric liquid crystal in situ, a requisite starting point for understanding the liquid crystal-solid interface at the molecular level. The results are also important in the context of developing a model for the molecular. origins of the contrast observed in STM images of organic monolayers on conductor surfaces. The data and analysis provide strong evidence that neither frontier orbital alone (highest occupied or lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) is sufficient to describe the observed tunneling efficiency.
Surface plasmons are electromagnetic waves that can exist at metal interfaces because of coupling between light and free electrons. Restricted to travel along the interface, these waves can be channeled, concentrated, or otherwise manipulated by surface patterning. However, because surface roughness and other inhomogeneities have so far limited surface-plasmon propagation in real plasmonic devices, simple high-throughput methods are needed to fabricate high-quality patterned metals. We combined template stripping with precisely patterned silicon substrates to obtain ultrasmooth pure metal films with grooves, bumps, pyramids, ridges, and holes. Measured surface-plasmon-propagation lengths on the resulting surfaces approach theoretical values for perfectly flat films. With the use of our method, we demonstrated structures that exhibit Raman scattering enhancements above 10(7) for sensing applications and multilayer films for optical metamaterials.
Experiments conducted aboard Apollo 17 by astronaut Ronald E. Evans showed that in uncovered liquids convection driven by surface tension can occur at lower temperature gradients in low gravity (about 10-(8)g) than in 1g. In completely confined fluids (no liquid-gas interface) vibrations caused by spacecraft and astronaut movements increased the heat transfer considerably over the pure conduction case.
Nanoparticulate metals and semiconductors that have atomic arrangements at the interface of molecular clusters and "infinite" solid-state arrays of atoms have distinctive properties determined by the extent of confinement of highly delocalized valence electrons. At this interface, the total number of atoms and the geometrical disposition of each atom can be used to significantly modify the electronic and photonic response of the medium. In addition to teh novel inherent physical properties of the quantum-confined moieties, their "packaging" into nanocomposite bulk materials can be used to define the confinement surface states and environment, intercluster interactions, the quantum-confinement geometry, and the effective charge-carrier density of the bulk. Current approaches for generating nanostructures of conducting materials are briefly reviewed, especially the use of three-dimensional crystalline superlattices as hosts for quantum-confined semiconductor atom arrays (such as quantum wires and dots) with controlled inter-quantum-structure tunneling.
Chemical separations of many biomolecules and pharmaceuticals are limited by their electrostatic interaction with the surfaces of the separation medium. Mixed self-assembled monolayers of octadecyl and methyl chains organize into a dense, two-dimensionally cross-linked network over the chromatographic silica surface to reduce acid dissociation of the surface silanols. Molecular models predict that two-dimensional cross-linking is sterically possible for pure methylsiloxane monolayers, silicon-29 nuclear magnetic resonance measurements show that cross-linking predominates for mixed monolayers of primarily methylsiloxane, and chromatographic measurements confirm that electrostatic interactions are reduced when the monolayer is primarily methylsiloxane. Chromatographic separation of genetic variants of a highly charged protein, cytochrome c, demonstrates the promise of self-assembled monolayers in separations of biomolecules.
Metals dissolved in natural waters often become sorbed onto oxide or clay minerals, so that prediction of their chemical behaviour and transport properties requires knowledge of the structure and bonding of metal species at the solid/water interface. For many sorption systems, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) can be used to determine the identity and number of nearest-neighbour atoms and interatomic distances in aqueous complexes on solid surfaces, and thus to identify the dominant type of surface complex and the partitioning mechanism. Here we describe an XAS study of divalent cobalt (Co(II)) complexes sorbed on three different solids, gamma-Al2O3, rutile (TiO2) and kaolinite (Al2Si2O5(OH)4). We find direct evidence for the presence of multinuclear sorption complexes at surface coverages below one monolayer of Co(II) atoms. Our spectroscopic data reveal distinct differences in the number of coordinating atoms and interatomic distances in the surface complexes formed on each of the solids at the same sorption density. These results suggest that different oxide and clay surfaces influence the structure and properties of aqueous surface complexes, and therefore must be accounted for in models of metal-ion sorption.
Surface tension gives gas bubbles their perfect spherical shape by minimizing the surface area for a given volume. Here we show that gas bubbles and liquid drops can exist in stable, non-spherical shapes if the surface is covered, or 'armoured', with a close-packed monolayer of particles. When two spherical armoured bubbles are fused, jamming of the particles on the interface supports the unequal stresses that are necessary to stabilize a non-spherical shape.
Creating a robust synthetic surface that repels various liquids would have broad technological implications for areas ranging from biomedical devices and fuel transport to architecture but has proved extremely challenging. Inspirations from natural nonwetting structures, particularly the leaves of the lotus, have led to the development of liquid-repellent microtextured surfaces that rely on the formation of a stable air-liquid interface. Despite over a decade of intense research, these surfaces are, however, still plagued with problems that restrict their practical applications: limited oleophobicity with high contact angle hysteresis, failure under pressure and upon physical damage, inability to self-heal and high production cost. To address these challenges, here we report a strategy to create self-healing, slippery liquid-infused porous surface(s) (SLIPS) with exceptional liquid- and ice-repellency, pressure stability and enhanced optical transparency. Our approach-inspired by Nepenthes pitcher plants-is conceptually different from the lotus effect, because we use nano/microstructured substrates to lock in place the infused lubricating fluid. We define the requirements for which the lubricant forms a stable, defect-free and inert 'slippery' interface. This surface outperforms its natural counterparts and state-of-the-art synthetic liquid-repellent surfaces in its capability to repel various simple and complex liquids (water, hydrocarbons, crude oil and blood), maintain low contact angle hysteresis (<2.5deg), quickly restore liquid-repellency after physical damage (within 0.1-1 s), resist ice adhesion, and function at high pressures (up to about 680 atm). We show that these properties are insensitive to the precise geometry of the underlying substrate, making our approach applicable to various inexpensive, low-surface-energy structured materials (such as porous Teflon membrane). We envision that these slippery surfaces will be useful in fluid handling and transportation, optical sensing, medicine, and as self-cleaning and anti-fouling materials operating in extreme environments.
Optical probes of heterogeneous catalytic reactions can be valuable tools for optimization and process control because they can operate under realistic conditions, but often probes lack sensitivity. We have developed a plasmonic sensing method for such reactions based on arrays of nanofabricated gold disks, covered by a thin (approximately 10 nanometer) coating (catalyst support) on which the catalyst nanoparticles are deposited. The sensing particles monitor changes in surface coverage of reactants during catalytic reaction through peak shifts in the optical extinction spectrum. Sensitivities to below 10(-3) monolayers are estimated. The capacity of the method is demonstrated for three catalytic reactions, CO and H2 oxidation on Pt, and NO(x) conversion to N2 on Pt/BaO.
One challenge in the production of nanometer-sized objects with given properties is to control their growth at a macroscopic scale in situ and in real time. A dedicated ultrahigh-vacuum grazing-incidence small-angle x-ray scattering setup has been developed, yielding high sensitivity and dynamics. Its capabilities to derive the average particle shape and size and the film growth mode and ordering and to probe both surfaces and buried interfaces are illustrated for two prototypical cases: the model catalyst Pd/MgO(100) and the self-organized Co/Au(111) system. A wide range of technologically important systems can potentially be investigated in various gaseous environments.
Probing the structure of material layers just a few nanometres thick requires analytical techniques with high depth sensitivity. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) provides one such method, but obtaining vertically resolved structural information from the raw data is not straightforward. There are several XPS depth-profiling methods, including ion etching, angle-resolved XPS (ref. 2) and Tougaard's approach, but all suffer various limitations. Here we report a simple, non-destructive XPS depth-profiling method that yields accurate depth information with nanometre resolution. We demonstrate the technique using self-assembled multilayers on gold surfaces; the former contain 'marker' monolayers that have been inserted at predetermined depths. A controllable potential gradient is established vertically through the sample by charging the surface of the dielectric overlayer with an electron flood gun. The local potential is probed by measuring XPS line shifts, which correlate directly with the vertical position of atoms. We term the method 'controlled surface charging' and expect it to be generally applicable to a large variety of mesoscopic heterostructures.
Alkanes at the air-sea interface were analyzed in 118 surface samples collected at five different intervals over a 12-month period from Timbalier Bay (Louisiana), ogfshore Louiisiana, and offshore Florida. The alkanes were characterized by gas chromatography and mass spectrometry. Unexpectedly, methyl branched alkanes ranging in chain length froin C(15) to C(35) and cycloalkanes were frequently the predominant components. This suggests that the alkanes are produced by natural biological sources as well as human activities.
