Herpesviruses specify new glycoproteins that bind to cell membranes and also appear in the envelope of the virion. Incubation of purified smooth membranes from infected cells with antiviral antibody results in an increase in the density of the membranes as determined by flotation in sucrose density gradients. The magnitude of this increase depends on the amount of antibody used; densities as high as 1.16 grams per cubic centimeter have been obtained (the density of the untreated membranes is 1.08 grams per cubic centimeter). Antiviral antibody does not increase the density of uninfected cell membranes nor do saline or normal rabbit serum change the densities of infected or uninfected cell mnembranes. Viral antigens-presumably the glycoproteins specified by the virus-are probably on the surface of the infected cell membranes and bind to them strongly enough to withstand the hydrodynamic forces applied to them in the sucrose gradient.
There is much interest in developing vaccines against acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), which is caused by a retrovirus termed human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Isolates of this virus include human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III), lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV), and AIDS-associated retrovirus (ARV). Several approaches towards the development of an AIDS vaccine result in the production of antibodies in subprimates. These methods involve the use of: antigens isolated from the AIDS virus; viral antigens expressed by transfected cells or by recombinant vaccinia viruses; and particular synthetic peptides of viral antigens. Because T-cell-mediated immunity (in addition to antibodies) is involved in resistance to diseases and death caused by various enveloped viruses, we sought to determine whether potential AIDS vaccines can induce T-cell responses against the AIDS virus. Here we report that immunization of non-human primates, Macaca fascicularis (macaques), with recombinant vaccinia viruses that express LAV envelope glycoproteins gp41 and gp110 results not only in the production of antibodies against the LAV envelope antigens but also in the generation of T-cells that proliferate and produce the lymphokine interleukin-2 (IL-2), in response to stimulation with purified LAV. We believe this is the first report demonstrating T-cell-mediated immunity to the virus that causes AIDS.
A titer for homologous viral neutralization activity (greater than 1:19,683) was observed after a 3.5-year immunization period with an octameric, branching peptide representing the principal neutralizing determinant (PND) of the human immunodeficiency virus-1IIIB envelope protein. Booster immunizations elicited persistent and potent antibodies in guinea pigs, exceeding responses produced by a conventional bovine serum albumin conjugate by 100-fold. Peptide length, central presentation of a conserved sequence, and inclusion of an upstream sequence contributed to immunogenicity. Titers (greater than 1:1,000) of heterotypic neutralizing antibodies also developed. Octameric PND peptides are a promising approach for an acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) vaccine.
Both interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) produced by T helper 1 (TH1) lymphocytes and interleukin-4 (IL-4) produced by TH2 lymphocytes were reduced in either bulk circulating mononuclear cells or mitogen-induced CD4+ T cell clones from the peripheral blood of individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). There was a preferential reduction in clones producing IL-4 and IL-5 in the advanced phases of infection. However, enhanced proportions of CD4+ T cell clones producing both TH1-type and TH2-type cytokines (TH0 clones) were generated from either skin-infiltrating T cells that had been activated in vivo or peripheral blood T cells stimulated by antigen in vitro when cells were isolated from HIV-infected individuals. All TH2 and most TH0 clones supported viral replication, although viral replication was not detected in any of the TH1 clones infected in vitro with HIV. These results suggest that HIV (i) does not induce a definite TH1 to TH2 switch, but can favor a shift to the TH0 phenotype in response to recall antigens, and (ii) preferentially replicates in CD4+ T cells producing TH2-type cytokines (TH2 and TH0).
Molecules of the structure ppp(A2'p)2A containing a 2' leads to 5' phosphodiester bond, commonly abbreviated as 2-5A, are synthesized in interferon-treated virally-infected cells and have been implicated in several systems as contributing to interferon's antiviral activity. The 2-5A binds to and subsequently activates an endogenous endonuclease, ultimately resulting in degradation of RNA. We have been interested in the use of 2-5A analogues to achieve antiviral activity without the use of interferon. For this approach to be successful, analogues must be synthesized with an increased stability (native 2-5A is rapidly degraded by cellular phosphodiesterases) and with increased ability to enter intact cells. Removal of the highly-negative charged 5' terminal phosphates from ppp(A2'p)2A results in formation of the 'core' species, (A2'p)2A, which should be able to penetrate intact cells more readily. While Kimchi et al. have shown that 2-5A core has an antimitogenic effect in mouse spleen lymphocytes and 3T3 fibroblasts, Williams and Kerr have reported lack of antiviral activity against Semliki Forest virus or encephalomyocarditis virus by exogenously-administered 2-5A core. We have previously determined that (xyloA2'p)2xyloA (abbreviated as xylo 2-5A core), the xyloadenosine analogue of the 5'-terminally dephosphorylated 2-5A core, is over 100 times more stable than the parent 2-5A core species. We now report that this xylo 2-5A core inhibits replication of herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2 in vitro, with greater than 100 times the activity of the parent 2-5A core. The mechanism of antiviral action of the 2-5A core analogue appears to involve a pathway different from that activated by the parent 5' triphosphorylated 2-5A species.
Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) types 1 and 2 encode their own ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) (EC 1.17.4.1) to convert ribonucleoside diphosphates into the corresponding deoxyribonucleotides. Like other iron-dependent RNRs, the viral enzyme is formed by the reversible association of two distinct homodimeric subunits. The carboxy terminus of the RNR small subunit (R2) is critical for subunit association and synthetic peptides containing these amino-acid sequences selectively inhibit the viral enzyme by preventing subunit association. Increasing evidence indicates that the HSV RNR is important for virulence and reactivation from latency. Previously, we reported on the design of HSV RNR inhibitors with enhanced inhibitory potency in vitro. We now report on BILD 1263, which to our knowledge is the first HSV RNR subunit-association inhibitor with antiviral activity in vivo. This compound suppresses the replication of HSV-1, HSV-2 and acyclovir-resistant HSV strains in cell culture, and also strongly potentiates the antiviral activity of acyclovir. Most importantly, its anti-herpetic activity is shown in a murine ocular model of HSV-1-induced keratitis, providing an example of potent nonsubstrate-based antiviral agents that prevent protein-protein interactions. The unique antiviral properties of BILD 1263 may lead to the design of new strategies to treat herpesvirus infections in humans.
Transcriptional activation of cytokines, such as type-I interferons (interferon (IFN)-alpha and IFN-beta), constitutes the first line of antiviral defence. Here we show that translational control is critical for induction of type-I IFN production. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking the translational repressors 4E-BP1 and 4E-BP2, the threshold for eliciting type-I IFN production is lowered. Consequently, replication of encephalomyocarditis virus, vesicular stomatitis virus, influenza virus and Sindbis virus is markedly suppressed. Furthermore, mice with both 4E- and 4E-BP2 genes (also known as Eif4ebp1 and Eif4ebp2, respectively) knocked out are resistant to vesicular stomatitis virus infection, and this correlates with an enhanced type-I IFN production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells and the expression of IFN-regulated genes in the lungs. The enhanced type-I IFN response in 4E-BP1-/- 4E-BP2-/- double knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts is caused by upregulation of interferon regulatory factor 7 (Irf7) messenger RNA translation. These findings highlight the role of 4E-BPs as negative regulators of type-I IFN production, via translational repression of Irf7 mRNA.
2'-Fluoro-5-methyl-l-beta-D-arabinosyluracil (FMAU) labeled with carbon-14 was used to image herpes simplex virus type 1-infected regions of rat brain by quantitative autoradiography. FMAU is a potent antiviral pyrimidine nucleoside which is selectively phosphorylated by virus-coded thymidine kinase. When the labeled FMAU was administered 6 hours before the rats were killed, the selective uptake and concentration of the drug and its metabolites by infected cells (defined by immunoperoxidase staining of viral antigens) allowed quantitative definition and mapping of HSV-1-infected structures in autoradiograms of brain sections. These results show that quantitative autoradiography can be used to characterize the local metabolism of antiviral drugs by infected cells in vivo. They also suggest that the selective uptake of drugs that exploit viral thymidine kinase for their antiviral effect can, by appropriate labeling, be used in conjunction  with clinical neuroimaging techniques to define infected regions of human brain, thereby providing a new approach to the diagnosis of herpes encephalitis in man.
HIV infection can persist in spite of efficacious antiretroviral therapies. Although incomplete inhibition of viral replication may contribute to this phenomenon, this is largely due to the early establishment of a stable reservoir of latently infected cells. Thus, life-long antiviral therapy may be needed to control HIV. Such therapy is prone to drug resistance and cumulative side effects and is an unbearable financial burden for regions of the world hit hardest by the epidemic. This review discusses our current understanding of HIV persistence and the limitations of potential approaches to eradicate the virus and accordingly pleads for a joint multidisciplinary effort toward two highly related goals: the development of an HIV prophylactic vaccine and the achievement of long-term drug-free remissions in HIV-infected individuals.
Guanidine hydrochloride is a potent inhibitor of poliovirus synthesis in cell culture. However, the viral progeny which do grow in the presence of guani-dine may become approximately 10,000 times more resistant to the drug. The phenomenon of drug resistance poses yet another problem in the search for a satisfactory viral chemotherapeutic agent.
The deoxyribonucleic acids of adenovirus types 2, 7, and 12 were extracted and examined in the electron microscope. Cyclic forms of the molecules were found to exist in each viral type. The lengths of cyclic strands extracted from the most dense fraction of purified particles of adenovirus type 2 were highly variable, averaging about 2.5 microns. This corresponds to a molecular weight of about 5 million.
Trans-activator (Tat) proteins regulate the transcription of lentiviral DNA in the host cell genome. These RNA binding proteins participate in the life cycle of all known lentiviruses, such as the human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) or the equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV). The consensus RNA binding motifs [the trans-activation responsive element (TAR)] of HIV-1 as well as EIAV Tat proteins are well characterized. The structure of the 75-amino acid EIAV Tat protein in solution was determined by two- and three-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance methods and molecular dynamics calculations. The protein structure exhibits a well-defined hydrophobic core of 15 amino acids that serves as a scaffold for two flexible domains corresponding to the NH2- and COOH-terminal regions. The core region is a strictly conserved sequence region among the known Tat proteins. The structural data can be used to explain several of the observed features of Tat proteins.
Herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) infection causes significant morbidity and is an important cofactor for the transmission of HIV infection. A microbicide to prevent sexual transmission of HSV-2 would contribute substantially to controlling the spread of HIV and other infections. Because RNA interference (RNAi) provides effective antiviral defence in plants and other organisms, several studies have focused on harnessing RNAi to inhibit viral infection. Here we show that vaginal instillation of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting HSV-2 protects mice from lethal infection. siRNAs mixed with lipid are efficiently taken up by epithelial and lamina propria cells and silence gene expression in the mouse vagina and ectocervix for at least nine days. Intravaginal application of siRNAs targeting the HSV-2 UL27 and UL29 genes (which encode an envelope glycoprotein and a DNA binding protein, respectively) was well tolerated, did not induce interferon-responsive genes or cause inflammation, and protected mice when administered before and/or after lethal HSV-2 challenge. These results suggest that siRNAs are attractive candidates for the active component of a microbicide designed to prevent viral infection or transmission.
In contrast to activated CD4+ T cells, resting human CD4+ T cells circulating in blood are highly resistant to infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Whether the inability of HIV to infect these resting CD4+ T cells is due to the lack of a key factor, or alternatively reflects the presence of an efficient mechanism for defence against HIV, is not clear. Here we show that the anti-retroviral deoxycytidine deaminase APOBEC3G strongly protects unstimulated peripheral blood CD4+ T cells against HIV-1 infection. In activated CD4+ T cells, cytoplasmic APOBEC3G resides in an enzymatically inactive, high-molecular-mass (HMM) ribonucleoprotein complex that converts to an enzymatically active low-molecular-mass (LMM) form after treatment with RNase. In contrast, LMM APOBEC3G predominates in unstimulated CD4+ T cells, where HIV-1 replication is blocked and reverse transcription is impaired. Mitogen activation induces the recruitment of LMM APOBEC3G into the HMM complex, and this correlates with a sharp increase in permissivity for HIV infection in these stimulated cells. Notably, when APOBEC3G-specific small interfering RNAs are introduced into unstimulated CD4+ T cells, the early replication block encountered by HIV-1 is greatly relieved. Thus, LMM APOBEC3G functions as a potent post-entry restriction factor for HIV-1 in unstimulated CD4+ T cells. Surprisingly, sequencing of the reverse transcripts slowly formed in unstimulated CD4+ T cells reveals only low levels of dG dA hypermutation, raising the possibility that the APOBEC3G-restricting activity may not be strictly dependent on deoxycytidine deamination
The passage of mammalian cells through the restriction point into the S phase of the cell cycle is regulated by the activities of Cdk4 and Cdk6 complexed with the D-type cyclins and by cyclin E/Cdk2. The activities of these holoenzymes are constrained by CDK inhibitory proteins. The importance of the restriction point is illustrated by its deregulation in many tumour cells and upon infection with DNA tumour viruses. Here we describe the properties of cyclins encoded by two herpesviruses, herpesvirus saimiri (HVS) which can transform blood lymphocytes and induce malignancies of lymphoid origin in New World primates, and human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) implicated as a causative agent of Kaposi's sarcoma and body cavity lymphomas. Both viral cyclins form active kinase complexes with Cdk6 that are resistant to inhibition by the CDK inhibitors p16(Ink4a), p21Cip1 and p27Kip1. Furthermore, ectopic expression of a viral cyclin prevents G1 arrest imposed by each inhibitor and stimulates cell-cycle progression in quiescent fibroblasts. These results suggest a new mechanism for deregulation of the cell cycle and indicate that the viral cyclins may contribute to the oncogenic nature of these viruses.
The oncoprotein large tumour antigen (LTag) is encoded by the DNA tumour virus simian virus 40. LTag transforms cells and induces tumours in animals by altering the functions of tumour suppressors (including pRB and p53) and other key cellular proteins. LTag is also a molecular machine that distorts/melts the replication origin of the viral genome and unwinds duplex DNA. LTag therefore seems to be a functional homologue of the eukaryotic minichromosome maintenance (MCM) complex. Here we present the X-ray structure of a hexameric LTag with DNA helicase activity. The structure identifies the p53-binding surface and reveals the structural basis of hexamerization. The hexamer contains a long, positively charged channel with an unusually large central chamber that binds both single-stranded and double-stranded DNA. The hexamer organizes into two tiers that can potentially rotate relative to each other through connecting alpha-helices to expand/constrict the channel, producing an 'iris' effect that could be used for distorting or melting the origin and unwinding DNA at the replication fork.
Enhancers are cis-acting control elements which can stimulate at a distance the activity of a variety of eukaryotic promoters. First identified as a repeated 72 base pair (bp) sequence upstream of the simian virus 40 (SV40) early gene promoter, enhancers have since been shown to be associated with numerous other viral and cellular genes. Although there are no strong homologies between the sequences of different enhancers, a number of short and degenerate consensus sequences have been identified, including the 'core' element GTGGA/TA/TA/TG and stretches of alternating purines and pyrimidines which may have the potential to form left-handed Z DNA. To study the functional significance of two alternating purine and pyrimidine sequences in the SV40 enhancer, we have introduced various combinations of point mutations into a modified SV40 enhancer which contained only one copy of the 72 bp element (W.H., Y.G., A. Nordheim and A. Rich, unpublished results); one of these combinations impaired both the activity of the enhancer and growth of SV40. We describe here the structure of 18 revertants of this mutant and suggest that in each of the 18 revertants, the defects of the original mutant have been overcome by simple tandem duplications in the enhancer region, all of which include the 'core' element.
Two DNA strand transfer reactions occur during retroviral reverse transcription. The mechanism of the first, minus strand strong-stop DNA, transfer has been studied in vitro with human immunodeficiency virus 1 reverse transcriptase (HIV-1 RT) and a model template-primer system derived from the HIV-1 genome. The results reveal that HIV-1 RT alone can catalyze DNA strand transfer reactions. Two kinetically distinct ribonuclease (RNase) H activities associated with HIV-1 RT are required for removal of RNA fragments annealed to the nascent DNA strand. Examination of the binding of DNA.RNA duplex and single-stranded RNA to HIV-1 RT during strand transfer supports a model where the enzyme accommodates both the acceptor RNA template and the nascent DNA strand before the transfer event is completed. The polymerase activity incorporated additional bases beyond the 5' end of the RNA template, resulting in a base misincorporation upon DNA strand transfer. Such a process occurring in vivo during retroviral homologous recombination could contribute to the hypermutability of the HIV-1 genome.
Restriction factors, such as the retroviral complementary DNA deaminase APOBEC3G, are cellular proteins that dominantly block virus replication. The AIDS virus, human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), produces the accessory factor Vif, which counteracts the host's antiviral defence by hijacking a ubiquitin ligase complex, containing CUL5, ELOC, ELOB and a RING-box protein, and targeting APOBEC3G for degradation. Here we reveal, using an affinity tag/purification mass spectrometry approach, that Vif additionally recruits the transcription cofactor CBF-b to this ubiquitin ligase complex. CBF-b, which normally functions in concert with RUNX DNA binding proteins, allows the reconstitution of a recombinant six-protein assembly that elicits specific polyubiquitination activity with APOBEC3G, but not the related deaminase APOBEC3A. Using RNA knockdown and genetic complementation studies, we also demonstrate that CBF-b is required for Vif-mediated degradation of APOBEC3G and therefore for preserving HIV-1 infectivity. Finally, simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) Vif also binds to and requires CBF-b to degrade rhesus macaque APOBEC3G, indicating functional conservation. Methods of disrupting the CBF-b-Vif interaction might enable HIV-1 restriction and provide a supplement to current antiviral therapies that primarily target viral proteins.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a herpes virus, infects human B lymphocytes in vitro and efficiently immortalizes them. About 10 of the approximately 100 genes of EBV are expressed in recently immortalized B cells and although there is circumstantial evidence that at least three of these may contribute to the process of immortalization, there is no direct evidence that any particular gene is required. We have developed a genetic analysis of EBV that uses a transformation-defective strain of the virus as a helper virus in conjunction with DNA that contains all of the viral cis-acting elements required for replication, cleavage and packaging during the lytic phase of the viral life cycle. This DNA can include viral genes required for immortalization that complement the transformation-defective virus strain. The DNA can be amplified and packaged by the products of the helper virus and the packaged DNA is infectious. We have analysed two viral genes expressed in immortalized cells and find that the gene encoding EBV nuclear antigen-2 is required for immortalization, whereas the gene for the EBV nuclear antigen leader protein is not.
Lymphoma cells infected with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus are autocrine dependent on virus-derived interleukin-6 (IL-6), but not on cellular IL-6. During viral infection, host cells induce the antiviral factor interferon (IFN) to up-regulate p21, initiate cell cycle arrest, and inhibit virus replication. Viral IL-6, however, blocks IFN signaling. A viral transcriptional program exists in which only the viral IL-6 gene is directly activated by IFN-alpha, allowing the virus to modify its cellular environment by sensing and responding to levels of intracellular IFN signaling. The human cytokine cannot mimic this effect because IFN-alpha down-regulates the IL-6 receptor, gp80. Viral IL-6 bypasses the gp80 regulatory checkpoint by binding directly to the gp130 transducer molecule, resulting in tumor cell autocrine dependence on the viral cytokine for proliferation and survival.
Retinoic acid inducible-gene I (RIG-I) is a cytosolic multidomain protein that detects viral RNA and elicits an antiviral immune response. Two N-terminal caspase activation and recruitment domains (CARDs) transmit the signal, and the regulatory domain prevents signaling in the absence of viral RNA. 5'-triphosphate and double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) are two molecular patterns that enable RIG-I to discriminate pathogenic from self-RNA. However, the function of the DExH box helicase domain that is also required for activity is less clear. Using single-molecule protein-induced fluorescence enhancement, we discovered a robust adenosine 5'-triphosphate-powered dsRNA translocation activity of RIG-I. The CARDs dramatically suppress translocation in the absence of 5'-triphosphate, and the activation by 5'-triphosphate triggers RIG-I to translocate preferentially on dsRNA in cis. This functional integration of two RNA molecular patterns may provide a means to specifically sense and counteract replicating viruses.
Avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV), like other acute transforming viruses, arose by recombination between its helper virus and host cellular sequences. The latter sequences, termed v-myb, are responsible for the oncogenic properties of the virus. AMV causes acute myeloblastic leukaemia in chickens and transforms a specific class of haematopoietic cells in vitro, but does not induce morphological transformation of cultured fibroblasts, suggesting that only a restricted target-cell population is responsive to its transforming gene product. The normal cellular counterpart of v-myb, c-myb, is highly conserved and is present in all vertebrate and some invertebrate species examined. DNA rearrangements and altered expression of the myb oncogene have been reported in mouse lymphoid tumours and human myeloid and colon tumours. The mechanism of activation of the cellular proto-oncogenes is thought to involve the structural alteration of the coding regions that result in either the synthesis of an altered gene product or the enhanced expression of a proto-oncogene caused by alterations in its regulatory elements. To distinguish between these two mechanisms, we have cloned and sequenced the chicken c-myb complementary DNA and compared it with that of v-myb sequences. We demonstrate that during the transduction of the cellular sequences and/or viral passage a substantial portion of the coding region of the c-myb gene has been lost from both the 5' and 3' ends, resulting in the generation of a truncated gene product that mediates the transforming function of the virus.
Factors contributing to retroviral integration have been intractable because past studies have not precisely located genomic sites of proviruses in sufficient numbers for significant analysis. In this study, 903 murine leukemia virus (MLV) and 379 human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) integrations in the human genome were mapped. The data showed that MLV preferred integration near the start of transcriptional units (either upstream or downstream) whereas HIV-1 preferred integration anywhere in the transcriptional unit but not upstream of the transcriptional start. Defining different integration site preferences for retroviruses will have important ramifications for gene therapy and may aid in our understanding of the factors directing the integration process.
Using in vitro immunization, we have reconstructed three consecutive steps of an idiotype network to show that the nucleocapsid of Semliki Forest virus contains a specific 'receptor' for the cytoplasmic tail of the E2 spike glycoprotein. This interaction could be the basis for the highly selective inclusion of viral glycoproteins--and exclusion of host cell surface proteins--during virus budding.
Papillomaviruses (PV) contain several conserved genes that may encode nonstructural proteins; however, none of these predicted gene products have been identified. Papillomavirus E6 genes are retained and expressed as RNA in PV-associated human and animal carcinomas and cell lines. This suggests that the E6 gene product may be important in the maintenance of the malignant phenotype. The E6 open reading frame of the bovine papillomavirus (BPV) genome has been identified as one of two BPV genes that can independently transform mouse cells in vitro. A polypeptide encoded by this region of BPV was produced in a bacterial expression vector and used to raise antisera. The antisera specifically immunoprecipitated the predicted 15.5-kilodalton BPV E6 protein from cells transformed by the E6 gene. The E6 protein was identified in both the nuclear and membrane fractions of these transformed cells.
Lombardi et al. (Reports, 23 October 2009, p. 585) reported detection of the human gammaretrovirus XMRV in the blood cells of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). However, the patient description provided was incomplete. The inclusion of patients from a "CFS outbreak" previously linked with a viral infection, without confirmation in sporadic CFS cases, casts doubt on the role of XMRV in the pathogenesis of CFS.
A complete, cloned complementary DNA copy of the RNA genome of poliovirus was constructed in the Pst I site of the bacterial plasmid pBR322. Cultured mammalian cells transfected with this hybrid plasmid produced infectious poliovirus. Cells transfected with a plasmid which lacked the first 115 bases of the poliovirus genome did not produce virus.
Drosophila cells contain virus-like particles (VLPs) containing 5 kilobases (kb) of RNA (VLP H-RNA) homologous to the transposable element copia. The identity between VLP H-RNA and copia DNA has previously been confirmed at the nucleotide sequence level and reverse transcriptase activity is also detected in the VLPs. These results suggest that VLPs and copia are derivatives of viral particle and provirus forms, respectively, of the copia retrovirus-like particle. If the copia retrovirus-like particle replicates by a mechanism similar to the mechanism of vertebrate retroviral replication, a cellular transfer RNA would prime synthesis of the first DNA strand. We show that this is indeed so but that copia retrovirus-like particle has a novel type of priming mechanism; the first DNA extension does not start from the 3' end of a tRNA, but from an internal site (two nucleotides after the anticodon loop) of the Drosophila initiator methionine tRNA (tRNAMeti).
The relation between viremia and clinical outcome in individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) has important implications for therapeutic research and clinical care. HIV-1 RNA in plasma was quantified with a branched-DNA signal amplification assay as a measure of viral load in a cohort of 180 seropositive men studied for more than 10 years. The risk of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and death in study subjects, including those with normal numbers of CD4+ T cells, was directly related to plasma viral load at study entry. Plasma viral load was a better predictor of progression to AIDS and death than was the number of CD4+ T cells.
Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major cause of liver disease. Only interferon-alpha and the nucleosidic inhibitors of the viral polymerase, 3TC and adefovir, are approved for therapy. However, these therapies are limited by the side effects of interferon and the substantial resistance of the virus to nucleosidic inhibitors. Potent new antiviral compounds suitable for monotherapy or combination therapy are highly desired. We describe non-nucleosidic inhibitors of HBV nucleocapsid maturation that possess in vitro and in vivo antiviral activity. These inhibitors have potential for future therapeutic regimens to combat chronic HBV infection.
Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is a subviral human pathogen that requires hepatitis B virus (HBV) for packaging. Concurrent infection by HBV and HDV increases the risk of severe liver disease compared to infection with HBV alone. The HDV genome is a closed circular RNA of about 1,700 bases which is replicated through an RNA intermediate, the antigenome. Both RNAs can be folded into highly base-paired, rod-shaped structures, similar to the plant viroid RNAs. Two forms of the sole HDV protein, hepatitis delta antigen, are derived from a single open reading frame by RNA editing; the enzymes responsible for the editing have not been characterized. Here we report that the purified enzyme dsRAD (for double-stranded-RNA-adenosine deaminase) can edit HDV antigenomic RNA in vitro. Most important, we observe that mutations in critical sequences of the antigenome have identical effects on in vitro and in vivo editing, suggesting that dsRAD, or a closely related enzyme, is responsible for editing HDV RNA in vivo.
The 1918 influenza pandemic was unusually severe, resulting in about 50 million deaths worldwide. The 1918 virus is also highly pathogenic in mice, and studies have identified a multigenic origin of this virulent phenotype in mice. However, these initial characterizations of the 1918 virus did not address the question of its pathogenic potential in primates. Here we demonstrate that the 1918 virus caused a highly pathogenic respiratory infection in a cynomolgus macaque model that culminated in acute respiratory distress and a fatal outcome. Furthermore, infected animals mounted an immune response, characterized by dysregulation of the antiviral response, that was insufficient for protection, indicating that atypical host innate immune responses may contribute to lethality. The ability of influenza viruses to modulate host immune responses, such as that demonstrated for the avian H5N1 influenza viruses, may be a feature shared by the virulent influenza viruses.
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV, also known as human herpesvirus 8, or HHV 8) is a virus that is consistently present in Kaposi's sarcoma and in primary-effusion (body-cavity-based) lymphomas, malignancies that occur frequently, but not exclusively, in AIDS patients. KSHV is a gamma herpesvirus with homology to herpesvirus Saimiri and Epstein-Barr virus, both of which can transform lymphocytes. Cloning of a KSHV genome fragment revealed the presence of an open reading frame encoding a putative G-protein-coupled receptor that is homologous to a G-protein-coupled receptor encoded by herpesvirus Saimiri and to human interleukin-8 receptors. Here we show that the KSHV G-protein-coupled receptor is a bona fide signalling receptor which has constitutive (agonist-independent) activity in the phosphoinositide-inositoltrisphosphate-protein kinase C pathway. Furthermore, the KSHV G-protein-coupled receptor stimulates cellular proliferation, making it a candidate viral oncogene.
Vertebrate genomes contain proto-oncogenes whose enhanced expression or alteration by mutation seems to be involved in the development of naturally occurring tumours. These activated genes, usually assayed by their ability to induce the malignant transformation of NIH 3T3 cells, are frequently related to the ras oncogene of Harvey (Ha-ras) or Kirsten (Ki-ras) murine sarcoma viruses, or a third member of this family (N-ras). Activation involves point mutation which often affect codon 12 (refs 16-26) of the encoded 21,000-molecular weight polypeptide (p21). To provide insight into structural requirements involved in p21 activation, we have now constructed 20 mutant c-Ha-ras1 genes by in vitro mutagenesis, each encoding a different amino acid at codon 12. Analysis of rat fibroblasts transfected with these altered genes demonstrates that all amino acids except glycine (which is encoded by normal cellular ras genes) and proline at position 12 activate p21, suggesting a requirement for an alpha-helical structure in this region of the polypeptide. The morphological phenotype of cells transformed by the activated genes can, however, depend on the particular amino acid at this position.
The x-ray structures of a murine MHC class I molecule (H-2Kb) were determined in complex with two different viral peptides, derived from the vesicular stomatitis virus nucleoprotein (52-59), VSV-8, and the Sendai virus nucleoprotein (324-332), SEV-9. The H-2Kb complexes were refined at 2.3 A for VSV-8 and 2.5 A for SEV-9. The structure of H-2Kb exhibits a high degree of similarity with human HLA class I, although the individual domains can have slightly altered dispositions. Both peptides bind in extended conformations with most of their surfaces buried in the H-2Kb binding groove. The nonamer peptide maintains the same amino- and carboxyl-terminal interactions as the octamer primarily by the insertion of a bulge in the center of an otherwise beta conformation. Most of the specific interactions are between side-chain atoms of H-2Kb and main-chain atoms of peptide. This binding scheme accounts in large part for the enormous diversity of peptide sequences that bind with high affinity to class I molecules. Small but significant conformational changes in H-2Kb are associated with peptide binding, and these synergistic movements may be an integral part of the T cell receptor recognition process.
Mice inoculated with herpes simplex virus (type 1) by the lip or corneal route and then passively immunized with rabbit antibody to herpes simplex virus developed a latent infection in the trigeminal ganglia within 96 hours. Neutralizing antibody to herpes simplex virus was cleared from the circulation and could not be detected in most of these mice after 2 months. Examination of ganglia from the antibody-negative mice revealed latent virus in over 90 percent of the animals, indicating that serum neutralizing antibody is not necessary to maintain the latent state. When the lips or corneas of these mice were traumatized, viral reactivation occurred in up to 90 percent of the mice, as demonstrated by the appearance of neutralizing antibody. This study provides a model for identifying factors that trigger viral reactivation.
The gene encoding the large-T protein of polyoma virus (plt), the E1A genes of adenoviruses, the viral myc gene (v-myc) or rearranged forms of the cellular c-myc gene confer on rat embryo fibroblast (REF) cells in primary culture a series of new properties ('immortality', reduced serum requirement and sensitivity to transformation by viral and activated cellular oncogenes) but do not induce the appearance of transformed foci. We now report that focus formation can be induced after transfer of these genes into either REF or established FR3T3 rat cells by subsequent exposure to the tumour promoter 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA). Frequencies of transformation are in the same range as those usually observed for transformation with complete polyoma DNA or with a mixture of cloned myc and ras oncogenes. These results further characterize the 'immortalized' state induced by plt and myc as one in which the cells maintain a normal growth control in many respects but can be further acted upon to produce a neoplastic progeny.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a ubiquitous pathogen that persists in the host and can cause severe disease in the immunocompromised individual or in the fetus. Analysis of the nucleotide sequence of the virus genome has revealed the presence of an open reading frame whose predicted translation product has homology with the heavy chain of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecule of higher eukaryotes, and the observed sequence homology was given additional significance by the independent observation that HCMV virions can bind beta 2 microglobulin (beta 2m), the light chain of the MHC class I molecule. We expressed both the HCMV class I homologue and the human beta 2m gene in recombinant vaccinia viruses. We show that the coexpressed gene products associate, that the transport of beta 2m to the cell surface is dependent on coexpression of the class I homologue and that the viral gene product is therefore functionally related to its cellular counterpart. We observe also that, in HCMV-infected cells, no synthesis of mature cellular class I molecules occurs, while messenger RNA levels remain unaltered, and we speculate that one function of the viral homologue may be to sequester beta 2m, thus preventing the maturation of cellular class I molecules and rendering the infected cell unrecognizable by cytotoxic T cells.
Three types of tumors termed plasmacytomas (ABPC's), lymphosarcomas (ABLS's), and plasmacytoid lymphosarcomas (ABPL's) arise in BALB/c mice treated with pristane and Abelson murine leukemia virus (A-MuLV). While most ABPC's and BLS's contain integrated A-MuLV proviral genome and synthesize the v-abl RNA, most ABPL's do not. The ABPL tumors were examined for the expression of other oncogenes that may be associated with their transformed state, in the absence of transforming virus. These tumors expressed abundant c-myb RNA of unusually large size and showed DNA rearrangements of the c-myb locus.
The genus Coccolithovirus is a recently discovered group of viruses that infect the globally important marine calcifying microalga Emiliania huxleyi. Among the 472 predicted genes of the 407,339-base pair genome are a variety of unexpected genes, most notably those involved in biosynthesis of ceramide, a sphingolipid known to induce apoptosis. Uniquely for algal viruses, it also contains six RNA polymerase subunits and a novel promoter, suggesting this virus encodes its own transcription machinery. Microarray transcriptomic analysis reveals that 65% of the predicted virus-encoded genes are expressed during lytic infection of E. huxleyi.
Murine embryonal carcinoma cells (ECCs) do not express antigens of the major histocompatibility complex (H-2), but do express cell-surface molecules shared with early embryos. ECCs are also characterized by their insusceptibility to infection by various oncogenic viruses, and their ability to differentiate into a variety of adult cell types. Differentiation of ECCs in vitro can occur spontaneously or can be induced. On exposure to retinoic acid the ECC line F9 (ref. 13) differentiates into cells which have the characteristics of parietal endoderm. When ECCs are exposed to simian virus 40 (SV40), the SV40 tumour (T) antigen is not expressed, although the virus genome reaches the nucleus, and a primary transcript of the SV40 A gene is made. However, following exposure to retinoic acid, the differentiated cells, like most mouse somatic cells, are susceptible to SV40 abortive infection and synthesize large T and small t antigens. To monitor the molecular events associated with the expression of the SV40 A gene on differentiation, we have constructed an ECC line (F9 12-1) containing a single integrated copy of the SV40 genome. This was accomplished by introducing a recombinant plasmid consisting of pBR322 linked to the herpes simplex type 1 thymidine kinase gene and SV40 genome into a thymidine kinase-deficient F9 cell line. We report here that in F9 12-1 cells exposed to retinoic acid, synthesis of the SV40 A gene product(s), T and tumour-associated specific antigens (TASA), parallels the appearance of the normal hallmarks of differentiation in this cell line, H-2 antigens and the basement membrane protein laminin.
Sjogren's syndrome is an autoimmune disease that is characterized by dryness of the mouth and eyes. The loss of salivary and lacrimal gland function is accompanied by lymphocytic infiltration. Because similar symptoms and glandular pathology are observed in certain persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), a search was initiated for a possible retroviral etiology in this syndrome. A human intracisternal A-type retroviral particle that is antigenically related to HIV was detected in lymphoblastoid cells exposed to homogenates of salivary tissue from patients with Sjogren's syndrome. Comparison of this retroviral particle to HIV indicates that they are distinguishable by several ultrastructural, physical, and enzymatic criteria.
A special class of self-antigens (endogenous superantigens) is capable of deleting many murine T cells on the basis of their expression of particular T-cell receptor V beta gene segments. In mice that endogenously express these antigens, tolerance is mediated in part by the clonal deletion of the relevant V beta-bearing T cells. The deletion of I-E-reactive V beta 5.2-bearing T cells is dependent on the coexpression of an I-E tolerogenic coligand (Etc)14 and the gene for one of these coligands, Etc-1, maps to chromosome 12, near the mouse mammary tumour viral integrant, Mtv-9. Here we report a perfect genetic linkage between Etc-1 and Mtv-9 and show that Etc-1 is also involved in the I-E-dependent deletion of T cells bearing V beta 5.1 and V beta 11 domains. We also demonstrate that Mtv-9 transcripts are present in B cells expressing Etc-1 and suggest that the coligand recognized by roughly 15% of all T lymphocytes is encoded by the Mtv-9 genome.
The influenza A viral heterotrimeric polymerase complex (PA, PB1, PB2) is known to be involved in many aspects of viral replication and to interact with host factors, thereby having a role in host specificity. The polymerase protein sequences from the 1918 human influenza virus differ from avian consensus sequences at only a small number of amino acids, consistent with the hypothesis that they were derived from an avian source shortly before the pandemic. However, when compared to avian sequences, the nucleotide sequences of the 1918 polymerase genes have more synonymous differences than expected, suggesting evolutionary distance from known avian strains. Here we present sequence and phylogenetic analyses of the complete genome of the 1918 influenza virus, and propose that the 1918 virus was not a reassortant virus (like those of the 1957 and 1968 pandemics), but more likely an entirely avian-like virus that adapted to humans. These data support prior phylogenetic studies suggesting that the 1918 virus was derived from an avian source. A total of ten amino acid changes in the polymerase proteins consistently differentiate the 1918 and subsequent human influenza virus sequences from avian virus sequences. Notably, a number of the same changes have been found in recently circulating, highly pathogenic H5N1 viruses that have caused illness and death in humans and are feared to be the precursors of a new influenza pandemic. The sequence changes identified here may be important in the adaptation of influenza viruses to humans.
Animal and human lentiviruses elude host defences by establishing covert infections and eventually cause disease through cumulative losses of cells that die with activation of viral gene expression. We used polymerase chain reaction in situ double-label methods to determine how many CD4+ lymphocytes are latently infected by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in patient lymph nodes and whether the pool of infected cells is large enough to account for immune depletion through continual activation of viral gene expression and attrition of cells responding to antigens. We discovered an extraordinarily large number of latently infected CD4+ lymphocytes and macrophages throughout the lymphoid system from early to late stages of infection, and confirmed the extracellular association of HIV with follicular dendritic cells. Follicular dendritic cells may transmit infection to cells as they migrate through lymphoid follicles. Latently infected lymphocytes and macrophages constitute an intracellular reservoir large enough ultimately to contribute to much of the immune depletion in AIDS, and represent a difficult problem that must be resolved in developing effective treatments and protective vaccine.
Large amounts of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) localize on follicular dendritic cells (FDC) in the follicles of secondary lymphoid tissues following viral infection. During clinical latency, active viral infection occurs primarily at these sites. As HIV on FDC is in the form of immune complexes, some of which may be formed with neutralizing antibody, we investigated whether HIV on FDC is infectious. We report here that HIV on FDC is highly infectious. Furthermore, FDC can convert neutralized HIV into an infectious form even in the presence of a vast excess of neutralizing antibody. Thus FDC may provide a mechanism whereby HIV infection can continue in the presence of neutralizing antibody.
The transition from the expression of alpha, the first set of five herpes simplex virus genes expressed after infection, to beta and gamma genes, expressed later in infection, requires the participation of infected cell protein 4 (alpha 4), the major viral regulatory protein. The alpha 4 protein is present in complexes formed by proteins extracted from infected cells and viral DNA fragments derived from promoter domains. This report shows that the alpha 4 protein forms specific complexes with DNA fragments derived from 5' transcribed noncoding domains of late (gamma 2) genes whose expression requires viral DNA synthesis as well as functional alpha 4 protein. Some of the DNA fragments to which alpha 4 binds do not contain homologs of the previously reported DNA binding site consensus sequence, suggesting that alpha 4 may recognize and interact with more than one type of DNA binding site. The alpha 4 proteins can bind to DNA directly. A posttranslationally modified form of the alpha 4 protein designated alpha 4c differs from the alpha 4a and alpha 4b forms with respect to its affinity for DNA fragments differing in the nucleotide sequences of the binding sites.
The critical viral components for packaging DNA, recognizing and binding to host cells, and injecting the condensed DNA into the host are organized at a single vertex of many icosahedral viruses. These component structures do not share icosahedral symmetry and cannot be resolved using a conventional icosahedral averaging method. Here we report the structure of the entire infectious Salmonella bacteriophage epsilon15 (ref. 1) determined from single-particle cryo-electron microscopy, without icosahedral averaging. This structure displays not only the icosahedral shell of 60 hexamers and 11 pentamers, but also the non-icosahedral components at one pentameric vertex. The densities at this vertex can be identified as the 12-subunit portal complex sandwiched between an internal cylindrical core and an external tail hub connecting to six projecting trimeric tailspikes. The viral genome is packed as coaxial coils in at least three outer layers with approximately 90 terminal nucleotides extending through the protein core and the portal complex and poised for injection. The shell protein from icosahedral reconstruction at higher resolution exhibits a similar fold to that of other double-stranded DNA viruses including herpesvirus, suggesting a common ancestor among these diverse viruses. The image reconstruction approach should be applicable to studying other biological nanomachines with components of mixed symmetries.
Herpesviruses encode a serine protease that specifically cleaves assembly protein. This protease is critical for replication, and represents a new target for antiviral drug design. Here we report the three-dimensional structure of the protease from human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) at 2.27 angstroms resolution. The structure reveals a unique fold and new catalytic strategy for cleavage. The monomer fold of the enzyme, a seven-stranded beta-barrel encircled by a chain of helices that form the carboxy terminus of the molecule, is unrelated to those observed in classic serine proteases such as chymotrypsin and subtilisin. The serine nucleophile at position 132 is activated by two juxtaposed histidine residues at positions 63 and 157. Dimerization, which seems to be necessary for activity, is observed in the crystals. Correlations of the structure with the sequences of herpesvirus proteases suggest that dimerization may confer specificity and recognition in substrate binding.
A population genetic survey of over 200 structural loci previously revealed that the South African cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus jubatus) has an extreme paucity of genetic variability, probably as a consequence of a severe population bottleneck in its recent past. The genetic monomorphism of the species is here extended to the major histocompatibility complex, since 14 reciprocal skin grafts between unrelated cheetahs were accepted. The apparent consequences of such genetic uniformity to the species include (i) great difficulty in captive breeding, (ii) a high degree of juvenile mortality in captivity and in the wild, and (iii) a high frequency of spermatozoal abnormalities in ejaculates. The species vulnerability of the cheetah was demonstrated by an epizootic of coronavirus-associated feline infectious peritonitis in an Oregon breeding colony in 1983. Exposure and spread of the coronavirus, which has a very low morbidity in domestic cats (approximately 1 percent), has decimated a heretofore productive and healthy captive population. The extreme genetic monomorphism, especially at the major histocompatibility complex, and the apparent hypersensitivity of the cheetah to a viral pathogen may be related, and provide a biological basis for understanding the adaptive significance of abundant genetic variation in outbred mammalian species.
Stable lymphoid cell lines expressing the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) nef gene product, p27, were established. The presence of p27 in the lymphoid cells suppressed replication of some strains of both HIV-1 and HIV-2. This observation indicates that nef could be important in the establishment of HIV latency. In contrast, fast replicating and highly cytopathic HIV-1 isolates recovered from patients with advanced disease states were not affected by the negative effect of nef present in these lymphoid cell lines. This lack of response to nef appears to constitute another viral feature that correlates with disease progression. Thus, manipulating expression of the nef gene in vivo might influence pathogenesis in the host.
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is characterized by opportunistic infections and by 'opportunistic neoplasms' (for example, Kaposi's sarcoma). Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL) is epidemiologically associated with AIDS, especially in male homosexuals. A subset of T lymphocytes positive for the CD4 antigen (also termed T4 antigen), is depleted in AIDS and PGL patients. A retrovirus found in T-cell cultures from these patients is strongly implicated in the aetiology of AIDS because of the high frequency of isolation and the prevalence of specific antibodies in the patients. Here we have detected cell-surface receptors for the AIDS retrovirus (human T-cell leukaemia virus-III (HTLV-III) and lymphadenopathy-associated virus-1 (LAV-1) isolates) by testing the susceptibility of cells to infection with pseudotypes of vesicular stomatitis virus bearing retroviral envelope antigens, and by the formation of multinucleated syncytia on mixing virus-producing cells with receptor-bearing cells. Receptors were present only on cells expressing CD4 antigen; among 155 monoclonal antibodies tested, each of the 14 anti-CD4 antibodies inhibited formation of syncytia and blocked pseudotypes. Productive infection of CD4+ cells with HTLV-III or LAV-1 markedly reduced cell-surface expression of CD4. In contrast, receptors for HTLV-I and HTLV-II were not restricted to CD4+ cells, were not blocked by anti-CD4 antibodies; cells productively infected with HTLV-I and HTLV-II expressed surface CD4. Hence, we conclude that the CD4 antigen is an essential and specific component of the receptor for the causative agent of AIDS.
TRIM5 is a RING domain-E3 ubiquitin ligase that restricts infection by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 and other retroviruses immediately following virus invasion of the target cell cytoplasm. Antiviral potency correlates with TRIM5 avidity for the retrovirion capsid lattice and several reports indicate that TRIM5 has a role in signal transduction, but the precise mechanism of restriction is unknown. Here we demonstrate that TRIM5 promotes innate immune signalling and that this activity is amplified by retroviral infection and interaction with the capsid lattice. Acting with the heterodimeric, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13-UEV1A (also known as UBE2N-UBE2V1), TRIM5 catalyses the synthesis of unattached K63-linked ubiquitin chains that activate the TAK1 (also known as MAP3K7) kinase complex and stimulate AP-1 and NFkB signalling. Interaction with the HIV-1 capsid lattice greatly enhances the UBC13-UEV1A-dependent E3 activity of TRIM5 and challenge with retroviruses induces the transcription of AP-1 and NF-kB-dependent factors with a magnitude that tracks with TRIM5 avidity for the invading capsid. Finally, TAK1 and UBC13-UEV1A contribute to capsid-specific restriction by TRIM5. Thus, the retroviral restriction factor TRIM5 has two additional activities that are linked to restriction: it constitutively promotes innate immune signalling and it acts as a pattern recognition receptor specific for the retrovirus capsid lattice.
Cytotoxic T cells lyse only those virus infected target cells in vitro which express, in addition to the viral antigen(s), those K or D region products of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) which were present during anti-viral sensitisation in vivo. This 'associative recognition' by cytotoxic T cells could reflect the interaction of two T-cell receptors with specificity for target K or D gene products and independently for the viral antigen, or one receptor with specificity for virally altered K or D region products (see ref. 1 and refs therein). There are various ways that the MHC antigens could be altered, including 'modification from within', where the virus modifies host protein synthesis by interfering with transcription, translation or post-translational glycosylation; or 'modification from without' where enzymic or chemical alteration of cell membrane proteins are induced by virus activity at the cell surface. In this report we show that inactivated Sendai virus or isolated Sendai virus envelopes can serve to modify a cell and make it a specific target for Sendai-immune T-cell killing, thus excluding the possibility of 'modification from within' in this system.
Segmental duplications in the human genome are selectively enriched for genes involved in immunity, although the phenotypic consequences for host defense are unknown. We show that there are significant interindividual and interpopulation differences in the copy number of a segmental duplication encompassing the gene encoding CCL3L1 (MIP-1alphaP), a potent human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1)-suppressive chemokine and ligand for the HIV coreceptor CCR5. Possession of a CCL3L1 copy number lower than the population average is associated with markedly enhanced HIV/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) susceptibility. This susceptibility is even greater in individuals who also possess disease-accelerating CCR5 genotypes. This relationship between CCL3L1 dose and altered HIV/AIDS susceptibility points to a central role for CCL3L1 in HIV/AIDS pathogenesis and indicates that differences in the dose of immune response genes may constitute a genetic basis for variable responses to infectious diseases.
Oceanic bacteria perform many environmental functions, including biogeochemical cycling of many elements, metabolizing of greenhouse gases, functioning in oceanic food webs (microbial loop), and producing valuable natural products and viruses. We demonstrate that the widespread capability of marine bacteria to participate in horizontal gene transfer (HGT) in coastal and oceanic environments may be the result of gene transfer agents (GTAs), viral-like particles produced by a-Proteobacteria. We documented GTA-mediated gene transfer frequencies a thousand to a hundred million times higher than prior estimates of HGT in the oceans, with as high as 47% of the culturable natural microbial community confirmed as gene recipients. These findings suggest a plausible mechanism by which marine bacteria acquire novel traits, thus ensuring resilience in the face of environmental change.
Analysis of the ability of heteroantisera, monoclonal antibodies, and antibodies to synthetic peptides to react with viral glycoproteins deglycosylated with endoglycosidase F revealed that the reactivities of most of the antibodies to these glycoprotein antigens were influenced by the attached carbohydrate moieties. All heteroantisera prepared in rabbits or goats to either fully glycosylated retroviruses or influenza virus were virtually unreactive toward the viral glycoproteins after carbohydrate removal. Analyses with a panel of monoclonal antibodies to purified Rauscher murine leukemia virus gp70 indicated that the reactivity of most of these antibodies improved while the reactivity of others decreased or remain unchanged after carbohydrate removal. Most of the antibodies to synthetic peptide sequences in the influenza virus hemagglutinin also improved in reactivity after carbohydrate removal. These data indicate that carbohydrate side chains on viral glycoproteins influence the immune response to these antigens, and the more native the glycoprotein immunogen, the more dramatic the carbohydrate influence. Thus the immune response to these glycoproteins is not simply a function of the immunogenicity of certain domains over others but rather is a direct measure of carbohydrate influences on the host's perception of the foreign antigen.
Herpesviruses, such as murine and human cytomegalovirus (MCMV and HCMV), can establish a persistent infection within the host and have diverse mechanisms as protection from host immune defences. Several herpesvirus genes that are homologous to host immune modulators have been identified, and are implicated in viral evasion of the host immune response. The discovery of a viral major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I homologue, encoded by HCMV, led to speculation that it might function as an immune modulator and disrupt presentation of peptides by MHC class I to cytotoxic T cells. However, there is no evidence concerning the biological significance of this gene during viral infection. Recent analysis of the MCMV genome has also demonstrated the presence of a MHC class I homologue. Here we show that a recombinant MCMV, in which the gene encoding the class I homologue has been disrupted, has severely restricted replication during the acute stage of infection compared with wild-type MCMV. We demonstrate by in vivo depletion studies that natural killer (NK) cells are responsible for the attenuated phenotype of the mutant. Thus the viral MHC class I homologue contributes to immune evasion through interference with NK cell-mediated clearance.
An RNA virus population does not consist of a single genotype; rather, it is an ensemble of related sequences, termed quasispecies. Quasispecies arise from rapid genomic evolution powered by the high mutation rate of RNA viral replication. Although a high mutation rate is dangerous for a virus because it results in nonviable individuals, it has been hypothesized that high mutation rates create a 'cloud' of potentially beneficial mutations at the population level, which afford the viral quasispecies a greater probability to evolve and adapt to new environments and challenges during infection. Mathematical models predict that viral quasispecies are not simply a collection of diverse mutants but a group of interactive variants, which together contribute to the characteristics of the population. According to this view, viral populations, rather than individual variants, are the target of evolutionary selection. Here we test this hypothesis by examining the consequences of limiting genomic diversity on viral populations. We find that poliovirus carrying a high-fidelity polymerase replicates at wild-type levels but generates less genomic diversity and is unable to adapt to adverse growth conditions. In infected animals, the reduced viral diversity leads to loss of neurotropism and an attenuated pathogenic phenotype. Notably, using chemical mutagenesis to expand quasispecies diversity of the high-fidelity virus before infection restores neurotropism and pathogenesis. Analysis of viruses isolated from brain provides direct evidence for complementation between members in the quasispecies, indicating that selection indeed occurs at the population level rather than on individual variants. Our study provides direct evidence for a fundamental prediction of the quasispecies theory and establishes a link between mutation rate, population dynamics and pathogenesis.
Recovery from Friend virus 3 (Rfv3) is a single autosomal gene encoding a resistance trait that influences retroviral neutralizing antibody responses and viremia. Despite extensive research for 30 years, the molecular identity of Rfv3 has remained elusive. Here, we demonstrate that Rfv3 is encoded by Apobec3. Apobec3 maps to the same chromosome region as Rfv3 and has broad inhibitory activity against retroviruses, including HIV. Not only did genetic inactivation of Apobec3 convert Rfv3-resistant mice to a susceptible phenotype, but Apobec3 was also found to be naturally disabled by aberrant messenger RNA splicing in Rfv3-susceptible strains. The link between Apobec3 and neutralizing antibody responses highlights an Apobec3-dependent mechanism of host protection that might extend to HIV and other human retroviral infections.
Polyoma virus codes for three proteins involved in host cell transformation: the large, middle and small T antigens. Middle T antigen is a major transforming protein which is responsible for the induction of the phenotype of transformed cells and, without it, transformation does not occur (reviewed in refs 1-4). Middle T antigen alone can transform established cell lines, although large, and possibly small, T antigens are also required for the full expression of the phenotype of transformed cells in media with a low concentration of serum. A subfraction of middle T antigen is associated with a protein kinase activity which phosphorylates middle T antigen in vitro on tyrosine. There is a strong correlation between the level of this kinase activity and the degree of expression of the phenotype of transformed cells. We report here that epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of middle T antigen, suggesting the possibility that mitogenic growth factor(s) regulates this phosphorylation activity.
Microorganisms are generally used for mass production of foreign gene products, but multicellular organisms such as plants have been proposed as an economical alternative. The silkworm may be useful in this context as it can be cultured easily and at low cost. We have therefore developed a virus vector to introduce foreign genes, for example, the gene for human alpha-interferon (IFN-alpha), into silkworms. We used the baculovirus Bombyx mori nuclear polyhedrosis virus (BmNPV) which has a large (greater than 100 kilobases, kb) double-stranded circular DNA genome within its rod-shaped capsid. Baculoviruses have been used previously as vectors for expression of beta-interferon and beta-galactosidase in established cell lines. Although BmNPV has not been used previously as an expression vector, it has an advantage over the baculovirus Autographa californica NPV in that it has a narrower host range and will not grow in wild insect pests in the field. In the present study, the polyhedrin gene encoding the major inclusion body protein of BmNPV was identified by hybridization with complementary DNA and cloned in a plasmid. For insertion of foreign genes, we constructed a recombinant plasmid carrying a polylinker linked to the promoter of the polyhedrin gene, and inserted the IFN-alpha gene into this plasmid. The resulting plasmid and the BmNPV genomic DNA were co-transfected into BM-N cells, and stable recombinant viruses isolated by plaque assay on BM-N cells. The recombinant virus replicated in silkworm larvae, which synthesized as much as 5 X 10(7) units (approximately 50 micrograms) of interferon in their haemolymph.
The current prevalence of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome in humans has provoked renewed interest in methods of protective immunization against retrovirus-induced diseases. In this study, a vaccinia-retrovirus recombinant vector was constructed to study mechanisms of immune protection against Friend virus leukemia in mice. The envelope (env) gene from Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV) was inserted into the genome of a vaccinia virus expression vector. Infected cells synthesized gp85, the glycosylated primary product of the env gene. Processing to gp70 and p15E, and cell surface localization, were similar to that occurring in cells infected with F-MuLV. Mice inoculated with live recombinant vaccinia virus had an envelope-specific T-cell proliferative response and, after challenge with Friend virus complex, developed neutralizing antibody and cytotoxic T cells (CTL) and were protected against leukemia. In contrast, unimmunized and control groups developed a delayed neutralizing antibody response, but no detectable CTL, and succumbed to leukemia. Genes of the major histocompatibility complex influenced protection induced by the vaccinia recombinant but not that induced by attenuated N-tropic Friend virus.
Purified preparations of Rous sarcoma virus (an avian tumor virus with an RNA genome) contain small amounts of double-stranded DNA. This DNA cannot be hybridized to viral RNA, but will reanneal completely with the DNA of avian cells. Extensive substitution of bromodeoxyuridine for thymidine in "viral" DNA does not photosensitize the biological activity of the virus. These observations indicate that the DNA associated with Rous sarcoma virus is derived from the DNA of the avian host cell, and is probably devoid of any function in the life cycle of the virus.
A new acute transforming feline retrovirus, the Hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma virus (HZ4-FeSV), has been isolated from a feline fibrosarcoma. The viral genome of HZ4-FeSV contains a new oncogene designated v-kit, has the structure 5' delta gag-kit-delta pol-delta env 3' and specifies a gag-kit polyprotein of relative molecular mass 80,000. The predicted kit amino-acid sequence displays partial homology with tyrosine-specific protein kinase oncogenes. HZ4-FeSV appears to have been generated by transduction of feline c-kit sequences with feline leukaemia virus.
The human T-cell leukemia viruses (HTLV) are replication-competent retroviruses whose genomes contain gag, pol, and env genes as well as a fourth gene, termed x, which is believed to be the transforming gene of HTLV. The product of the x gene is now shown to be encoded by a 2.1-kilobase messenger RNA derived by splicing of at least two introns. By means of S1 nuclease mapping of this RNA and nucleic acid sequence analysis of a complementary DNA clone, the complete primary structure of the x-gene product has been determined. It is encoded by sequences containing the env initiation codon and one nucleotide of the next codon spliced to the major open reading frame of the HTLV-I and HTLV-II x gene.
The human complement system is an important component of innate immunity. Complement-derived products mediate functions contributing to pathogen killing and elimination. However, inappropriate activation of the system contributes to the pathogenesis of immunological and inflammatory diseases. Complement component 3 (C3) occupies a central position because of the manifold biological activities of its activation fragments, including the major fragment, C3b, which anchors the assembly of convertases effecting C3 and C5 activation. C3 is converted to C3b by proteolysis of its anaphylatoxin domain, by either of two C3 convertases. This activates a stable thioester bond, leading to the covalent attachment of C3b to cell-surface or protein-surface hydroxyl groups through transesterification. The cleavage and activation of C3 exposes binding sites for factors B, H and I, properdin, decay accelerating factor (DAF, CD55), membrane cofactor protein (MCP, CD46), complement receptor 1 (CR1, CD35) and viral molecules such as vaccinia virus complement-control protein. C3b associates with these molecules in different configurations and forms complexes mediating the activation, amplification and regulation of the complement response. Structures of C3 and C3c, a fragment derived from the proteolysis of C3b, have revealed a domain configuration, including six macroglobulin domains (MG1-MG6; nomenclature follows ref. 5) arranged in a ring, termed the beta-ring. However, because neither C3 nor C3c is active in complement activation and regulation, questions about function can be answered only through direct observations on C3b. Here we present a structure of C3b that reveals a marked loss of secondary structure in the CUB (for 'complement C1r/C1s, Uegf, Bmp1') domain, which together with the resulting translocation of the thioester domain provides a molecular basis for conformational changes accompanying the conversion of C3 to C3b. The total conformational changes make many proposed ligand-binding sites more accessible and create a cavity that shields target peptide bonds from access by factor I. A covalently bound N-acetyl-l-threonine residue demonstrates the geometry of C3b attachment to surface hydroxyl groups.
Selective autophagy involves the recognition and targeting of specific cargo, such as damaged organelles, misfolded proteins, or invading pathogens for lysosomal destruction. Yeast genetic screens have identified proteins required for different forms of selective autophagy, including cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting, pexophagy and mitophagy, and mammalian genetic screens have identified proteins required for autophagy regulation. However, there have been no systematic approaches to identify molecular determinants of selective autophagy in mammalian cells. Here, to identify mammalian genes required for selective autophagy, we performed a high-content, image-based, genome-wide small interfering RNA screen to detect genes required for the colocalization of Sindbis virus capsid protein with autophagolysosomes. We identified 141 candidate genes required for viral autophagy, which were enriched for cellular pathways related to messenger RNA processing, interferon signalling, vesicle trafficking, cytoskeletal motor function and metabolism. Ninety-six of these genes were also required for Parkin-mediated mitophagy, indicating that common molecular determinants may be involved in autophagic targeting of viral nucleocapsids and autophagic targeting of damaged mitochondria. Murine embryonic fibroblasts lacking one of these gene products, the C2-domain containing protein, SMURF1, are deficient in the autophagosomal targeting of Sindbis and herpes simplex viruses and in the clearance of damaged mitochondria. Moreover, SMURF1-deficient mice accumulate damaged mitochondria in the heart, brain and liver. Thus, our study identifies candidate determinants of selective autophagy, and defines SMURF1 as a newly recognized mediator of both viral autophagy and mitophagy.
The fast generation time, small genome size and extensive genetic map of the crucifer Arabidopsis thaliana have made it the subject of an increasing number of studies in plant molecular genetics. As transposable elements have greatly facilitated genetic analysis in a variety of species, we have attempted to identify an endogenous A. thaliana transposable element. We report here the discovery of a family of such elements, which we refer to as Ta1 elements. Sequence analysis of one such element shows that it is closely related to retrotransposons and integrated retroviral proviruses, being bound by a direct sequence repeat and having an open reading frame with clear sequence similarity to the polyprotein of the Drosophila melanogaster retrotransposon copia. The sequence of an empty target site of a Ta1 element shows that insertion is accompanied by a five-base-pair target-site duplication and that Ta1 has transposed in the period of time since divergence of two races of A. thaliana.
It has been suggested that mutations within immunodominant cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) epitopes may be exploited by viruses to evade protective immune responses critical for clearance. Viral escape could originate from passive mechanisms, such as mutations within crucial CTL epitopes, either affecting major histocompatibility complex binding or T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) recognition. Additionally, it has recently been shown that substitutions of TCR contact sites can yield analogue peptides that can still interact with the T-cell receptor but be unable to deliver a full stimulatory signal, thus inducing anergy or acting as an antagonist for the TCR. We report here that hepatitis B virus isolates derived from two chronically infected patients display variant epitopes that act as natural TCR antagonists with the capacity to inhibit the CTL response to the wild-type epitope. During natural infection, TCR antagonist mutations of CTL epitopes could contribute to the development of viral persistence, especially if the antiviral CTL response is monospecific or the epitope is strongly immunodominant.
Simian virus 40 (SV40) replicates in nuclei of human and monkey cells. One viral protein, large tumour (T) antigen, is required for the initiation of DNA replication. The development of in vitro replication systems which retain this property has facilitated the identification of the cellular components required for replication. T antigen recognizes the pentanucleotide 5'-GAGGC-3' which is present in four copies within the 64 base-pairs (bp) of the core origin. In the presence of ATP it binds with increased affinity forming a distinctive, bilobed structure visible in electron micrographs. As a helicase, it unwinds SV40 DNA bidirectionally from the origin. We report here that in vitro and in the presence of ATP, T antigen assembles a double hexamer, centred on the core origin and extending beyond it by 12 bp in each direction. The assembly of this dodecamer initiates an untwisting of the duplex by 2-3 turns. In the absence of ATP, a tetrameric structure is the largest found at the core origin. In the absence of DNA, but in the presence of ATP or its non-hydrolysable analogues, T antigen assembles into hexamers. This suggests that ATP effects an allosteric change in the monomer. The change alters protein-protein interactions and allows the assembly of a double hexamer, which initiates replication at the core origin.
By virtue of its immediate contact with the circulating blood, the endothelium provides an attractive target for retroviral vector transduction for the purpose of gene therapy. To see whether efficient gene transfer and expression was feasible, rabbit aortic endothelial cells were infected with three Moloney murine leukemia virus-derived retroviral vectors. Two of these vectors carry genes encoding products that are not secreted: N2, containing only the selectable marker gene neoR, and SAX, containing both neoR gene and an SV40-promoted adenosine deaminase (ADA) gene. The third vector, G2N, contains a secretory rat growth hormone (rGH) gene and an SV40-promoted neoR gene. Infection with all three vectors resulted in expression of the respective genes. A high level of human ADA expression was observed in infected endothelial cell populations both before and after selection in G418. G2N-infected rabbit aortic endothelial cells that were grown on a synthetic vascular graft continued to secrete rGH into the culture medium. These studies suggest that endothelial cells may serve as vehicles for the introduction in vivo of functioning recombinant genes.
The largest group of transposable elements in Drosophila melanogaster, copia-like elements, share some important structural features with and are intimately related in evolution to vertebrate retroviruses. To further clarify the relationship between retroviruses and copia-like transposable elements, we set out to determine the complete nucleotide sequence of the genome of 17.6, which has long terminal repeats homologous in nucleotide sequence to those of avian leukaemia-sarcoma virus. We report here that 17.6 contains three long open reading frames comparable with gag, pol and env genes in retrovirus. At the level of amino acid sequence, the longest open reading frame of 17.6 includes a coding sequence similar to that for reverse transcriptase, suggesting a role for this enzyme in the life cycle of some Drosophila copia-like elements, analogous to the situation in retrovirus.
Recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified a locus on chromosome 1p13 strongly associated with both plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and myocardial infarction (MI) in humans. Here we show through a series of studies in human cohorts and human-derived hepatocytes that a common noncoding polymorphism at the 1p13 locus, rs12740374, creates a C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein) transcription factor binding site and alters the hepatic expression of the SORT1 gene. With small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown and viral overexpression in mouse liver, we demonstrate that Sort1 alters plasma LDL-C and very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) particle levels by modulating hepatic VLDL secretion. Thus, we provide functional evidence for a novel regulatory pathway for lipoprotein metabolism and suggest that modulation of this pathway may alter risk for MI in humans. We also demonstrate that common noncoding DNA variants identified by GWASs can directly contribute to clinical phenotypes.
It has recently been suggested that the endogenous retroviruses present in many different species might be involved during stimulation of the immune system of their hosts. We have now studied the expression of two avian retroviral antigens p27 and gp85 in chicken lymphoid cells by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) and by complement-dependent microcytotoxicity (CDM). We have now found that these viral antigens are expressed in peripheral blood leukocytes of adults and embryos and in splenic and bursal lymphocytes of Spafas gs- chf- chickens but they are not expressed in fibroblasts cultured from the feather follicles of the same individual adult birds nor in fibroblasts cultured from embryos of the same flock. The differential expression of viral antigens in leukocytes may be related to a specific property or function of these cells.
The three-dimensional structure of the amino-terminal core domain (residues 1 through 151) of the human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) capsid protein has been solved by multidimensional heteronuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The structure is unlike those of previously characterized viral coat proteins and is composed of seven alpha helices, two beta hairpins, and an exposed partially ordered loop. The domain is shaped like an arrowhead, with the beta hairpins and loop exposed at the trailing edge and the carboxyl-terminal helix projecting from the tip. The proline residue Pro1 forms a salt bridge with a conserved, buried aspartate residue (Asp51), which suggests that the amino terminus of the protein rearranges upon proteolytic maturation. The binding site for cyclophilin A, a cellular rotamase that is packaged into the HIV-1 virion, is located on the exposed loop and encompasses the essential proline residue Pro90. In the free monomeric domain, Pro90 adopts kinetically trapped cis and trans conformations, raising the possibility that cyclophilin A catalyzes interconversion of the cis- and trans-Pro90 loop structures.
Mouse erythroleukaemia cells (also called Friend cells) can be isolated from the spleen of certain strains of mice that have been infected with the Friend virus complex. The cells resemble proerythroblasts and, when exposed to dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) or a variety of other chemicals, can be induced to undergo a programme of differentiation which closely resembles the final stages of normal erythropoiesis. This includes the cessation of proliferation and large increases in the production of messenger RNA for both alpha- and beta-globin. In addition, DMSO induces a rapid (less than 2 h) decrease in c-myc mRNA levels. The c-myc oncogene is expressed in the majority of proliferating normal cells and altered expression of the gene has been implicated in the genesis of a wide variety of tumours. To study the influence of oncogene activation on differentiation, we have transfected viral-promoter-driven c-myc genes into mouse erythroleukaemia cells. Constitutive c-myc expression was found to block DMSO-induced differentiation.
The initiation of protein synthesis can be regulated in mammalian cells by protein kinases which phosphorylate the alpha subunit of initiation factor eIF-2. This phosphorylation results in a block in the recycling of eIF-2 and in the inhibition of messenger RNA binding to 80S initiation complexes. After eIF-2 alpha is phosphorylated, the mRNA becomes associated with 48S complexes consisting of a 40S ribosomal subunit, eIF-2 (alpha P), GDP and Met-tRNAf. One of the eIF-2 alpha kinases is activated by low concentrations of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). This kinase (PKds) is present at a basal level in all mammalian cells investigated and its synthesis is induced in cells treated with interferon. The PKds may be involved in the inhibition of translation of viral mRNA in interferon-treated cells infected with RNA viruses, as it is activated by viral replicative complexes. It is not known, however, if the activated PKds preferentially inhibits the translation of viral mRNA when cellular protein synthesis proceeds at a normal rate in infected cells. We now report that mRNA covalently linked to dsRNA is preferentially inhibited from binding to 80S complexes by a localized activation of PKds. This suggests that in interferon-treated cells the binding of some nascent viral mRNAs to functional initiation complexes may be preferentially inhibited by a similar mechanism.
Chick embryo fibroblasts (CEF) infected with avian sarcoma virus become rapidly transformed as a result of expression of the viral src gene in the form of a single polypeptide of molecular weight 60,000 (pp60src) with protein kinase activity and suggested preferential association with the plasma membrane. Studies with normal avian and mammalian cells have revealed the presence of an antigenically related protein which seems to have similar kinase activity, but which is present at less than 1% of the levels of virally induced src protein found in transformed cells. As dynamic phosphorylation is important in numerous regulatory processes, the phenotypic expression of transformation may arise from an imbalance in one or more regulatory mechanisms that are controlled by protein phosphorylation. The cell membrane is affected during transformation, including its phosphotransferase activity. The latter has been shown using isolated membrane fractions whose properties may be changed during preparation. Therefore, we have compared the phosphorylation state of individual membrane proteins found in intact normal and RSV-transformed cells and report here the identification of two heavily phosphorylated, acidic membrane proteins in normal CEF which are specifically dephosphorylated on transformation by wild-type and temperature-sensitive Rous sarcoma viruses.
Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is a suspected causative agent of adult T-cell leukemia. One of the viral genes encodes a protein (tat) that not only results in transactivation of viral gene expression but may also regulate the expression of certain cellular genes that are important for cell growth. Transgenic mice that expressed the authentic tat protein under the control of the HTLV-1 long terminal repeat were generated, and cell types that are permissive for the viral promoter and the effects of the tat gene on these cells were studied. Three of eight founder mice with high levels of expression of the transgene in muscle were bred and then analyzed. All developed soft tissue tumors at multiple sites between 13 to 17 weeks of age. This phenotype was transmitted to nine of nine offspring that inherited the tat gene and were available for analysis. The remaining five founders expressed the transgene in the thymus, as well as in muscle. This second group of mice all exhibited extensive thymic depletion and growth retardation; in all of these mice, death occurred between 3 to 6 weeks of age before tumors became macroscopically visible. The tat gene under the control of the HTLV-1 regulatory region showed tissue-specific expression and the tat protein efficiently induced mesenchymal tumors. The data establish tat as an oncogenic protein and HTLV-1 as a transforming virus.
We modeled the mobility of mobile phone users in order to study the fundamental spreading patterns that characterize a mobile virus outbreak. We find that although Bluetooth viruses can reach all susceptible handsets with time, they spread slowly because of human mobility, offering ample opportunities to deploy antiviral software. In contrast, viruses using multimedia messaging services could infect all users in hours, but currently a phase transition on the underlying call graph limits them to only a small fraction of the susceptible users. These results explain the lack of a major mobile virus breakout so far and predict that once a mobile operating system's market share reaches the phase transition point, viruses will pose a serious threat to mobile communications.
Hybridization measurements among the DNA's of six weakly tumorigenic strains of human adenovirus type 7 reveal that all six strains are very closely related (83- to 110-percent nucleotide sequence homology). The DNA homology between these six type 7 strains and nontumorigenic types 2 and 4 is 32 percent and 52 percent, respectively. The 10- to 20-percent homology between the type 7 DNA's and those of "potent" tumorigenic types 12 and 18 indicates a very low degree of genetic relatedness. These data indicate that, if the carcinogenic potential of adenovirus types 7, 12, and 18 lies in the possession of nucleotide sequences common to these three viruses, these regions represent a small portion of the total genome, approximately one to three viral cistrons.
All retroviruses possess a highly error-prone reverse transcriptase, but the extent of the consequent sequence diversity and the rate of evolution differ greatly among retroviruses. Because of the high mutability of retroviruses, it is not the generation of new viral variants that limits the extent of diversity and the rate of evolution of retroviruses, but rather the selection forces that act on these variants. Here, we suggest that two selection forces--the immune response and the limited availability of appropriate target cells during transmission and persistence--are chiefly responsible for the observed sequence diversity in untreated retroviral infections. We illustrate these aspects of positive selection by reference to specific lentiviruses [human and simian immunodeficiency viruses (HIV and SIV)] and oncoviruses [feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and human T cell leukemia virus (HTLV)] that differ in their extent of variation and in disease outcomes.
Laboratory isolates of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) such as HTLV-IIIB are generally T cell line-tropic and highly sensitive to neutralization by soluble CD4 (sCD4), a potential antiviral agent that is undergoing clinical trial. However, many primary HIV-1 isolates are macrophage-tropic and sCD4-resistant. Envelope V3 loop sequences derived from primary HIV-1 isolates were sufficient to confer on HTLV-IIIB not only the tissue tropism but also the degree of sCD4 neutralization resistance characteristic of their HIV-1 strains of origin. Single amino acid changes in the V3 loop enhanced sCD4 resistance by up to tenfold. These observations suggest that the tissue tropism and sCD4 neutralization sensitivity of HIV-1 isolates are regulated by similar mechanisms.
The cells of two hamster ependymomas, originally induced by intracerebral inoculation with simian virus 40 in newborn animals, have been serially cultured in vitro. None of the virus was detected in cell-free culture fluids or cell lysates. All cells retained their neoplastic potential when newborn hamsters were inoculated. Data suggest that viral nucleic acid is permanently present in some tumor cells.
Single-stranded 35S and 20S viral RNA species are synthesized in virus-producing mouse and rat cells transformed by the murine sarcoma virus. A transformed hamster cell line that does not produce virus synthesizes 35S, but not 20S viral RNA.
A retroviral vector was used to insert human alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1AT) complementary DNA into the genome of mouse fibroblasts to create a clonal population of mouse fibroblasts secreting human alpha 1AT. After demonstrating that this clone of fibroblasts produced alpha 1AT after more than 100 population doublings in the absence of selection pressure, the clone was transplanted into the peritoneal cavities of nude mice. When the animals were evaluated 4 weeks later, human alpha 1AT was detected in both sera and the epithelial surface of the lungs. The transplanted clone of fibroblasts could be recovered from the peritoneal cavities of those mice and demonstrated to still be producing human alpha 1AT. Thus, even after removal of selective pressure, a single clone of retroviral vector-infected cells that expressed an exogenous gene in vitro, continued to do so in vivo, and when recovered, continued to produce the product of the exogenous gene.
Several viral and bacterial live recombinant vaccine vehicles are being developed to produce a new generation of vaccines against a broad spectrum of infectious diseases. The human tuberculosis vaccine Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) has features that make it a particularly attractive live recombinant vaccine vehicle. BCG and other mycobacteria are highly effective adjuvants, and the immune response to mycobacteria has been studied extensively. With nearly two billion immunizations, BCG has a long record of safe use in man. It is one of the few vaccines that can be given at birth, it engenders long-lived immune responses with only a single dose, and there is a worldwide distribution network with experience in BCG vaccination. Recently developed molecular genetic tools and methods for mycobacteria have provided the means to introduce foreign genes into BCG. Here we report that a variety of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 polypeptides can be expressed in BCG recombinants under the control of the mycobacterial hsp70 promoter and that the foreign polypeptides produced in BCG can induce antibody and T-cell responses. These results demonstrate that BCG can be used as a live recombinant vaccine vehicle to induce immune responses to pathogen proteins produced by the bacillus.
Sindbis virus, an enveloped virus with a single-stranded RNA genome, was engineered to express a bacterial protein, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT), in cultured insect, avian, and mammalian cells. The vectors were self-replicating and gene expression was efficient and rapid; up to 10(8) CAT polypeptides were produced per infected cell in 16 to 20 hours. CAT expression could be made temperature-sensitive by means of a derivative that incorporated a temperature-sensitive mutation in viral RNA synthesis. Vector genomic RNAs were packaged into infectious particles when Sindbis helper virus was used to supply virion structural proteins. The vector RNAs were stable to at least seven cycles of infection. The expression of CAT increased about 10(3)-fold, despite a 10(15)-fold dilution during the passaging. Sindbis virus vectors should prove useful for expressing large quantities of gene products in a variety of animal cells.
Superantigens bind class II major histocompatibility proteins and stimulate powerful proliferative responses of T lymphocytes bearing particular V beta sequences as part of their alpha beta antigen receptor. Exogenous bacterial superantigens are responsible for food poisoning and toxic shock syndrome. Murine virus-encoded self-superantigens induce clonal deletion of T lymphocytes. Although superantigen-like properties have been suggested for human immunodeficiency virus-1, no viral superantigen has been identified in humans. Here we report that the nucleocapsid of the rabies virus is an exogenous superantigen specific for V beta 8 human T lymphocytes which binds to HLA class II alpha-chains.
All reactions involving reverse transcription of RNA are segregated from the cytosol within a subviral particle or capsid composed of the major capsid protein, the polymerase and the RNA template. A key step in the formation of these particles is the selective encapsidation of the RNA template. Although an important general feature of the reverse transcription pathway, encapsidation has been carefully studied only for retroviruses. We have now examined the encapsidation reaction in a family of enveloped DNA viruses that replicate by reverse transcription--the hepatitis B viruses (hepadnaviruses). Our results indicate that the hepadnaviral polymerase (P) gene product is required for RNA packaging, and that the encapsidation function of the enzyme can be separated from its DNA polymerase activity. To our knowledge, this is the first description of a role for polymerase gene products in this step of the reverse transcription pathway.
The lysis of murine sarcoma virus-murine leukaemia virus (MSV-MuLV)-induced tumour cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) appears to require that an antigen specified by MSV-MuLV, or induced by the infection, be presented in association with class I major histocompatibility complex antigens. The viral proteins of the tumorigenic MuLV seem to be a part of the antigens recognized by these dually restricted anti-MuLV CTL, but the precise nature of the putative viral antigen(s) recognized by CTL is unknown. Studies using recombinant viruses have suggested that a product of the viral envelope gene (env gene), perhaps the glycoprotein gp70, is the viral antigen recognized by CTL. Attempts to use purified gp70 or anti-gp70 antibodies to block CTL recognition of retrovirus-induced tumour cells, however, have yielded contradictory results. To examine more closely the role of gp70 in the CTL response to MuLV infections, we have constructed murine cell lines which express only the env gene of the Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV). We show here that BALB/c-3T3 cells expressing the M-MuLV envelope gene products on their cell surface are susceptible to lysis by M-MuLV-specific CTL.
In 1996, Projet RETRO-CI, a U.S.-Ivoirian collaboration funded by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, hired virologist John Nkengasong to build a virology lab from scratch. Now Nkengasong runs one of the best equipped HIV labs in sub-Saharan Africa and has published dozens of papers helping to clarify properties of specific strains of the virus.
The 1918 "Spanish" influenza pandemic represents the largest recorded outbreak of any infectious disease. The crystal structure of the uncleaved precursor of the major surface antigen of the extinct 1918 virus was determined at 3.0 angstrom resolution after reassembly of the hemagglutinin gene from viral RNA fragments preserved in 1918 formalin-fixed lung tissues. A narrow avian-like receptor-binding site, two previously unobserved histidine patches, and a less exposed surface loop at the cleavage site that activates viral membrane fusion reveal structural features primarily found in avian viruses, which may have contributed to the extraordinarily high infectivity and mortality rates observed during 1918.
The adenovirus E1a protein stimulates transcription of a wide variety of viral and cellular genes. It is shown here that E1a has the two functions characteristic of a typical cellular activator: one direct E1a to the promoter, perhaps by interacting with a DNA-bound protein, and the other, an activating region, enables the bound activator to stimulate transcription.
Recovery from viral encephalomyelitis requires immune-mediated noncytolytic clearance from neurons by mechanisms assumed to be the same for all neurons. In alphavirus encephalomyelitis, antibody clears infectious virus from neurons in all regions of the central nervous system (CNS), but CD8 T cells contribute to elimination of viral RNA. To understand the role of T cells in clearance, we infected antibody knockout mice with Sindbis virus. Virus was cleared from spinal cord and brain stem neurons, but not from cortical neurons, and required both CD4 and CD8 T cells. Infection with cytokine-expressing recombinant viruses suggested that T cells used interferon-gamma, but not tumor necrosis factor alpha, in clearing virus and that populations of neurons differ in responsiveness to this effector pathway.
UV light is a potent mutagen in most living cells, but molecular analysis of its mode of action in animal cells has not been possible because of the high complexity of the cell genome. Therefore, we have used simian virus 40 (SV40) as a biological probe to study the mutagenic effect of UV-irradiation at the molecular level. A thermosensitive SV40 mutant of the large T antigen (tsA58), which is defective at high temperature for initiation of viral DNA replication and for repression of early transcription, was UV-irradiated in vitro, then replicated in monkey kidney cells. Revertants of tsA58 were selected for growth at the nonpermissive temperature, then the reversion sites were mapped by using the marker rescue technique, and precisely localized by DNA sequencing. We report here that all revertants analysed showed one or two base pair substitutions localized in the C-terminal half of the T antigen gene. The original tsA58 mutation was still present in all revertant genomes. In 16 DNAs sequenced, seven reversion sites were found on the large T antigen gene, all of which localized opposite a possible UV-induced pyrimidine-pyrimidine lesion, suggesting targeted mutagenesis. UV-irradiation of the host cell before infection did not change the pattern of reversion sites at the molecular level, although it strongly increased the mutation frequency. These results demonstrate for the first time in animal cells the specificity of UV-induced mutagenesis.
The hallmark of retroviral transforming genes (onc genes) are specific sequences which are unrelated to essential virion genes but are closely related to sequences in normal cells. Viral onc genes probably originated from rare transductions of these cellular sequences by retroviruses without onc genes. Consequently, it has been suggested that retroviral transforming genes are present in normal cells in a latent form. However, recent structural analyses indicate that viral onc genes and cellular genes, which share specific sequences, are not isogenic. They differ from each other in scattered point mutations and in unique coding regions. The cellular genes containing onc-related sequences are expressed in normal cells compatible with a normal function. There is as yet no functional or consistent circumstantial evidence that these cellular genes cause cancer in animals that are not infected by viruses with onc genes. Therefore, it is still uncertain whether the onc-related cellular genes have oncogenic potential beyond their role as progenitors of retroviral onc genes.
In retroviral integration, the viral integration protein (integrase) mediates a concerted DNA cleavage-ligation reaction in which the target DNA is cleaved and the resulting 5' ends of target DNA are joined to the 3' ends of viral DNA. Through an oligonucleotide substrate that mimics the recombination intermediate formed by this initial cleavage-ligation reaction, the purified integrase of human immunodeficiency virus was shown to promote the same reaction in reverse, a process called disintegration. Analysis of a set of structurally related substrates showed that integrase could promote a range of DNA cleavage-ligation reactions. When the viral DNA component of the disintegration substrate was single-stranded, integrase could mediate a DNA splicing reaction analogous to RNA splicing.
The injection of Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) into the wing web of newly hatched chicks causes a rapidly growing sarcomatous tumour which is palpable within 1 week of inoculation; and cultures of fibroblasts derived from chick embryos (CEF) and infected with RSV become rapidly transformed. Genetic studies have determined that expression of a single viral gene, designated v-src, is necessary for neoplastic transformation. This gene codes for a 60,000-molecular weight phosphoprotein termed pp60SPC , which possesses a protein kinase activity that phosphorylates polypeptides on tyrosine residues and is constitutively expressed in infected CEF cells. It has been suggested that transformation, and possibly tumorigenesis, may result solely from the consequences of this increase in tyrosine phosphorylations. The pathogenicity of RSV in chick embryos in ovo is less clear. Murphy and Rous suggested that RSV may have caused tumours in "various tissues" of "some embryos", but the subsequent studies of Milford and Duran - Reynals , as well as several other laboratories, failed to find any evidence of intraembryonic tumours in RSV-infected early embryos. The findings of Duran - Reynals , if correct, cannot be explained easily in view of our present understanding of RSV tumorigenicity. Thus, we have re-examined the interaction of RSV with the avian embryo and confirm here that RSV is nontumorigenic and non-teratogenic when microinjected into day 4 chicken embryos. In addition, we found that (1) the virus not only replicates in the embryo, but it also expresses an active src-specific protein kinase and (2) once the cells from the infected limbs are disrupted and placed in culture, they are capable of expressing the transformed phenotype after a 24-h delay.
The entry of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) into cells requires the sequential interaction of the viral exterior envelope glycoprotein, gp120, with the CD4 glycoprotein and a chemokine receptor on the cell surface. These interactions initiate a fusion of the viral and cellular membranes. Although gp120 can elicit virus-neutralizing antibodies, HIV eludes the immune system. We have solved the X-ray crystal structure at 2.5 A resolution of an HIV-1 gp120 core complexed with a two-domain fragment of human CD4 and an antigen-binding fragment of a neutralizing antibody that blocks chemokine-receptor binding. The structure reveals a cavity-laden CD4-gp120 interface, a conserved binding site for the chemokine receptor, evidence for a conformational change upon CD4 binding, the nature of a CD4-induced antibody epitope, and specific mechanisms for immune evasion. Our results provide a framework for understanding the complex biology of HIV entry into cells and should guide efforts to intervene.
Endogenous retroviruses are multicopy retroelements accounting for nearly 10% of murine or human genomes. These retroelements spread into our ancestral genome millions of years ago and have acted as a driving force for genome evolution. Endogenous retroviruses may also be deleterious for their host, and have been implicated in cancers and autoimmune diseases. Most retroelements have lost replication competence because of the accumulation of inactivating mutations, but several, including some murine intracisternal A-particle (IAP) and MusD sequences, are still mobile. These elements encode a reverse transcriptase activity and move by retrotransposition, an intracellular copy-and-paste process involving an RNA intermediate. The host has developed mechanisms to silence their expression, mainly cosuppression and gene methylation. Here we identify another level of antiviral control, mediated by APOBEC3G, a member of the cytidine deaminase family that was previously shown to block HIV replication. We show that APOBEC3G markedly inhibits retrotransposition of IAP and MusD elements, and induces G-to-A hypermutations in their DNA copies. APOBEC3G, by editing viral genetic material, provides an ancestral wide cellular defence against endogenous and exogenous invaders.
Recently, Rossman et al. have described the three-dimensional structure of a human rhinovirus. A possible host cell surface receptor binding site was identified with a cleft on each icosahedral face. Two highly conserved amino-acid sequences found in rhino-, polio-, and foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) viruses are located near the base of this site and could be important in maintaining its topology. We have prepared site-specific antibodies to two synthetic peptides which include these sequences. The antibodies bind to the predicted capsid proteins of rhinovirus and neutralize approximately 60% of 48 rhinovirus serotypes tested. These results could provide a route to a rhinovirus vaccine effective against most of the numerous serotypes of this virus.
A small protein, VPg, is covalently linked to the 5' end of the plus-stranded poliovirus genomic RNA. Poliovirus messenger RNA, identical in nucleotide sequence to genomic RNA, is not capped at its 5' end by the methylated structure that is common to most eukaryotic mRNAs. These discoveries presented two problems. First, as cap structures are usually required for translation of mRNA into protein, how does this uncapped viral RNA act as a template for translation? Second, what is the function of VPg? The identification of the internal ribosomal-entry site, which allows the entry of ribosomes into viral mRNA independently of the 5' mRNA end, has solved the first conundrum. Here we describe the resolution of the second problem. VPg is linked to the genomic RNA through the 5'-terminal uridylic acid of the RNA. We show that VPg can be uridylylated by the poliovirus RNA polymerase 3Dpol. Uridylylated VPg can then prime the transcription of polyadenylate RNA by 3Dpol to produce VPg-linked poly(U). Initiation of transcription of the poliovirus genome from the polyadenylated 3' end therefore depends on VPg.
The human microbiome refers to the community of microorganisms, including prokaryotes, viruses, and microbial eukaryotes, that populate the human body. The National Institutes of Health launched an initiative that focuses on describing the diversity of microbial species that are associated with health and disease. The first phase of this initiative includes the sequencing of hundreds of microbial reference genomes, coupled to metagenomic sequencing from multiple body sites. Here we present results from an initial reference genome sequencing of 178 microbial genomes. From 547,968 predicted polypeptides that correspond to the gene complement of these strains, previously unidentified ("novel") polypeptides that had both unmasked sequence length greater than 100 amino acids and no BLASTP match to any nonreference entry in the nonredundant subset were defined. This analysis resulted in a set of 30,867 polypeptides, of which 29,987 (approximately 97%) were unique. In addition, this set of microbial genomes allows for approximately 40% of random sequences from the microbiome of the gastrointestinal tract to be associated with organisms based on the match criteria used. Insights into pan-genome analysis suggest that we are still far from saturating microbial species genetic data sets. In addition, the associated metrics and standards used by our group for quality assurance are presented.
Ebola virus (EboV) is a highly pathogenic enveloped virus that causes outbreaks of zoonotic infection in Africa. The clinical symptoms are manifestations of the massive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to infection and in many outbreaks, mortality exceeds 75%. The unpredictable onset, ease of transmission, rapid progression of disease, high mortality and lack of effective vaccine or therapy have created a high level of public concern about EboV. Here we report the identification of a novel benzylpiperazine adamantane diamide-derived compound that inhibits EboV infection. Using mutant cell lines and informative derivatives of the lead compound, we show that the target of the inhibitor is the endosomal membrane protein Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1). We find that NPC1 is essential for infection, that it binds to the virus glycoprotein (GP), and that antiviral compounds interfere with GP binding to NPC1. Combined with the results of previous studies of GP structure and function, our findings support a model of EboV infection in which cleavage of the GP1 subunit by endosomal cathepsin proteases removes heavily glycosylated domains to expose the amino-terminal domain, which is a ligand for NPC1 and regulates membrane fusion by the GP2 subunit. Thus, NPC1 is essential for EboV entry and a target for antiviral therapy.
The genome of the human immunodeficiency virus is highly prone to recombination, although it is not obvious whether recombinants arise infrequently or whether they are constantly being spawned but escape identification because of the massive and rapid turnover of virus particles. Here we use fluorescence in situ hybridization to estimate the number of proviruses harboured by individual splenocytes from two HIV patients, and determine the extent of recombination by sequencing amplified DNA from these cells. We find an average of three or four proviruses per cell and evidence for huge numbers of recombinants and extensive genetic variation. Although this creates problems for phylogenetic analyses, which ignore recombination effects, the intracellular variation may help to broaden immune recognition.
Acyl chain compositions of the lipids of three strains of influenza virus show differences not anticipated from current theories of myxovirus assembly. Fatty acids of viruses with antigenically related envelope proteins show greater resemblance than those of an unrelated strain, which suggests that these proteins influence the composition of membrane lipids at the site of viral release.
The nucleotide sequence of the genome of HTLV-III, the infectious agent etiologically associated with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome, predicts a small open reading frame, termed sor, located between the pol and env genes. A DNA segment containing 82 percent of the sor region was inserted into a prokaryotic expression vector, pJL6, to determine whether sor encodes a viral protein and to gain some insight into its possible function. The bacterially synthesized sor protein reacted with sera from individuals infected with HTLV-III, indicating that sor is expressed as a protein product or products that are immunogenic in vivo. Antibodies to the purified, bacterially synthesized sor protein were found to react specifically with the same protein and also with a protein of molecular weight 23,000 (23K) in HTLV-III-infected H9 cell extracts. The 23K protein comigrated with a protein immunoprecipitated by the serum of a hemophiliac patient with antibodies to HTLV-III, suggesting that this protein is probably the sor gene product.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the causative agent of AIDS, infects human lymphocytes and monocytes. An interaction between the viral envelope gp 120 and CD4 protein is required to initiate an infectious cycle. HIV infection in vitro induces syncytium formation by cell-to-cell fusion; this aspect of viral cytopathogenicity is even more dependent on gp120-CD4 interactions. That gp120 is extremely heavily glycosylated (31-36 N-linked glycans per molecule), suggests involvement of N-linked glycans in the gp120-CD4 interaction. We therefore investigated the effects of castanospermine, 1-deoxynojirimycin (dNM) and 1-deoxymannojirimycin (dMM), three trimming glycosidase inhibitors which perturb N-linked glycan structure, on induction of the formation of syncytium between HIV-infected and CD4-expressing cells. The glucosidase inhibitors castanospermine and dNM, but not the mannosidase inhibitor dMM, inhibited syncytium formation and interfered with infectivity. The potential of glucosidase inhibitors as anti-HIV therapeutic agents deserves further investigation, especially because dNM and related compounds show little toxicity in vitro and in vivo.
Rapid induction of type I interferon expression, a central event in establishing the innate antiviral response, requires cooperative activation of numerous transcription factors. Although signaling pathways that activate the transcription factors nuclear factor kappaB and ATF-2/c-Jun have been well characterized, activation of the interferon regulatory factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 has remained a critical missing link in understanding interferon signaling. We report here that the IkappaB kinase (IKK)-related kinases IKKepsilon and TANK-binding kinase 1 are components of the virus-activated kinase that phosphorylate IRF-3 and IRF-7. These studies illustrate an essential role for an IKK-related kinase pathway in triggering the host antiviral response to viral infection.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) isolated from woodchucks chronically infected with the woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) carry low levels of nonreplicating WHV DNA. When PBLs from chronic carrier woodchucks were activated in culture with the generalized mitogen lipopolysaccharide (LPS), WHV DNA replication was initiated in cells obtained from one of three animals examined. Intracellular WHV core particles, containing WHV DNA replication intermediates, RNA/DNA hybrid molecules, and an active endogenous DNA polymerase, appeared 3 days after the start of LPS stimulation. After 5 to 7 days of LPS stimulation, WHV DNA-containing particles, which displayed the properties of intact, mature virions, were released into the culture medium. These studies provide evidence for reactivation of a latent WHV infection of circulating lymphoid cells and indicate that the presence of nonreplicating hepadnaviral DNA in lymphoid cells represents a potentially active infection following cellular activation.
Retroviruses have proved to be useful reagents for studying genetic and epigenetic (such as regulatory) changes in eukaryotic cells, for assessing functional and structural relationships between transposable genetic elements, for inducing insertional mutations, including some important in oncogenesis, and for transporting genes into eukaryotic cells, either after natural transduction of putative cellular oncogenes or after experimental construction of recombinant viruses. Many of these properties of retroviruses depend on their capacity to establish a DNA (proviral) form of their RNA genomes as a stable component of host chromosomes, in either somatic or germinal cells.
The Harvey and Kirsten strains of murine sarcoma virus encode enzymatically and serologically related p21 src proteins which are required for virally mediated cellular transformation. The genes in each virus encoding p21 show such extensive divergence from each other that cloned probes from these genes detect distinct sets of cellular genes in the DNA from several vertebrate species. These data suggest that cellular p21 sarc genes constitute a divergent family of vertebrate genes that can regulate the growth of cells.
During its lytic cycle bacteriophage Mu uses repeated transposition as a mode of DNA synthesis. These transpositional events are undoubtedly replicative, and presumably semi-conservative. In a Mu lysogen this type of transposition can start immediately after prophage induction. However, in an infective cycle the Mu genome (which is injected into the host cell as a linear molecule flanked by short random sequences of bacterial DNA) must first become integrated into the host chromosome. Little is known about how this occurs apart from the fact that the bacterial sequences at either end of the Mu genome are lost in the process. The integration is thus similar to a transposition event. In an attempt to determine whether this type of Mu transposition (between a linear donor molecule and a circular recipient) is also semi-conservative we have analysed the progeny phage arising from an infective cycle in which the parental DNA was heterozygous for a known genetic marker. The expectation is that if integration of the infecting Mu genome occurs by a single semi-conservative transpositional event then pure phage bursts should be produced as the genetic information on only one strand would be preserved throughout the lytic cycle. The experiments reported here do not support this expectation in that the infected cells yield mixed bursts, suggesting that Mu integration is a conservative, rather than a semi-conservative event.
Antibodies reactive with proteins of human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV) can be found in Old World monkeys. A T-lymphocyte cell line established from a seropositive baboon (Papio cynocephalus) was analyzed for the presence of viral DNA sequences. The provirus found in these cells was related to but distinct from HTLV subgroup I. These results add to recent evidence from human studies that HTLV represents a spectrum of infectious T-lymphotropic retroviruses that includes closely and distantly related members.
With the use of antibody for herpesvirus nonvirion antigens (not structural components of the virus) complement fixing reactivity has been shown for soluble membrane antigens separated from lip and cervical carcinomas but not for similar extracts from normal vaginal tissue or intestinal carcinoma. Neither the serum obtained from the guinea pig before hyperimmunization with the herpesvirus nonvirion antigen nor the antiserum of guinea pigs immunized with comparable uninfected cell extracts reacted with these tumor soluble membrane antigens. Since the above soluble membrane antigens could be specific markers for the presence of virus genome within the tumor cells, the findings could support an etiological role of herpesvirus in selected human malignancies.
Smallpox eradication culminated the most successful antimicrobial campaign in medical history. To characterize further the linear double-stranded DNA genome of the aetiological agent of smallpox, we have determined the entire nucleotide sequence of the highly virulent variola major virus, strain Bangladesh-1975 (VAR-BSH; 186,102 base pairs, 33.7% G + C; Genbank accession number, L22579). Here we highlight features of the molecule and focus on a few of the 187 putative proteins that probably contribute to pathogenicity and virus host-range properties. One hundred and fifty proteins were markedly similar to those of vaccinia virus (smallpox vaccine), for which a complete sequence has been reported for strain Copenhagen (VAC-CPN; 191,636 base pairs, 33.3% G + C). The remaining 37 proteins reflected variola-specific sequences or open reading frame divergences for variant proteins, which are often truncated or elongated compared with their vaccinia counterparts.
Influenza A viruses cause recurrent outbreaks at local or global scale with potentially severe consequences for human health and the global economy. Recently, a new strain of influenza A virus was detected that causes disease in and transmits among humans, probably owing to little or no pre-existing immunity to the new strain. On 11 June 2009 the World Health Organization declared that the infections caused by the new strain had reached pandemic proportion. Characterized as an influenza A virus of the H1N1 subtype, the genomic segments of the new strain were most closely related to swine viruses. Most human infections with swine-origin H1N1 influenza viruses (S-OIVs) seem to be mild; however, a substantial number of hospitalized individuals do not have underlying health issues, attesting to the pathogenic potential of S-OIVs. To achieve a better assessment of the risk posed by the new virus, we characterized one of the first US S-OIV isolates, A/California/04/09 (H1N1; hereafter referred to as CA04), as well as several other S-OIV isolates, in vitro and in vivo. In mice and ferrets, CA04 and other S-OIV isolates tested replicate more efficiently than a currently circulating human H1N1 virus. In addition, CA04 replicates efficiently in non-human primates, causes more severe pathological lesions in the lungs of infected mice, ferrets and non-human primates than a currently circulating human H1N1 virus, and transmits among ferrets. In specific-pathogen-free miniature pigs, CA04 replicates without clinical symptoms. The assessment of human sera from different age groups suggests that infection with human H1N1 viruses antigenically closely related to viruses circulating in 1918 confers neutralizing antibody activity to CA04. Finally, we show that CA04 is sensitive to approved and experimental antiviral drugs, suggesting that these compounds could function as a first line of defence against the recently declared S-OIV pandemic.
The human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV) types I and II have two nonstructural genes that are encoded in overlapping reading frames. One of these genes, known as tax, has been shown to encode a protein responsible for enhanced transcription (transactivation) from the viral long terminal repeats (LTRs). Genetic evidence indicates that the second nonstructural gene of HTLV-II, here designated rex, acts in trans to modulate tax gene-mediated transactivation in a concentration-dependent fashion. The rex gene may regulate the process of transactivation during the viral life cycle.
[(3)H]RNA isolated from "virus-free," summer phase, renal adenocarcinomas of Rana pipiens labeled with [(3)H]uridine hybridizes with DNA of herpesvirus particles isolated from the winter phase Lucke tumor. Transcription of the herpesvirus genome in virus-free tumors provides additional evidence for the viral etiology of this tumor.
Rotaviruses are the leading cause of severe gastroenteritis and dehydrating diarrhea in young children and animals worldwide. A murine model and "backpack tumor" transplantation were used to determine the protective effect of antibodies against VP4(an outer capsid viral protein) and VP6(a major inner capsid viral protein). Only two non-neutralizing immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibodies to VP6 were capable of preventing primary and resolving chronic murine rotavirus infections. These antibodies were not active, however, when presented directly to the luminal side of the intestinal tract. These findings support the hypothesis that in vivo intracellular viral inactivation by secretory IgA during transcytosis is a mechanism of host defense against rotavirus infection.
T cells transformed by Herpesvirus saimiri express seven viral U-rich noncoding RNAs of unknown function called HSURs. We noted that conserved sequences in HSURs 1 and 2 constitute potential binding sites for three host-cell microRNAs (miRNAs). Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed that HSURs 1 and 2 interact with the predicted miRNAs in virally transformed T cells. The abundance of one of these miRNAs, miR-27, is dramatically lowered in transformed cells, with consequent effects on the expression of miR-27 target genes. Transient knockdown and ectopic expression of HSUR 1 demonstrate that it directs degradation of mature miR-27 in a sequence-specific and binding-dependent manner. This viral strategy illustrates use of a ncRNA to manipulate host-cell gene expression via the miRNA pathway.
I-Adamantanamine hydrochloride, added to chick embryo cells, inhibited focus production upon subsequent inoculation of the cells with Rous and Esh sarcoma viruses. Addition of the chemical to suspensions of Rous and Esh viruses before they were added to chick cell cultures did not inactivate the viruses; and the addition to chick cells did not prevent plaque formation following their inoculation with Newcastle disease virus. This indicates that cells treated with 1-adamantanamine hydrochloride are capable of supporting viral replication, and these observations suggest that the drug inhibits growth of two oncogenic viruses by prevention of virus penetration, but not by a virucidal effect or cell intoxication.
Oncogenic transformation of cultured cells by inactivated herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2 has been demonstrated. Expression of HSV information in these transformed cells has been shown by immunofluorescence studies, detection of HSV neutralizing antibody in sera from tumour-bearing animals and by hybridization of HSV-specific RNA. Molecular hybridization studies of DNA from HSV-2 transformed hamster cells have detected up to 40% of the HSV genome present in several copies. Complementation of three HSV-2 temperature-sensitive mutants when superinfecting the RE1 rat embryo cell line (transformed by the HSV-2 temperature-sensitive mutant ts1) suggests that resident viral genes can be expressed. Brown et al. used a similar approach to detect HSV information latent in human ganglia. We report here retrieval of intertypic HSV recombinants from HSV transformed cells after superinfection with ts mutants of the alternative serotype of HSV. Restriction enzyme analysis which clearly differentiates between HSV-1 and HSV-2 DNA has demonstrated the isolation of recombinants spanning the genome and of virus indistinguishable from the original transforming virus.
Brome mosaic virus (BMV) is a plant virus whose genome consists of three RNA components. A previously described viral complementary DNA expression system has been used to express both wild-type and altered genomic RNA's in barley protoplasts. Variants of BMV RNA3 were constructed in which the coat gene had been removed or replaced with sequences encoding chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT). CAT sequences were also inserted near the 5' end of the intact coat gene. When inoculated on protoplasts together with transcripts of BMV RNA's 1 and 2, all of these RNA3 derivatives were replicated and produced subgenomic RNA's analogous to the normal subgenomic coat protein messenger RNA. RNA3 derivatives in which the CAT coding sequences were oriented with the same polarity as viral genes produced significant CAT activity in protoplasts. CAT expression was improved by inserting the CAT gene in frame with the upstream coat protein initiation codon, and exceeded expression in plant cells transformed with Ti plasmid-based vectors.
Complement fixation techniques are described for measuring a virus-like antigen associated with viral hepatitis. Antigen was found in the blood of 98 percent of 130 patients, with the serum form of hepatitis, from whom multiple samples were obtained. Antibodies arising during hepatitis are usually combined with antigen and cause anticomplementary activity in the serum, which is reversible with excess antigen or antibody. Tests for antigen and specific anticomplementary activity can be used diagnostically and to screen blood donors for hepatitis carriers.
The murine cardioviruses, such as the Mengo and encephalomyocarditis viruses, and the bovine aphthoviruses, such as foot-and-mouth disease virus, are distinguished among positive-strand RNA viruses by the presence of long homopolymeric poly(C) tracts within their 5' noncoding sequences. Although the specific lengths (60-350 bases) and sequence discontinuities (for example, uridine residues) that sometimes disrupt the homopolymer have served to characterize natural viral isolates, the biological function of the poly(C) region has never been clear. We now report that complementary DNA-mediated truncation of the Mengo virus poly(C) tract dramatically attenuates the pathogenicity of the virus in mice. Animals injected with viruses with short tracts not only survived inoculation of up to 50 micrograms live virus (10(11) plaque-forming units) but consistently produced high titres of neutralizing antibodies, which conferred long-term immunogenic protection from (normally) lethal virus challenge. We propose that analogous synthetic strains of foot and mouth disease virus could serve as the basis for new attenuated vaccines.
The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transactivator protein, termed Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2), plays a critical role in the regulation of latent viral transcription and in the immortalization of EBV-infected B cells. Unlike most transcription factors, EBNA2 does not bind directly to its cis-responsive DNA element but requires a cellular factor, termed C-promoter binding factor 1 (CBF1). Here, CBF1 was purified and was found to directly interact with EBNA2. CBF1 is identical to a protein thought to be involved in immunoglobulin gene rearrangement, RBPJ kappa. Contrary to previous reports, CBF1-RBPJ kappa did not bind to the recombination signal sequences but instead bound to sites in the EBV C-promoter and in the CD23 promoter.
The herpes simplex virus 1 genome consists of one long and one short stretch of unique sequences flanked by inverted repeat sequences. The nucleotide sequence and RNA map predict 12 open reading frames designated as US1 through US12 within the short stretch of unique sequences. This paper reports the construction of virus mutants from which US2, US3, or US4 had been deleted that are capable of growth in cell culture. One of the three deleted genes, US4, specifies the viral envelope glycoprotein G. Mutants with deletions in US1, US8, US9, US10, US11, and US12 have been previously reported. The nine genes deleted from this region form two clusters, US1 through US4 and US8 through US12, and encode at least two and possibly more structural proteins. The presence of so many genes dispensable for growth in cell culture suggests several hypotheses regarding their function and evolution.
Viruses have been found to induce inflammatory demyelinating lesions in central nervous system (CNS) tissue of both animal and man, either by natural infections or after vaccination. At least two different pathogenic mechanisms have been proposed for these changes, a cytopathic viral infection of oligodendroglia cells with subsequent cell death, and a host immune reaction against virus and brain antigens. We now report the occurrence of cell-mediated immune reactions against basic myelin proteins in the course of coronavirus infections in Lewis rats. Infection of rats with the murine coronavirus JHM leads to demyelinating encephalomyelitis developing several weeks to months postinfection. Lymphocytes from these diseased Lewis rats can be restimulated with basic myelin protein (BMP) and adoptive transfer of these cells leads to lesions resembling those of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) in recipients, which can be accompanied by a mild clinical disease. This model demonstrates that a virus infection in CNS tissue is capable of initiating an autoimmune response which may be of pathogenic importance.
Antigen-specific T cell immunity is HLA-restricted. Human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) mutations that allow escape from host immune responses may therefore be HLA allele-specific. We analyzed HIV-1 reverse transcriptase sequences from a large HLA-diverse population of HIV-1-infected individuals. Polymorphisms in HIV-1 were most evident at sites of least functional or structural constraint and frequently were associated with particular host HLA class I alleles. Absence of polymorphism was also HLA allele-specific. At a population level, the degree of HLA-associated selection in viral sequence was predictive of viral load. These results support a fundamental role for HLA-restricted immune responses in driving and shaping HIV-1 evolution in vivo.
Influenza virus evades prevailing natural and vaccine-induced immunity by accumulating antigenic change in the haemagglutinin surface protein. Linking amino acid substitutions in haemagglutinin epitopes to epidemiology has been problematic because of the scarcity of data connecting these scales. We use experiments on equine influenza virus to address this issue, quantifying how key parameters of viral establishment and shedding increase the probability of transmission with genetic distance between previously immunizing virus and challenge virus. Qualitatively similar patterns emerge from analyses based on antigenic distance and from a published human influenza study. Combination of the equine data and epidemiological models allows us to calculate the effective reproductive number of transmission as a function of relevant genetic change in the virus, illuminating the probability of influenza epidemics as a function of immunity.
Without therapy, most people infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) ultimately progress to AIDS. Rare individuals ('elite controllers') maintain very low levels of HIV RNA without therapy, thereby making disease progression and transmission unlikely. Certain HLA class I alleles are markedly enriched in elite controllers, with the highest association observed for HLA-B57 (ref. 1). Because HLA molecules present viral peptides that activate CD8(+) T cells, an immune-mediated mechanism is probably responsible for superior control of HIV. Here we describe how the peptide-binding characteristics of HLA-B57 molecules affect thymic development such that, compared to other HLA-restricted T cells, a larger fraction of the naive repertoire of B57-restricted clones recognizes a viral epitope, and these T cells are more cross-reactive to mutants of targeted epitopes. Our calculations predict that such a T-cell repertoire imposes strong immune pressure on immunodominant HIV epitopes and emergent mutants, thereby promoting efficient control of the virus. Supporting these predictions, in a large cohort of HLA-typed individuals, our experiments show that the relative ability of HLA-B alleles to control HIV correlates with their peptide-binding characteristics that affect thymic development. Our results provide a conceptual framework that unifies diverse empirical observations, and have implications for vaccination strategies.
Hepatitis delta virus genomic and antigenomic RNAs contain a self-cleavage site hypothesized to function in processing the viral RNA during replication. Self-cleavage requires only a divalent cation and is mediated at the genomic site by a sequence of less than 85 nucleotides. We propose that the genomic self-cleaving sequence element and a corresponding sequence from the anti-genomic RNA could generate related secondary structures. The region of the antigenomic sequence, predicted from the proposed structure, was synthesized and shown to be sufficient for self-cleavage. Evidence for two stems which form a tertiary interaction was obtained by site-specific mutagenesis of the antigenomic sequence. Efficient self-cleavage in 10 M formamide or 5 M urea, also a property of the genomic sequence, was dependent on base-pairing in both stems. But in the absence of denaturants, the stem distal to the site of cleavage was not required, suggesting that the tertiary interaction stabilizes the structure required for self-cleavage.
Human CD4 is the receptor for the gp120 envelope glycoprotein of human immunodeficiency virus and is essential for virus entry into the host cell. Sequence analysis of CD4 has suggested an evolutionary origin from a structure with four immunoglobulin-related domains. Only the two NH2-terminal domains are required to mediate gp120 binding. The extracellular segment of murine CD4 has an overall 50% identity with its human counterpart at the amino-acid level, but fails to bind gp120. To define those residues of human CD4 critical for gp120 binding, we have taken advantage of this species difference and substituted all non-conserved murine for human CD4 residues between amino-acid positions 27-167. We used oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis to create each of 16 individual mutant human CD4 molecules containing from 1-4 amino-acid substitutions. Introduction of as few as three amino acids into corresponding positions of human CD4 abrogates gp120 binding. Furthermore, these critical residues are located in domain I with a contribution from domain II. Modelling studies using the three-dimensional coordinates of the V kappa Bence-Jones REI homodimer localize the site in domain I to the C" beta strand within CDR2 but projecting away from the homologues of principle antigen-binding regions CDR 1 and 3.
The inability of pathogenic animal viruses to be completely neutralized by antibodies can lead to chronic viral infections in which infectious virus persists even in the presence of excess neutralizing antibody. A mechanism that results in this nonneutralized fraction of virus was defined by the topographical relationships of viral epitopes identified with monoclonal antibodies wherein monoclonal antibodies bind to virus and sterically block the binding of neutralizing antibodies.
Although some viruses, particularly the herpes viruses, may never be eliminated from the body, others like influenza A, regularly reinfect humans and boost waning crossreactive CD8+ T-cell immunity. Prolonged T-cell memory is found for viruses that are unlikely to be re-encountered and which do not persist in the host genome, indicating that CD8+ T-cell memory might be independent of continued (or sporadic) antigenic exposure. A feature of virus-specific CD8+ T-cell memory is that antigen-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte precursors (CTLp) are greatly increased and remain high throughout life. The idea that persistence of the inducing antigen is essential is based on experiments in which adoptively transferred CD8+ memory T cells could not be detected for more than a few weeks in naive recipient mice without secondary challenge. Here we show that restimulation of such chimaeric mice with an inducing Sendai virus antigen increases the clonal burst size more than 7-fold within 8 days, making memory CTLp easier to detect in the longer term. We find that Sendai-virus-specific CTLp are maintained for > 250 days in irradiated uninfected recipients, including reconstituted beta 2-microglobulin-/- mice. To determine whether a source of viral peptide can persist after primary infection, we gave Sendai-virus-specific Thy1.1+ memory spleen cells to naive mice that had been minimally depleted of Thy1.2+ T cells, or to comparable recipients that had recovered from infection with Sendai virus or influenza virus. Although antibody against Sendai virus was never found in the naive recipients, Sendai-virus-specific CD8+ memory T cells were maintained equally well in each case for > 100 days after cell transfer. We find no evidence for persisting depots of viral protein that might feed into the endogenous processing pathway and maintain virus-specific CD8+ T-cell memory.
Our understanding of the biology and origins of human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) derives from studies of cultured isolates from urban populations experiencing epidemic infection and disease. To test the hypothesis that such isolates might represent only a subset of a larger, genetically more diverse group of viruses, we used nested polymerase chain reactions to characterize HIV-2 sequences in uncultured mononuclear blood cells of two healthy Liberian agricultural workers, from whom virus isolation was repeatedly unsuccessful, and from a culture-positive symptomatic urban dweller. Analysis of pol, env and long terminal repeat regions revealed the presence of three highly divergent HIV-2 strains, one of which (from one of the healthy subjects) was significantly more closely related to simian immunodeficiency viruses infecting sooty mangabeys and rhesus macaques (SIVSM/SIVMAC) than to any virus of human derivation. This subject also harboured multiply defective viral genotypes that resulted from hypermutation of G to A bases. Our results indicate that HIV-2, SIVSM and SIVMAC comprise a single, highly diverse group of lentiviruses which cannot be separated into distinct phylogenetic lineages according to species of origin.
Viruses are obligate parasites of Eukarya, Archaea and Bacteria. Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus (APMV) is the largest known virus; it grows only in amoeba and is visible under the optical microscope. Mimivirus possesses a 1,185-kilobase double-stranded linear chromosome whose coding capacity is greater than that of numerous bacteria and archaea1, 2, 3. Here we describe an icosahedral small virus, Sputnik, 50 nm in size, found associated with a new strain of APMV. Sputnik cannot multiply in Acanthamoeba castellanii but grows rapidly, after an eclipse phase, in the giant virus factory found in amoebae co-infected with APMV4. Sputnik growth is deleterious to APMV and results in the production of abortive forms and abnormal capsid assembly of the host virus. The Sputnik genome is an 18.343-kilobase circular double-stranded DNA and contains genes that are linked to viruses infecting each of the three domains of life Eukarya, Archaea and Bacteria. Of the 21 predicted protein-coding genes, eight encode proteins with detectable homologues, including three proteins apparently derived from APMV, a homologue of an archaeal virus integrase, a predicted primase-helicase, a packaging ATPase with homologues in bacteriophages and eukaryotic viruses, a distant homologue of bacterial insertion sequence transposase DNA-binding subunit, and a Zn-ribbon protein. The closest homologues of the last four of these proteins were detected in the Global Ocean Survey environmental data set5, suggesting that Sputnik represents a currently unknown family of viruses. Considering its functional analogy with bacteriophages, we classify this virus as a virophage. The virophage could be a vehicle mediating lateral gene transfer between giant viruses.
CD8-positive T cells protect the body against viral pathogens by two important mechanisms: production of antiviral cytokines and lysis of infected cells. Cytokine production can have both local and systemic consequences, whereas cytolytic activity is limited to infected cells that are in direct contact with T cells. Here we analyse activated CD8-positive T cells from mice infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus and find that cytokines are not produced ex vivo in the absence of peptide stimulation, but that they are rapidly generated after T cells encounter viral peptides bound to the major histocompatibility complex. Remarkably, cytokine production ceases immediately upon dissociation of the T cells from their targets and resumes when antigenic contact is restored. In contrast to the 'on/off/on' cycling of cytokines, the pore-forming cytotoxic protein perforin is constitutively maintained. Our results indicate that there is differential expression of effector molecules according to whether the antiviral product is secreted (like cytokines) or stored inside the cell (like perforin). The ability to turn cytokines on and off while maintaining intracellular stores of perforin shows the versatility of the cellular immune response and provides a mechanism for maintaining effective immune surveillance while reducing systemic immunopathology.
Proviral DNA has been demonstrated by in situ hybridization in foci of cells of a lamb infected with the RNA slow virus visna. A few of these cells also contain the major virion structural antigen p30. This restriction in virus gene expression in the infected animal provides a mechanism for persistence of virus in this chronic infection.
The spread of HIV between immune cells is greatly enhanced by cell-cell adhesions called virological synapses, although the underlying mechanisms have been unclear. With use of an infectious, fluorescent clone of HIV, we tracked the movement of Gag in live CD4 T cells and captured the direct translocation of HIV across the virological synapse. Quantitative, high-speed three-dimensional (3D) video microscopy revealed the rapid formation of micrometer-sized "buttons" containing oligomerized viral Gag protein. Electron microscopy showed that these buttons were packed with budding viral crescents. Viral transfer events were observed to form virus-laden internal compartments within target cells. Continuous time-lapse monitoring showed preferential infection through synapses. Thus, HIV dissemination may be enhanced by virological synapse-mediated cell adhesion coupled to viral endocytosis.
We sequenced the 29,751-base genome of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-associated coronavirus known as the Tor2 isolate. The genome sequence reveals that this coronavirus is only moderately related to other known coronaviruses, including two human coronaviruses, HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-229E. Phylogenetic analysis of the predicted viral proteins indicates that the virus does not closely resemble any of the three previously known groups of coronaviruses. The genome sequence will aid in the diagnosis of SARS virus infection in humans and potential animal hosts (using polymerase chain reaction and immunological tests), in the development of antivirals (including neutralizing antibodies), and in the identification of putative epitopes for vaccine development.
Like other transforming genes of retroviruses, the v-myc gene of the avian virus, MC29, has a homologue in the genome of normal eukaryotic cells. The human cellular homologue, c-myc, located on human chromosome 8, region q24 leads to qter (refs 1, 2), is translocated into the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus on human chromosome 14 (ref. 3) in Burkitt's lymphoma, suggesting that c-myc has a primary role in transformation of some human haematopoietic cells. In addition, c-myc is amplified in the human promyelocytic leukaemia cell line, HL60 (refs 6, 7) which also contains high levels of c-myc mRNA. Recently, Colby et al. reported the nucleotide sequence of the human c-myc DNA isolated from a genomic recombinant DNA library derived from human fetal liver. This 4,053-base pair (bp) sequence includes two exons and one intron of the myc gene, and the authors have suggested the existence of a human c-myc mRNA of 2,291 nucleotides that has a coding capacity for a protein of molecular weight (Mr) 48,812. We have approached the problem of accurately defining the characteristics of the human c-myc mRNA and c-myc protein by determining the sequence of the c-myc cDNA isolated from a cDNA library prepared from mRNA of a clone of the K562 human leukaemic cell line. K562 cells are known to contain c-myc mRNA which is similar in size to the c-myc mRNA of other human cell types. We report here the sequence of 2,121 nucleotides of a human c-myc mRNA and demonstrate that its 5' noncoding sequence does not correspond to the sequence of the reported genomic human sequence. However, our data confirm that the intact human c-myc mRNA can encode a 48,812-Mr protein with a sequence identical to that reported by Colby et al.
A novel influenza A (H1N1) virus has spread rapidly across the globe. Judging its pandemic potential is difficult with limited data, but nevertheless essential to inform appropriate health responses. By analyzing the outbreak in Mexico, early data on international spread, and viral genetic diversity, we make an early assessment of transmissibility and severity. Our estimates suggest that 23,000 (range 6000 to 32,000) individuals had been infected in Mexico by late April, giving an estimated case fatality ratio (CFR) of 0.4% (range: 0.3 to 1.8%) based on confirmed and suspected deaths reported to that time. In a community outbreak in the small community of La Gloria, Veracruz, no deaths were attributed to infection, giving an upper 95% bound on CFR of 0.6%. Thus, although substantial uncertainty remains, clinical severity appears less than that seen in the 1918 influenza pandemic but comparable with that seen in the 1957 pandemic. Clinical attack rates in children in La Gloria were twice that in adults (<15 years of age: 61%; >/=15 years: 29%). Three different epidemiological analyses gave basic reproduction number (R0) estimates in the range of 1.4 to 1.6, whereas a genetic analysis gave a central estimate of 1.2. This range of values is consistent with 14 to 73 generations of human-to-human transmission having occurred in Mexico to late April. Transmissibility is therefore substantially higher than that of seasonal flu, and comparable with lower estimates of R0 obtained from previous influenza pandemics.
Mice infected with an aerosol of influenza type A virus, or immunized with purified UV-inactivated whole virus or with viral subunits, develop a transient delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) which peaks 5-7 days after immunization. The intensity of DTH is greatly enhanced and sustained when mice are pretreated with cyclophosphamide. The reaction is maximal 24 h after elicitation, has classical tuberculin-type histology and is transferable by immune H-21 region restricted Lyt-1+2- T cells (Td) but not by immune serum. These Td cells not only fail to protect mice against influenza virus infection, but increase the mortality rate due to influenzal pneumonia following challenge with homologous lethal virus. On the other hand, antigen-specific suppressor T (Ts) cells which inhibit DTH are readily generated during influenza virus infection, and are detectable for at least 40 days thereafter. The ease with which they are induced and maintained during the infection may be of evolutionary advantage. In support of this, we now report that these Ts cells can reverse the pathogenic effect of Td cells thereby demonstrating a beneficial influence of Ts cells in a viral disease.
Treatment of mice with 6-hydroxydopamine increased herpes simplex virus replication in the superior cervical ganglion while it decreased the subsequent prevalence of latent infection. Preganglionic neurectomy failed to block this effect. These observations suggest that intrinsic neural events modify the outcome of viral infections of the nervous system.
The mechanism of leukaemogenic transformation by human T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma virus (HTLV), a retrovirus implicated in the aetiology of certain adult T-cell leukaemias and lymphomas, is unknown but is conceivably associated with the expression of the cellular analogues of retroviral oncogenes. The HUT-102 cell line, derived from a cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and infected with HTLV, expresses several cellular oncogenes. It is unusual among haemopoietic cell lines in that one of these is c-sis, the gene from which the oncogene v-sis of the simian sarcoma virus was derived, and perhaps the gene for platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). To explore the possible role of c-sis expression in HTLV-induced disease, we have obtained cDNA clones of c-sis from HUT-102 cells. Here we describe two such clones and report that one of them transforms NIH-3T3 cells. This is the first example of transformation of NIH-3T3 cells by a human onc gene other than c-ras or Blym, as well as the first demonstration of transformation by a human cDNA clone.
Transposon mutagenesis of the bacterium Myxococcus xanthus with the transposon Tn5 revealed a special class of bacterial mutants that transduced the transposon through culture supernatant fluids. Virus-like particles copurified with transducing activity. Transposon tagging for detecting these virus-like particles may be generally useful in isolating endogenous viral agents capable of transferring genetic information between cells.
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) and transforming growth factor type I (TGF) are polypeptides of 53 and 50 amino acid residues, respectively. Both bind to EGF receptor, a 1,200-residue transmembranous glycoprotein, leading to phosphorylation of the receptor, enhancement of its tyrosine-specific kinase activity and ultimately to stimulation of cell growth. We report here that a 140-residue polypeptide encoded by one of the early genes of vaccinia virus (VV) is related closely to EGF and TGF. The presence of putative signal and transmembranous sequences further suggests that the viral protein might be an integral membrane protein, but that, as in the case of EGF itself, the membrane-associated form may be the precursor of a soluble growth factor. Production of EGF-like growth factors by virally infected cells could account for the proliferative diseases associated with members of the poxvirus family such as Shope fibroma virus, Yaba tumour virus, and molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV).
Filamentous bacteriophage Pf1 assembles by a membrane-mediated process during which the viral DNA is secreted through the membrane while being encapsulated by the major coat protein. Neutron diffraction studies showed that in the virus most of the coat protein consists of two alpha-helical segments arranged end-to-end with an intervening mobile surface loop. Nuclear magnetic resonance studies of the coat protein in the membrane-bound form have shown that the secondary structure is essentially identical to that in the intact virus. A comparison indicates that during membrane-mediated viral assembly, while the secondary structure of the coat protein is largely conserved, its tertiary structure changes substantially.
Alphaviruses are enveloped RNA viruses that have a diameter of about 700 A and can be lethal human pathogens. Entry of virus into host cells by endocytosis is controlled by two envelope glycoproteins, E1 and E2. The E2-E1 heterodimers form 80 trimeric spikes on the icosahedral virus surface, 60 with quasi-three-fold symmetry and 20 coincident with the icosahedral three-fold axes arranged with T = 4 quasi-symmetry. The E1 glycoprotein has a hydrophobic fusion loop at one end and is responsible for membrane fusion. The E2 protein is responsible for receptor binding and protects the fusion loop at neutral pH. The lower pH in the endosome induces the virions to undergo an irreversible conformational change in which E2 and E1 dissociate and E1 forms homotrimers, triggering fusion of the viral membrane with the endosomal membrane and then releasing the viral genome into the cytoplasm. Here we report the structure of an alphavirus spike, crystallized at low pH, representing an intermediate in the fusion process and clarifying the maturation process. The trimer of E2-E1 in the crystal structure is similar to the spikes in the neutral pH virus except that the E2 middle region is disordered, exposing the fusion loop. The amino- and carboxy-terminal domains of E2 each form immunoglobulin-like folds, consistent with the receptor attachment properties of E2.
Major epidemic outbreaks of viral hepatitis in underdeveloped countries result from a type of non-A, non-B hepatitis distinct from the parenterally transmitted form. The viral agent responsible for this form of epidemic, or enterically transmitted non-A, non-B hepatitis (ET-NANBH), has been serially transmitted in cynomolgus macaques (cynos) and has resulted in typical elevation in liver enzymes and the detection of characteristic virus-like particles (VLPs) in both feces and bile. Infectious bile was used for the construction of recombinant complementary DNA libraries. One clone, ET1.1, was exogenous to uninfected human and cyno genomic liver DNA, as well as to genomic DNA from infected cyno liver. ET1.1 did however, hybridize to an approximately 7.6-kilobase RNA species present only in infected cyno liver. The translated nucleic acid sequence of a portion of ET1.1 had a consensus amino acid motif consistent with an RNA-directed RNA polymerase; this enzyme is present in all positive strand RNA viruses. Furthermore, ET1.1 specifically identified similar sequences in complementary DNA prepared from infected human fecal samples collected from five geographically distinct ET-NANBH outbreaks. Therefore, ET1.1 represents a portion of the genome of the principal viral agent, to be named hepatitis E virus, which is responsible for epidemic outbreaks of ET-NANBH.
Primate lentiviruses such as human immunodeficiency type 1 (HIV-1) have the capacity to infect non-dividing cells such as tissue macrophages. In the process, viral complementary DNA traverses the nuclear envelope to integrate within chromatin. Given the intimate association between chromatin and the nuclear envelope, we examined whether HIV-1 appropriates nuclear envelope components during infection. Here we show that emerin, an integral inner-nuclear-envelope protein, is necessary for HIV-1 infection. Infection of primary macrophages lacking emerin was abortive in that viral cDNA localized to the nucleus but integration into chromatin was inefficient, and conversion of viral cDNA to non-functional episomal cDNA increased. HIV-1 cDNA associated with emerin in vivo, and the interaction of viral cDNA with chromatin was dependent on emerin. Barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF), the LEM (LAP, emerin, MAN) binding partner of emerin, was required for the association of viral cDNA with emerin and for the ability of emerin to support virus infection. Therefore emerin, which bridges the interface between the inner nuclear envelope and chromatin, may be necessary for chromatin engagement by viral cDNA before integration.
A series of recombinant plasmids containing polyoma virus (PY) DNA were constructed, and their biological activity was evaluated in mice and in cultured mouse cells. While all of the recombinants studied contain the complete, potentially infectious viral DNA, in no case was the intact recombinant PY-plasmid DNA, or live Escherichia coli containing the recombinant plasmids, capable of inducing PY infection of mice, either by feeding or by parenteral injection.
The use of modern techniques has led to new insights into the molecular mechanisms of viral pathogenesis. Although the infectious process is quite complex, it is clear that one critical stage, the interaction of viral attachment proteins with cell-surface receptors, often has a major role in determining the pattern of infection. The mammalian reoviruses have served as useful models for understanding the molecular basis of viral pathogenesis. The mammalian reovirus haemagglutinin (sigma 1 protein), which is an outer capsid protein, has been shown to be a major factor in determining virus-host cell interactions. To further our understanding of the structure and function of the haemagglutinin, we have cloned a complementary DNA copy of the reovirus type 3 S1 double-stranded RNA gene which encodes the virus haemagglutinin and have sequenced the DNA complementary to the S1 gene. Analysis of the predicted amino-acid sequence of the virus haemagglutinin has allowed us to determine that the amino-terminal portion contains an alpha-helical coiled-coil structure and that the carboxy-terminal portion contains the receptor-interacting domains. Using this information, we propose here a model of how the reovirus haemagglutinin is attached to the virus particle.
5-Trifluoromethyl-2'-deoxyuridine (F(3)TDR) has potent therapeutic antiviral activity in herpes simplex infection of the rabbit cornea with strains of herpes virus both sensitive and resistant to 5-iodo-2'-deoxyuridine, and in corneal infection with vaccinia. 5-Trifluoromethyl uracil is not therapeutically active in herpetic keratitis.
A 311-base pair fragment containing the SV40 origin of replication was linked to the chicken thymidine kinase gene on a recombinant plasmid. This molecule was transfected into human 143 thymidine kinase-deficient (TK-) cells, and colonies positive for thymidine kinase were selected. When cell lines derived from these colonies were fused to permissive simian cells that produce SV40 T antigen, the recombinant plasmid excised itself from the human cellular genome and replicated with a high copy number per cell. These results show that this segment of the viral genome is the only sequence required in cis to mediate SV40 excision and replication upon fusion to permissive cells. In addition, we have shown that excised plasmids apparently identical to the input DNA can be efficiently rescued in Escherichia coli. SV40 excision and replication may therefore be useful for the recovery of cloned genes from eukaryotic cells.
Although phage lambda represents a well studied biological systems, it has certain features that remain obscure. Among these is the function of the roughly one third of the phage genome dispensable for growth in the laboratory, yet retained despite undoubted pressure to economize. Here we report that these 'accessory' sequences contain two genes which are expressed during lysogeny, and encode host-cell envelope proteins. One of these is lom, the product of which is found in the bacterial outer membrane, and is homologous to virulence proteins of two other enterobacterial genera. The other gene, previously unidentified, we designate bor. Expression of bor significantly increases the survival of the Escherichia coli host cell in animal serum. This property is a well known bacterial virulence determinant--indeed, bor and its adjacent sequences are highly homologous to the iss serum resistance locus of the plasmid ColV2-K94, which confers virulence in animals. These results show that the lambda prophage is more transcriptionally active than has long been assumed, and suggest that lysogeny may generally have a role in bacterial survival in animal hosts, and perhaps in pathogenesis.
Cells have evolved multiple mechanisms to inhibit viral replication. To identify previously unknown antiviral activities, we screened mammalian complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries for genes that prevent infection by a genetically marked retrovirus. Virus-resistant cells were selected from pools of transduced clones, and an active antiviral cDNA was recovered. The gene encodes a CCCH-type zinc finger protein designated ZAP. Expression of the gene caused a profound and specific loss of viral messenger RNAs (mRNAs) from the cytoplasm without affecting the levels of nuclear mRNAs. The finding suggests the existence of a previously unknown machinery for the inhibition of virus replication, targeting a step in viral gene expression.
Infection by human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) is initiated when its envelope protein, gp120, binds to its receptor, the cell surface glycoprotein CD4. Small molecules, termed N-carbomethoxycarbonyl-prolyl-phenylalanyl benzyl esters (CPFs), blocked this binding. CPFs interacted with gp120 and did not interfere with the binding of CD4 to class II major histocompatibility complex molecules. One CPF isomer, CPF(DD), preserved CD4-dependent T cell function while inhibiting HIV-1 infection of H9 tumor cells and human T cells. Although the production of viral proteins in infected T cells is unaltered by CPF(DD), this compound prevents the spread of infection in an in vitro model system.
CD8-positive T cells are thought to play an important role in the control of infection by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) as a result of their cytotoxic activity and by releasing soluble factors. In AIDS patients, the absolute number of CD8+ T lymphocytes is decreased in peripheral blood and their turnover rate is increased, suggesting that there is more cell renewal and cell death occurring. Anti-retroviral therapy raises CD8+ T-cell counts in HIV-infected patients. Here we report that the death rate of CD8+ T cells by apoptosis increased markedly during HIV infection of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in vitro. Apoptosis is induced in a dose-dependent manner by recombinant envelope glycoprotein gp120 from HIV strain X4, or by stromal-derived factor-1 (SDF-1), the physiological ligand of the chemokine receptor CXCR4. Apoptosis is mediated by the interaction between tumour-necrosis factor-alpha bound to the membrane of macrophages (mbTNF) and a receptor on CD8+ T cells (TNF-receptor II, or TNFRII). The expression of both of these cell-surface proteins is upregulated by HIV infection or by treatment with recombinant gp120 or SDF-1. Apoptosis of CD8+ T cells isolated from HIV-infected patients is also mediated by macrophages through the interaction between mbTNF and TNFRII. These results indicate that the increased turnover of CD8+ T cells in HIV-infected subjects is mediated by the HIV envelope protein through the CXCR4 chemokine receptor.
Transposons are DNA sequences that encode functions that promote their movement to new locations in the genome. If unregulated, such movement could potentially insert additional DNA into genes, thereby disrupting gene expression and compromising an organism's viability. Transposable elements are classified by their transposition mechanisms and by the transposases that mediate their movement. The mechanism of movement of the eukaryotic hAT superfamily elements was previously unknown, but the divergent sequence of hAT transposases from other elements suggested that these elements might use a distinct mechanism. Here we have analysed transposition of the insect hAT element Hermes in vitro. Like other transposons, Hermes excises from DNA via double-strand breaks between the donor-site DNA and the transposon ends, and the newly exposed transposon ends join to the target DNA. Interestingly, the ends of the donor double-strand breaks form hairpin intermediates, as observed during V(D)J recombination, the process which underlies the combinatorial formation of antigen receptor genes. Significant similarities exist in the catalytic amino acids of Hermes transposase, the V(D)J recombinase RAG, and retroviral integrase superfamily transposases, thereby linking the movement of transposable elements and V(D)J recombination.
The role of the cytoskeleton during viral infection is poorly understood. Here we show, using a combination of mutant and drug studies, that the intracellular enveloped form of vaccinia virus is capable of inducing the formation of actin tails that are strikingly similar to those seen in Listeria, Shigella and Rickettsia infections. Analysis using video microscopy reveals that single viral particles are propelled in vivo on the tip of actin tails, at a speed of 2.8 mumol min-1. On contact with the cell surface, virus particles extend outwards on actin projections at a similar rate, to contact and infect neighboring cells. Given the similarities between the motility of vaccinia virus and bacterial pathogens, we suggest that intracellular pathogens have developed a common mechanism to exploit the actin cytoskeleton as a means to facilitate their direct spread between cells.
The duplication of the mammalian genome is an organized event, but there is limited information about the precision of the duplication program at specific genetic loci. We developed an approach that allows DNA replication events to be visualized in individual DNA molecules. Studying the latent replication of Epstein-Barr virus episomes, we show that different initiation sites are used to commence DNA replication from a specific portion of the viral genome (zone), whereas termination does not seem to be genomically defined. We conclude that initiation zones and pausing sites are major organizers of the duplication program, but initiation, fork progression, and termination of replication can vary in each molecule.
The Tax protein of human T cell leukemia virus type-1 (HTLV-I) transcriptionally activates the HTLV-I promoter. This activation requires binding sites for activating transcription factor (ATF) proteins, a family of cellular proteins that contain basic region-leucine zipper (bZIP) DNA binding domains. Data are presented showing that Tax increases the in vitro DNA binding activity of multiple ATF proteins. Tax also stimulated DNA binding by other bZIP proteins, but did not affect DNA binding proteins that lack a bZIP domain. The increase in DNA binding occurred because Tax promotes dimerization of the bZIP domain in the absence of DNA, and the elevated concentration of the bZIP homodimer then facilitates the DNA binding reaction. These results help explain how Tax activates viral transcription and transforms cells.
In most RNA viruses, genome replication and transcription are catalysed by a viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Double-stranded RNA viruses perform these operations in a capsid (the polymerase complex), using an enzyme that can read both single- and double-stranded RNA. Structures have been solved for such viral capsids, but they do not resolve the polymerase subunits in any detail. Here we show that the 2 A resolution X-ray structure of the active polymerase subunit from the double-stranded RNA bacteriophage straight phi6 is highly similar to that of the polymerase of hepatitis C virus, providing an evolutionary link between double-stranded RNA viruses and flaviviruses. By crystal soaking and co-crystallization, we determined a number of other structures, including complexes with oligonucleotide and/or nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs), that suggest a mechanism by which the incoming double-stranded RNA is opened up to feed the template through to the active site, while the substrates enter by another route. The template strand initially overshoots, locking into a specificity pocket, and then, in the presence of cognate NTPs, reverses to form the initiation complex; this process engages two NTPs, one of which acts with the carboxy-terminal domain of the protein to prime the reaction. Our results provide a working model for the initiation of replication and transcription.
Human fibroblasts infected in vitro with cytomegalovirus are relatively resistant to infection by Toxoplasma gondii during the first 4 days of virus infection. After 5 days, however, the cytomegalovirus-infected cells become susceptible to the parasites. The toxoplasmas replicate in paracentral rosettes surrounded by host cell mitochondria. This growth configuration differs from that seen in human fibroblasts infected in vitro with toxoplasma only but resembles the pattern seen in doubly infected cells found in human necropsy tissue.
The 'Spanish' influenza pandemic of 1918-19 was the most devastating outbreak of infectious disease in recorded history. At least 20 million people died from their illness, which was characterized by an unusually severe and rapid clinical course. The complete sequencing of several genes of the 1918 influenza virus has made it possible to study the functions of the proteins encoded by these genes in viruses generated by reverse genetics, a technique that permits the generation of infectious viruses entirely from cloned complementary DNA. Thus, to identify properties of the 1918 pandemic influenza A strain that might be related to its extraordinary virulence, viruses were produced containing the viral haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) genes of the 1918 strain. The HA of this strain supports the pathogenicity of a mouse-adapted virus in this animal. Here we demonstrate that the HA of the 1918 virus confers enhanced pathogenicity in mice to recent human viruses that are otherwise non-pathogenic in this host. Moreover, these highly virulent recombinant viruses expressing the 1918 viral HA could infect the entire lung and induce high levels of macrophage-derived chemokines and cytokines, which resulted in infiltration of inflammatory cells and severe haemorrhage, hallmarks of the illness produced during the original pandemic.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has a small genome and therefore relies heavily on the host cellular machinery to replicate. Identifying which host proteins and complexes come into physical contact with the viral proteins is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of how HIV rewires the host's cellular machinery during the course of infection. Here we report the use of affinity tagging and purification mass spectrometry to determine systematically the physical interactions of all 18 HIV-1 proteins and polyproteins with host proteins in two different human cell lines (HEK293 and Jurkat). Using a quantitative scoring system that we call MiST, we identified with high confidence 497 HIV-human protein-protein interactions involving 435 individual human proteins, with ~40% of the interactions being identified in both cell types. We found that the host proteins hijacked by HIV, especially those found interacting in both cell types, are highly conserved across primates. We uncovered a number of host complexes targeted by viral proteins, including the finding that HIV protease cleaves eIF3d, a subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3. This host protein is one of eleven identified in this analysis that act to inhibit HIV replication. This data set facilitates a more comprehensive and detailed understanding of how the host machinery is manipulated during the course of HIV infection.
Marine viruses that infect phytoplankton are recognized as a major ecological and evolutionary driving force, shaping community structure and nutrient cycling in the marine environment. Little is known about the signal transduction pathways mediating viral infection. We show that viral glycosphingolipids regulate infection of Emiliania huxleyi, a cosmopolitan coccolithophore that plays a major role in the global carbon cycle. These sphingolipids derive from an unprecedented cluster of biosynthetic genes in Coccolithovirus genomes, are synthesized de novo during lytic infection, and are enriched in virion membranes. Purified glycosphingolipids induced biochemical hallmarks of programmed cell death in an uninfected host. These lipids were detected in coccolithophore populations in the North Atlantic, which highlights their potential as biomarkers for viral infection in the oceans.
RNA viruses show high mutation frequencies partly because of a lack of the proofreading enzymes that assure fidelity of DNA replication. This high mutation frequency is coupled with high rates of replication reflected in rates of RNA genome evolution which can be more than a millionfold greater than the rates of the DNA chromosome evolution of their hosts. There are some disease implications for the DNA-based biosphere of this rapidly evolving RNA biosphere.
The coding sequences for the hepatitis B virus surface antigen, the herpes simplex virus glycoprotein D, and the influenza virus hemagglutinin were inserted into a single vaccinia virus genome. Rabbits inoculated intravenously or intradermally with this polyvalent vaccinia virus recombinant produced antibodies reactive to all three authentic foreign antigens. In addition, the feasibility of multiple rounds of vaccination with recombinant vaccinia virus was demonstrated.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are single-stranded noncoding RNAs of 19 to 25 nucleotides that function as gene regulators and as a host cell defense against both RNA and DNA viruses. We provide evidence for a physiological role of the miRNA-silencing machinery in controlling HIV-1 replication. Type III RNAses Dicer and Drosha, responsible for miRNA processing, inhibited virus replication both in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from HIV-1-infected donors and in latently infected cells. In turn, HIV-1 actively suppressed the expression of the polycistronic miRNA cluster miR-17/92. This suppression was found to be required for efficient viral replication and was dependent on the histone acetyltransferase Tat cofactor PCAF. Our results highlight the involvement of the miRNA-silencing pathway in HIV-1 replication and latency.
The class of ribosomes from Escherichia coli that associate with plant virus RNA in vitro can be separated from the bulk of ribosomes by gradient centrifugation. The relative activity for subsequent incorporation of amino acid into polypeptides directed by the viral RNA in comparison to that directed by polyuridylic acid is the same for that class as for the bulk of ribosomes.
Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells are susceptible to infection by a variety of viruses, but do not become resistant to infection by Semliki Forest virus or vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) on treatment with interferon. These observations have led to the conclusion that interferon does not induce an antiviral state in EC cells. We report here, however, that EC cells treated with interferon become resistant to infection by two picornaviruses and two ts mutants of VSV, whereas they remain sensitive to wild-type VSV, Sindbis and influenza virus infectin. These results suggest that a partial antiviral state is induced in EC cells by interferon and that the induced antiviral protein(s) interferes with the replication of specific viruses. A significant common feature of these viruses is their replication through structures containing double-stranded RNA (dsRNA).
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) are thought to detect viral infections by monitoring the surface of all cells for the presence of viral peptides bound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. In most cells, peptides presented by MHC class I molecules are derived exclusively from proteins synthesized by the antigen-bearing cells. Macrophages and dendritic cells also have an alternative MHC class I pathway that can present peptides derived from extracellular antigens; however, the physiological role of this process is unclear. Here we show that virally infected non-haematopoietic cells are unable to stimulate primary CTL-mediated immunity directly. Instead, bone-marrow-derived cells are required as antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to initiate anti-viral CTL responses. In these APCs, the alternative (exogenous) MHC class I pathway is the obligatory mechanism for the initiation of CTL responses to viruses that infect only non-haematopoietic cells.
Experimental insertion of a retrovirus into the germ line of mice has resulted in an embryonic recessive lethal mutation. Integration of the proviral genome occurred at the 5' end of the alpha 1(I) collagen gene, leading to complete transcriptional block. Developmental arrest of embryos homozygous at the mutated allele coincides with high expression of the gene in normal embryogenesis. Insertion mutagenesis by retroviruses may offer a general approach to the identification and isolation of genes which are transcriptionally active during mammalian development.
Soluble extracts from uninfected murine cells supplemented with purified viral E1 and E2 proteins support the replication of exogenously added papilloma virus DNA. The E2 transactivator stimulates the binding of the E1 replication protein to the minimal origin of replication and activates DNA replication. These results support the concept that transcription factors have a direct role in the initiation of DNA replication in eukaryotes by participating in the assembly of a complex at the origin of replication.
Retrovirus genomes introduced into mouse zygotes by microinjection of cloned DNA, or into morula stage pre-implantation mouse embryos by infection with Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV), became de novo methylated and were blocked in expression. No restriction of virus expression and no de novo methylation were observed when post-implantation mouse embryos were infected with virus. Efficient de novo methylation activity may be an important characteristic of gene regulation in early mouse embryos.
Upon entry into a host cell, retroviruses direct the reverse transcription of the viral RNA genome and the establishment of an integrated proviral DNA. The retroviral integrase protein (IN) is responsible for the insertion of the viral DNA into host chromosomal targets. The two-hybrid system was used to identify a human gene product that binds tightly to the human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) integrase in vitro and stimulates its DNA-joining activity. The sequence of the gene suggests that the protein is a human homolog of yeast SNF5, a transcriptional activator required for high-level expression of many genes. The gene, termed INI1 (for integrase interactor 1), may encode a nuclear factor that promotes integration and targets incoming viral DNA to active genes.
The three serotypes of poliovirus are members of the picornaviradae, a group of viruses which cause a variety of diseases of considerable importance in man and animals. We have previously used antigenic mutants resistant to neutralizing monoclonal antibodies to identify a single antigenic site for the neutralization of poliovirus type 3 (ref. 1). Evidence based on oligonucleotide mapping suggested that this site corresponded largely to one physicochemical region of the capsid protein viral polypeptide 1 (VP1). We now present conclusive evidence that most of the mutations conferring resistance to neutralization are confined to an eight-amino acid region of VP1, specified by a sequence of viral RNA 277-300 bases from the start of the region coding for VP1. These data strongly suggest that this small region constitutes a major antigenic site involved in virus neutralization and they provide the most detailed information currently available on the antigenic site of a human virus.
Parthenogenetic mouse embryos pose an interesting problem in the study of early mammalian development. Haploid or diploid parthenogenones, resulting from spontaneous or experimental activation of unfertilized eggs, will undergo apparently normal preimplantation development but die in the early post-implantation stages. However, in aggregation chimaeras with fertilized embryos, parthenogenetic embryos have the ability to differentiate into many tissue types, including gametes which can give rise to normal offspring. Furthermore, it has been reported that viable young were obtained from the transfer of inner cell-mass nuclei of parthenogenetic blastocysts to enucleated fertilized eggs. These observations suggest that sperm have some additional role, apart from restoring a complete genome, that is necessary for normal development. To investigate whether sperm-related modifications to the egg cytoplasm are important, we have used an efficient nuclear transfer technique in which a complete karyoplast, comprised of pronuclei, surrounding cytoplasm and a portion of the egg plasma membrane, is transferred utilizing Sendai virus membrane fusion. Embryos produced by the transfer of pronuclei from diploid parthenogenetic eggs to enucleated fertilized eggs died very soon after implantation, whereas viable young were obtained from the transfer of fertilized egg pronuclei into enucleated parthenogenetic eggs. This shows that the death of parthenogenones is not due to a lack of cytoplasmic factors from the sperm.
Alfalfa mosaic virus genomic RNAs are infectious only when the viral coat protein binds to the RNA 3' termini. The crystal structure of an alfalfa mosaic virus RNA-peptide complex reveals that conserved AUGC repeats and Pro-Thr-x-Arg-Ser-x-x-Tyr coat protein amino acids cofold upon interacting. Alternating AUGC residues have opposite orientation, and they base pair in different adjacent duplexes. Localized RNA backbone reversals stabilized by arginine-guanine interactions place the adenosines and guanines in reverse order in the duplex. The results suggest that a uniform, organized 3' conformation, similar to that found on viral RNAs with transfer RNA-like ends, may be essential for replication.
Coxsackie and adenovirus receptor (CAR) is the primary cellular receptor for group B coxsackieviruses and most adenovirus serotypes and plays a crucial role in adenoviral gene therapy. Recent discovery of the interaction between junctional adhesion molecule-like protein (JAML) and CAR uncovered important functional roles in immunity, inflammation, and tissue homeostasis. Crystal structures of JAML ectodomain (2.2 angstroms) and its complex with CAR (2.8 angstroms) reveal an unusual immunoglobulin-domain assembly for JAML and a charged interface that confers high specificity. Biochemical and mutagenesis studies illustrate how CAR-mediated clustering of JAML recruits phosphoinositide 3-kinase (P13K) to a JAML intracellular sequence motif as delineated for the alphabeta T cell costimulatory receptor CD28. Thus, CAR and JAML are cell signaling receptors of the immune system with implications for asthma, cancer, and chronic nonhealing wounds.
There is considerable genetic diversity among viruses of different subtypes (designated A to J) in the major group of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), the form of HIV that is dominant in the global epidemic. If available, HIV-1 sequences pre-dating the recognition of AIDS could be crucial in defining the time of origin and the subsequent evolution of these viruses in humans. The oldest known case of HIV-1 infection was reported to be that of a sailor from Manchester who died of an AIDS-like illness in 1959; however, the authenticity of this case has not been confirmed. Genetic analysis of sequences from clinical materials obtained from 1971 to 1976 from members of a Norwegian family infected earlier than 1971 showed that they carried viruses of the HIV-1 outlier group, a variant form that is mainly restricted to West Africa. Here we report the amplification and characterization of viral sequences from a 1959 African plasma sample that was previously found to be HIV-1 seropositive. Multiple phylogenetic analyses not only authenticate this case as the oldest known HIV-1 infection, but also place its viral sequence near the ancestral node of subtypes B and D in the major group, indicating that these HIV-1 subtypes, and perhaps all major-group viruses, may have evolved from a single introduction into the African population not long before 1959.
It has recently been reported that the sequences of the sis oncogene of simian sarcoma virus (SSV) and of human platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) are very similar, establishing the most solid link yet between the mitogenic actions of growth factors and the transforming proteins of retroviruses. To investigate molecular mechanisms of transformation I have produced antisera against synthetic peptides corresponding to segments of the protein sequences predicted by the nucleotide sequences of viral oncogenes. Applying this approach to the case of sis and PDGF, I report here the results of probing outdated human platelets with an antiserum directed against a synthetic peptide representing residues 139-155 of the predicted sequence of the SSV transforming protein, p28sis (ref. 3). I detected peptides of apparent molecular weights (MWs) 30,000 to 31,000 (30-31K) and 16-18K, which correspond to the apparent molecular weights of nonreduced and reduced PDGF. In addition, a peptide of MW 21,000 was detected in platelets and a protein of MW 56,000 was detected in SSV-infected marmoset cells.
Cellular messenger RNA (mRNA) of higher eukaryotes and many viral RNAs are methylated at the N-7 and 2'-O positions of the 5' guanosine cap by specific nuclear and cytoplasmic methyltransferases (MTases), respectively. Whereas N-7 methylation is essential for RNA translation and stability, the function of 2'-O methylation has remained uncertain since its discovery 35 years ago. Here we show that a West Nile virus (WNV) mutant (E218A) that lacks 2'-O MTase activity was attenuated in wild-type primary cells and mice but was pathogenic in the absence of type I interferon (IFN) signalling. 2'-O methylation of viral RNA did not affect IFN induction in WNV-infected fibroblasts but instead modulated the antiviral effects of IFN-induced proteins with tetratricopeptide repeats (IFIT), which are interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) implicated in regulation of protein translation. Poxvirus and coronavirus mutants that lacked 2'-O MTase activity similarly showed enhanced sensitivity to the antiviral actions of IFN and, specifically, IFIT proteins. Our results demonstrate that the 2'-O methylation of the 5' cap of viral RNA functions to subvert innate host antiviral responses through escape of IFIT-mediated suppression, and suggest an evolutionary explanation for 2'-O methylation of cellular mRNA: to distinguish self from non-self RNA. Differential methylation of cytoplasmic RNA probably serves as an example for pattern recognition and restriction of propagation of foreign viral RNA in host cells.
Rabbit beta-globin complementary DNA (cDNA) has been inserted into SV40 DNA in place of the gene coding for the virus' major capsid protein, VP1. The recombinant genome, SVGT5-RabetaG, multiplies efficiently in CV1 monkey kidney cell cultures and is transcribed to yield cytoplasmic, polyadenylated hybrid mRNAs containing the beta-globin coding sequence. Cells propagating SVGT5-RabetaG produce substantial quantities of rabbit beta-globin polypeptide.
Herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1) is a ubiquitous pathogen that is associated with considerable morbidity in the general population. Although it is known that the virion uses a basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor to penetrate vascular cells, it is not known how the viral particle recognizes and binds to this cell surface protein. Here we report that an immunoreactive basic FGF-like protein is associated with the viral particle and that this association appears responsible for viral uptake. Accordingly, HSV-1 infection of Swiss 3T3 cells stimulates the tyrosine phosphorylation of the specific substrate that characterizes the initial cellular response to basic FGF. Antibodies to basic FGF prevent this phosphorylation and inhibit HSV-1 uptake. Because no basic FGF sequence is found in the HSV-1 genome, a model for the infection for some target cells is presented whereby the viral particle uses host cell-derived basic FGF to ensure subsequent infectivity of newly replicated virus.
The dynamics of HIV-1 replication in vivo are largely unknown yet they are critical to our understanding of disease pathogenesis. Experimental drugs that are potent inhibitors of viral replication can be used to show that the composite lifespan of plasma virus and virus-producing cells is remarkably short (half-life approximately 2 days). Almost complete replacement of wild-type virus in plasma by drug-resistant variants occurs after fourteen days, indicating that HIV-1 viraemia is sustained primarily by a dynamic process involving continuous rounds of de novo virus infection and replication and rapid cell turnover.
DNA from a replication-defective spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) was reconstructed and transfected into psi-2 cells containing a packaging-defective mutant of Moloney murine leukemia virus. Replication-incompetent retrovirus particles (helper virus-free containing genomes that express the transforming envelope gene of SFFV (gp52) transformed bone marrow cells in vitro and, after direct intravenous introduction of the vector, induced malignant erythroid disease in vivo. Disease induction was dependent on prior treatment of mice with phenylhydrazine, which probably increased the availability of erythroid target cells. Since there was no evidence of virus particle expression in mice with malignant disease, this study demonstrates the acute oncogenic potential of a limited number of erythroid cells expressing SFFV gp52. Direct inoculation of animals with nonreplicating retroviral vectors containing transforming genes may be useful in study the oncogenic effects of such genes.
Sequence analysis of the 330-kilobase genome of the virus PBCV-1 that infects a chlorella-like green algae revealed an open reading frame, A98R, with similarity to several hyaluronan synthases. Hyaluronan is an essential polysaccharide found in higher animals as well as in a few pathogenic bacteria. Expression of the A98R gene product in Escherichia coli indicated that the recombinant protein is an authentic hyaluronan synthase. A98R is expressed early in PBCV-1 infection and hyaluronan is produced in infected algae. These results demonstrate that a virus can encode an enzyme capable of synthesizing a carbohydrate polymer and that hyaluronan exists outside of animals and their pathogens.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a ubiquitous human herpesvirus that can cause life-threatening disease in the fetus and the immunocompromised host. Upon attachment to the cell, the virus induces robust inflammatory, interferon- and growth-factor-like signalling. The mechanisms facilitating viral entry and gene expression are not clearly understood. Here we show that platelet-derived growth factor-alpha receptor (PDGFR-alpha) is specifically phosphorylated by both laboratory and clinical isolates of HCMV in various human cell types, resulting in activation of the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI(3)K) signalling pathway. Upon stimulation by HCMV, tyrosine-phosphorylated PDGFR-alpha associated with the p85 regulatory subunit of PI(3)K and induced protein kinase B (also known as Akt) phosphorylation, similar to the genuine ligand, PDGF-AA. Cells in which PDGFR-alpha was genetically deleted or functionally blocked were non-permissive to HCMV entry, viral gene expression or infectious virus production. Re-introducing human PDGFRA gene into knockout cells restored susceptibility to viral entry and essential viral gene expression. Blockade of receptor function with a humanized PDGFR-alpha blocking antibody (IMC-3G3) or targeted inhibition of its kinase activity with a small molecule (Gleevec) completely inhibited HCMV viral internalization and gene expression in human epithelial, endothelial and fibroblast cells. Viral entry in cells harbouring endogenous PDGFR-alpha was competitively inhibited by pretreatment with PDGF-AA. We further demonstrate that HCMV glycoprotein B directly interacts with PDGFR-alpha, resulting in receptor tyrosine phosphorylation, and that glycoprotein B neutralizing antibodies inhibit HCMV-induced PDGFR-alpha phosphorylation. Taken together, these data indicate that PDGFR-alpha is a critical receptor required for HCMV infection, and thus a target for novel anti-viral therapies.
Efficient gene transfer into human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is an important goal in the study of the hematopoietic system as well as for gene therapy of hematopoietic disorders. A lentiviral vector based on the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was able to transduce human CD34+ cells capable of stable, long-term reconstitution of nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mice. High-efficiency transduction occurred in the absence of cytokine stimulation and resulted in transgene expression in multiple lineages of human hematopoietic cells for up to 22 weeks after transplantation.
The genome of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is packaged within an unusual conical core particle located at the center of the infectious virion. The core is composed of a complex of the NC (nucleocapsid) protein and genomic RNA, surrounded by a shell of the CA (capsid) protein. A method was developed for assembling cones in vitro using pure recombinant HIV-1 CA-NC fusion proteins and RNA templates. These synthetic cores are capped at both ends and appear similar in size and morphology to authentic viral cores. It is proposed that both viral and synthetic cores are organized on conical hexagonal lattices, which by Euler's theorem requires quantization of their cone angles. Electron microscopic analyses revealed that the cone angles of synthetic cores were indeed quantized into the five allowed angles. The viral core and most synthetic cones exhibited cone angles of approximately 19 degrees (the narrowest of the allowed angles). These observations suggest that the core of HIV is organized on the principles of a fullerene cone, in analogy to structures recently observed for elemental carbon.
We report here genome sequences and comparative analyses of three closely related parasitoid wasps: Nasonia vitripennis, N. giraulti, and N. longicornis. Parasitoids are important regulators of arthropod populations, including major agricultural pests and disease vectors, and Nasonia is an emerging genetic model, particularly for evolutionary and developmental genetics. Key findings include the identification of a functional DNA methylation tool kit; hymenopteran-specific genes including diverse venoms; lateral gene transfers among Pox viruses, Wolbachia, and Nasonia; and the rapid evolution of genes involved in nuclear-mitochondrial interactions that are implicated in speciation. Newly developed genome resources advance Nasonia for genetic research, accelerate mapping and cloning of quantitative trait loci, and will ultimately provide tools and knowledge for further increasing the utility of parasitoids as pest insect-control agents.
Enhancers stimulate transcription of several eukaryotic genes (for review see ref. 1). While some enhancers, like that of simian virus 40 (SV40), are active in a wide range of cell types, others are more cell-specific. For example, the polyoma virus (Py) enhancer is not active in undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, such as F9 cells, while it is active in differentiated cells. In contrast, the SV40 enhancer is active in both undifferentiated and differentiated EC cells. One possible explanation for this difference is that the two viral enhancers interact with different positively or negatively acting transcription factors, a notion supported by in vitro experiments showing that the Py enhancer interacts with proteins that do not bind to the SV40 enhancer. Some viral and cellular enhancers, including the Py and SV40 enhancers, can be negatively regulated by the products of the E1A transcription unit of adenovirus-2. As it has been postulated that undifferentiated F9 cells contain an E1A-like activity, it is possible that the latter is responsible for the lack of activity of the Py enhancer in these cells. We show here that the E1A products do not repress a point mutant of the Py enhancer (Py ECF9.1; ref. 11 and references therein) that is active in undifferentiated F9 cells. This result is consistent with the idea that undifferentiated F9 cells contain a cellular repressor that blocks the Py enhancer and that this repressor has the same target sequence as the E1A proteins.
Human T-cell lymphotropic retrovirus type III (HTLV-III), also called lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV), has been identified as the aetiological agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). The sera of most patients with AIDS or AIDS-related complexes, and of asymptomatic individuals infected with HTLV-III, contain antibodies against antigens of HTLV-III. The characterization of these antibodies and their corresponding viral antigens is important not only for understanding immunity against HTLV-III and the pathology of AIDS, but also for the development of diagnostic methods and preventive vaccine for AIDS. Following the successful establishment of a long-term T-cell line permissive for HTLV-III replication, large quantities of virus have been produced, facilitating the purification of viral proteins and the development of mouse monoclonal antibodies against several viral antigens. More recently, the structure of HTLV-III proviral DNA has been elucidated. We now report the production, by genetic engineering methods, of a peptide encoded by a gene segment of HTLV-III. A 1.1-kilobase (kb) EcoRI DNA segment from an isolate of HTLV-III was inserted into a lpp and lac promoter-coupled expression vector, pIN-III-ompA. Escherichia coli transformants of this plasmid produced a peptide of relative molecular mass (Mr) 15,000 (15K) which was strongly immunoreactive with anti-HTLV-III antibodies present in sera from AIDS patients. Lysates of the clones expressing this 15K peptide inhibited the reactivity of the p31 virion protein with AIDS sera, suggesting that it is a fragment of the viral p31 protein. The peptide reacted with sera from all 20 AIDS patients but none of the 8 normal controls tested. These results suggest that the peptide may be useful for detecting anti-HTLV-III antibodies in blood samples.
The induction of lymphomas in C57BL mice by methylcholanthrene, urethan, or diethylnitrosamine was accompanied by the development of murine leukemia viral antigen in most of the lymphoid tumors. The cell-free transmission of lymphomas induced by methylcholanthrene and the development of antibody to murine leukemia virus prior to the detection of overt lymphoma in these mice suggest that unmasking of a latent leukemia virus is an indigenous actuating cause of the lymphomas.
Serological and molecular biological studies have shown an association between Epstein--Barr virus (EBV) and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Although it has been shown that the epithelioid tumour cells carry EBV genomes, they are apparently devoid of receptors for EBV (H.W., unpublished observations). Other have suggested that fusion of EBV carrying cells with epithelial cells may be the mode of entry of the virus into cells unable to absorb the virus and that this may be mediated by one of the known syncytium-forming viruses which inhabit the respiratory tract (for example, members of the paramyxovirus group). de The and colleagues suggested that intercellular bridges could be seen in NPC tumour material. We have developed a technique which permits the preparation of stable monolayers of viable human lymphoblastoid cell lines. Using this technique we have now demonstrated that EBV can induce fusion between EBV-superinfected lymphoblastoid cells and cells devoid of EBV receptors.
Cell-free translation of poliovirus RNA in an extract of uninfected human (HeLa) cells yielded viral proteins through proteolysis of the polyprotein. In the extract, newly synthesized proteins catalyzed poliovirus-specific RNA synthesis, and formed infectious poliovirus de novo. Newly formed virions were neutralized by type-specific antiserum, and infection of human cells with them was prevented by poliovirus receptor-specific antibodies. Poliovirus synthesis was increased nearly 70-fold when nucleoside triphosphates were added, but it was abolished in the presence of inhibitors of translation or viral genome replication. The ability to conduct cell-free synthesis of poliovirus will aid in the study of picornavirus proliferation and in the search for the control of picornaviral disease.
AIDS, caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), is one of the world's most serious health problems, with current protocols being inadequate for either prevention or successful long-term treatment. In retroviruses such as HIV, the enzyme reverse transcriptase copies the single-stranded RNA genome into double-stranded DNA that is then integrated into the chromosomes of infected cells. Reverse transcriptase is the target of the most widely used treatments for AIDS, 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) and 2',3'-dideoxyinosine (ddI), but resistant strains of HIV-1 arise in patients after a relatively short time. There are several nonnucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase, but resistance to such agents also develops rapidly. We report here the structure at 7 A resolution of a ternary complex of the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase heterodimer, a monoclonal antibody Fab fragment, and a duplex DNA template-primer. The double-stranded DNA binds in a groove on the surface of the enzyme. The electron density near one end of the DNA matches well with the known structure of the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase RNase H domain. At the opposite end of the DNA, a mercurated derivative of UTP has been localized by difference Fourier methods, allowing tentative identification of the polymerase nucleoside triphosphate binding site. We also determined the structure of the reverse transcriptase/Fab complex in the absence of template-primer to compare the bound and free forms of the enzyme. The presence of DNA correlates with movement of protein electron density in the vicinity of the putative template-primer binding groove. These results have important implications for developing improved inhibitors of reverse transcriptase for the treatment of AIDS.
Human T-cell leukaemia virus (HTLV), previously also reported as ATLV, is a recently identified retrovirus which is closely associated with adult T-cell leukaemia (ATL) endemic in southwestern Japan and the Caribbean. Determination of the total nucleotide sequence of the HTLV genome has revealed no typical onc gene acquired from the cellular sequence. Screening of the HTLV provirus genome in tumour cells has shown that in all cases of ATL examined, the primary tumour cells contained the provirus genome and were monoclonal with respect to the integration site of the provirus. These findings suggest that ATL leukaemogenesis may be due to insertional mutagenesis in which the provirus genome is integrated into a specific locus on the chromosomal DNA and then activates an adjacent cellular onc gene, a mechanism already demonstrated in avian lymphoma and erythroblastosis induced by avian leukosis viruses. A common site of HTLV provirus integration in leukaemic cells among some ATL patients was reported by Hahn et al. but subsequently retracted. However, this retraction does not imply the random integration of the proviruses. Independently, we have been testing this insertional mutagenesis model in ATL and report here that the provirus did not have a common locus of integration in 35 ATL patients and did not integrate on the same chromosome in 2 ATL patients.
A 16-kilodalton protein expressed in cells producing the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) was identified as the gene product of the vpu open reading frame. When expressed in vitro, the 81-amino acid vpu protein reacted with about one-third of the serum samples from AIDS patients that were tested, indicating that the vpu open reading frame is expressed in vivo as well. Introduction of a frame-shift mutation into the vpu open reading frame did not significantly interfere with expression of the major viral proteins in a transient expression system. However, a five- to tenfold reduction in progeny virions was observed after the infection of T lymphocytes with the mutant virus. These data suggest that the vpu gene product is required for efficient virus replication and may have a role in assembly or maturation of progeny virions.
Many species of parasitoid wasps inject polydnavirus particles in order to manipulate host defenses and development. Because the DNA packaged in these particles encodes almost no viral structural proteins, their relation to viruses has been debated. Characterization of complementary DNAs derived from braconid wasp ovaries identified genes encoding subunits of a viral RNA polymerase and structural components of polydnavirus particles related most closely to those of nudiviruses--a sister group of baculoviruses. The conservation of this viral machinery in different braconid wasp lineages sharing polydnaviruses suggests that parasitoid wasps incorporated a nudivirus-related genome into their own genetic material. We found that the nudiviral genes themselves are no longer packaged but are actively transcribed and produce particles used to deliver genes essential for successful parasitism in lepidopteran hosts.
Synthetic peptide segments of the CD4 molecule were tested for their ability to inhibit infection of CD4+ cells by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and to inhibit HIV-induced cell fusion. A peptide mixture composed of CD4(76-94), and synthesis side products, blocked HIV-induced cell fusion at a nominal concentration of 125 micromolar. Upon high-performance liquid chromatography, the antisyncytial activity of the peptide mixture was found not in the fraction containing the peptide CD4(76-94) itself, but in a side fraction containing derivatized peptide products generated in the automated synthesis. Derivatized deletion and substitution peptides in the region CD4(76-94) were used to demonstrate sequence specificity, a requirement for benzyl derivatization, and a core seven-residue fragment required for antisyncytial activity. A partially purified S-benzyl-CD4(83-94) peptide mixture inhibited HIV-induced cell fusion at a nominal concentration of less than or equal to 32 micromolar. Derivatized CD4 peptides blocked cell fusion induced by several HIV isolates and by the simian immunodeficiency virus, SIV, and blocked infection in vitro by four HIV-1 isolates with widely variant envelope gene sequences. Purified CD4(83-94) dibenzylated at cysteine 86 and glutamate 87 possessed antisyncytial activity at 125 micromolar. Derivatization may specifically alter the conformation of CD4 holoreceptor peptide fragments, increasing their antiviral efficacy.
Four juvenile rhesus monkeys were inoculated with 10(12) plaque-forming units of the bacteriophage phiV1 isolated from live virus vaccines. After phiV1 had been cleared from the blood, DNA's were isolated from the livers and kidneys and analyzed for the presence of bacteriophage by plaque assays, and for the presence of phiV1 DNA by DNA-DNA reassociation kinetics. No evidence was found for persistence of the bacteriophage or for replication of the phage genome in these rhesus monkeys.
Viruses may contribute to the development of human tumors by different mechanisms: indirectly by inducing immunosuppression or by modifying the host cell genome without persistence of viral DNA; directly by inducing oncoproteins or by altering the expression of host cell proteins at the site of viral DNA integration. Human cancers associated with papillomavirus, hepatitis B virus, Epstein-Barr virus, and human T cell leukemia-lymphoma virus infections are responsible for approximately 15 percent of the worldwide cancer incidence. Cancer of the cervix and hepatocellular carcinoma account for about 80 percent of virus-linked cancers. Because experimental and epidemiologic data imply a causative role for viruses, particularly in cervical and liver cancer, viruses must be thought of as the second most important risk factor for cancer development in humans, exceeded only by tobacco consumption.
The mechanisms by which interferon inhibits viral growth are only partially understood. Several enzymatic activities increase in cells shortly after treatment with interferon. One of these enzymes, oligo-isoadenylate synthetase, synthesizes (2'-5') isoadenylate oligomers which strongly stimulate the activity of a cellular ribonuclease, RNase F (ref. 7). Interferon also significantly increases the activity of a protein kinase which phosphorylates the initiation factor eIF-2 and can inhibit in vitro protein synthesis. Such interferon-induced enzymes, which affect RNA and protein metabolism, might be responsible for many of its effects on viruses. Indeed, inhibition of viral protein and RNA synthesis appears to have a major role in the antiviral state. We have now investigated possible interactions of the two enzymes with viral constituents during the course of infection and found that in two different membrane-coated RNA viruses, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV), there is an accumulation of the 2'-5') oligo-isoadenylate synthetase (E) in the virions. Most of the enzyme is bound to the virion ribonucleoprotein core. The incorporation of E into the virions suggests a direct involvement of the enzyme in regulation of virus functions.
A small RNA of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi 29 is shown to have a novel and essential role in viral DNA packaging in vitro. This requirement for RNA in the encapsidation of viral DNA provides a new dimension of complexity to the attendant protein-DNA interactions. The RNA is a constituent of the viral precursor shell of the DNA-packaging machine but is not a component of the mature virion. Studies of the sequential interactions involving this RNA molecule are likely to provide new insight into the structural and possible catalytic roles of small RNA molecules. The phi 29 assembly in extracts and phi 29 DNA packaging in the defined in vitro system were strongly inhibited by treatment with the ribonucleases A or T1. However, phage assembly occurred normally in the presence of ribonuclease A that had been treated with a ribonuclease inhibitor. An RNA of approximately 120 nucleotides co-purified with the phi 29 precursor protein shell (prohead), and this particle was the target of ribonuclease action. Removal of RNA from the prohead by ribonuclease rendered it inactive for DNA packaging. By RNA-DNA hybridization analysis, the RNA was shown to originate from a viral DNA segment very near the left end of the genome, the end packaged first during in vitro assembly.
Myeloid precursors can be grown in vitro in the presence of specific growth factors; however, their expansion is limited by a competing process of terminal differentiation. Proto-oncogenes seem to be involved in cellular proliferation and/or differentiation and may also play a role in the myelopoietic process. Murine myeloid precursors which are grown in vitro with growth factors respond with augmented self-renewal upon infection with recombinant retroviruses carrying the v-myc or v-src oncogenes, suggesting a synergism or complementation between some viral oncogenes (v-onc) and certain growth factors. We now show that the combination of two v-onc genes (raf and myc) induces the selective proliferation of monocytic cells from fresh murine bone marrow (BM) in the absence of a specific growth factor supplement. Depending on the culture conditions these cells can either differentiate and cease to proliferate or grow continuously, thus mimicking the alternative pathways that can be followed by committed BM stem cells in vivo.
Posttranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS) is a nucleotide sequence-specific defense mechanism that can target both cellular and viral mRNAs. Here, three types of transgene-induced PTGS and one example of virus-induced PTGS were analyzed in plants. In each case, antisense RNA complementary to the targeted mRNA was detected. These RNA molecules were of a uniform length, estimated at 25 nucleotides, and their accumulation required either transgene sense transcription or RNA virus replication. Thus, the 25-nucleotide antisense RNA is likely synthesized from an RNA template and may represent the specificity determinant of PTGS.
The induction of tumours by retroviruses lacking transduced oncogenes can involve the transcriptional or functional activation of cellular proto-oncogenes by an integrated provirus. Thus, the two cellular genes int-1 and int-2, identified as common targets for activation by mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV), may constitute previously unrecognized oncogenes. In tumours, proviral insertion at these loci leads to expression of messenger RNAs which are undetectable in normal mammary glands. Here we report that in a survey of the two transcriptional activity and structural integrity of the two int loci in 30 BR6 mouse mammary tumours, around 50% of the tumours expressed both of these genes, in ostensibly monoclonal cell populations. Our data suggest that int-1 and int-2 may act cooperatively in the genesis of mammary carcinomas. However, because three tumours (10%) involved neither gene, and because in five cases activation occurred in the apparent absence of an adjacent provirus, it is clear that other loci and mechanisms contribute to tumorigenesis.
A rapid increase in the RNA levels of the proto-oncogenes c-fos, c-jun, and c-myc was detected after human cytomegalovirus infection. Neither inactivation of viral infectivity with ultraviolet irradiation (with or without psoralen), nor inhibition of translation with cycloheximide or anisomycin adversely affected the enhanced expression of proto-oncogenes, even though these treatments substantially reduced or eliminated the detection of immediate early viral antigens. The increase in the RNA levels of the proto-oncogenes was prevented in the presence of alpha-amanitin or actinomycin D. Thus, expression of these oncogenes appears to be induced by events occurring before the onset of viral protein synthesis, perhaps by the interaction of viral particles with the cell surface.
An inhibitor of virus is demonstrable in the serums of mice infected with Plasmodium berghei. The titer of the inhibitor, detectable within 10 hours after injection of parasitized blood, increases rapidly until 30 to 40 hours when it levels off or decreases slightly before reaching a plateau. The factor that induces production of the antiviral substance is not present in the plasma of the infected blood, and the inhibitor is not detectable in serums of mice injected with nonparasitized mouse erythrocytes. The inhibitor fulfills the essential require ments of an interferon.
Entry of HIV-1 into target cells requires cell-surface CD4 and additional host cell cofactors. A cofactor required for infection with virus adapted for growth in transformed T-cell lines was recently identified and named fusin. However, fusin does not promote entry of macrophage-tropic viruses, which are believed to be the key pathogenic strains in vivo. The principal cofactor for entry mediated by the envelope glycoproteins of primary macrophage-tropic strains of HIV-1 is CC-CKR-5, a receptor for the beta-chemokines RANTES, MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta.
An estimated 170 million persons worldwide are infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV), a major cause of chronic liver disease. Despite increasing knowledge of genome structure and individual viral proteins, studies on virus replication and pathogenesis have been hampered by the lack of reliable and efficient cell culture systems. A full-length consensus genome was cloned from viral RNA isolated from an infected human liver and used to construct subgenomic selectable replicons. Upon transfection into a human hepatoma cell line, these RNAs were found to replicate to high levels, permitting metabolic radiolabeling of viral RNA and proteins. This work defines the structure of HCV replicons functional in cell culture and provides the basis for a long-sought cellular system that should allow detailed molecular studies of HCV and the development of antiviral drugs.
Viruses frequently persist in neurons, suggesting that these cells can evade immune surveillance. In a mouse model, 5 x 10(6) cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), specific for lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), did not lyse infected neurons or cause immunopathologic injury. In contrast, intracerebral injection of less than 10(3) CTL caused disease and death when viral antigens were expressed on leptomeningeal and choroid plexus cells of the nervous system. The neuronal cell line OBL21 expresses little or no major histocompatibility (MHC) class I surface glycoproteins and when infected with LCMV, resisted lysis by virus-specific CTLs. Expression of MHC heavy chain messenger RNA was limited, but beta 2-microglobulin messenger RNA and protein was made normally. OBL21 cells were made sensitive to CTL lysis by transfection with a fusion gene encoding another MHC class I molecule. Hence, neuronal cells probably evade immune surveillance by failing to express MHC class I molecules.
Satellite tobacco mosaic virus (STMV) is the spherical satellite to an obligatory rod-shaped helper tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), which is required for replication. STMV has 60 protein subunits of M(r) 17,500 on a T = 1 icosahedral capsid containing a single-stranded RNA genome of 1,059 bases. STMV appears similar to another virus, STNV, but is approximately 20 per cent smaller. It shows no amino-acid homology or immunological cross-reactivity with either STNV or its host TMV. Here we report the X-ray crystal structure of STMV, which shows that the coat protein of STMV contains a 'Swiss roll' beta-barrel. An amino-terminal strand extends more than 60A and is primarily responsible for quaternary interactions. Each capsid dimer is associated with a segment of genomic RNA double helix comprising seven base pairs. The dyad of each protein dimer is coincident with that of the central base pair of the associated RNA segment whose helix axis is directed along an icosahedral edge. Protein-nucleic acid interactions are extensive. The RNA helices, which have additional stacked bases at their 3' termini, differ significantly from canonical nucleic acid helical forms.
The hepatitis B virus (HBV) X gene product (pX) could be important in disease pathogenesis because it is known to transactivate transcription from many viral and cellular gene promoters, including the HBV core gene promoter, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) long terminal repeat, and the c-myc promoter. We have previously shown that only a subset of the promoters that can be transactivated by pX is transactivated in any particular cell line, and have proposed that pX acts through multiple, cell type-specific transcription factors. We show here that pX acts through both AP-1 and AP-2 sites, and that pX has a transcription activation domain. We conclude that transactivation by pX depends on at least two distinct cellular DNA-binding transcription factors and we present a model for the action of pX.
When the human immunodeficiency virus transactivating gene under the control of the viral regulatory region is introduced into the germline of mice, skin lesions are induced that resemble Kaposi's sarcoma seen in AIDS. Our findings indicate that HIV could play a direct part in causing cancer.
The assembly of a macromolecular structure proceeds along an ordered morphogenetic pathway, and is accomplished by the switching of proteins between discrete conformations as they are added to the nascent assembly. Scaffolding proteins often play a catalytic role in the assembly process, rather like molecular chaperones. Although macromolecular assembly processes are fundamental to all biological systems, they have been characterized most thoroughly in viral systems, such as the icosahedral Escherichia coli bacteriophage phiX174. The phiX174 virion contains the proteins F, G, H and J. During assembly, two scaffoldingproteins B and D are required for the formation of a 108S, 360-A-diameter procapsid from pentameric precursors containing the F, G and H proteins. The procapsid contains 240 copies of protein D, forming an external scaffold, and 60 copies each of the internal scaffolding protein B, the capsid protein F, and the spike protein G. Maturation involves packaging of DNA and J proteins and loss of protein B, producing a 132S intermediate. Subsequent removal of the external scaffold yields the mature virion. Both the F and G proteins have the eight-stranded antiparallel beta-sandwich motif common to many plant and animal viruses. Here we describe the structure of a procapsid-like particle at 3.5-A resolution, showing how the scaffolding proteins coordinate assembly of the virus by interactions with the F and G proteins, and showing that the F protein undergoes conformational changes during capsid maturation.
The complement system contributes to host defenses against invasion by infectious agents. A 35-kilodalton protein, encoded by vaccinia virus and secreted from infected cells, has sequence similarities to members of a gene family that includes complement control proteins. Biochemical and genetic studies showed that the viral protein binds to derivatives of the fourth component of complement and inhibits the classical complement cascade, suggesting that it serves as a defense molecule to help the virus evade the consequences of complement activation.
Given the considerable challenges to the rapid development of an effective vaccine against influenza, antiviral agents will play an important role as a first-line defense if a new pandemic occurs. The large-scale use of drugs for chemoprophylaxis and treatment will impose strong selection for the evolution of drug-resistant strains. The ensuing transmission of those strains could substantially limit the effectiveness of the drugs as a first-line defense. Summarizing recent data on the rate at which the treatment of influenza infection generates resistance de novo and on the transmission fitness of resistant virus, we discuss possible implications for the epidemiological spread of drug resistance in the context of an established population dynamic model.
Analysis of DNA from human embryo fibroblasts showed that ten Eco RI fragments were hybridizable with the Yamaguchi sarcoma virus oncogene (v-yes). Four of the Eco RI fragments were assigned to chromosome 18 and one to chromosome 6. There was evidence for multiple copies of yes-related genes in the human genome; however, only a single RNA species, 4.8 kilobases in length, was related to yes in various cells.
The human papillomaviruses (HPV) are associated specifically with epithelial lesions, ranging from benign warts to invasive carcinoma. The virus encodes three late proteins, which are produced only in terminally differentiating keratinocytes, two of which are structural components of the virion. The third, E1-E4, is derived primarily from the E4 open reading frame, which represents a region of maximal divergence between different HPV types. E1-E4 does not seem to be a component of the virus particle or to be needed for transformation in vitro, but accumulates in the cytoplasm, where in certain benign lesions it can comprise 20-30% of total cell protein. We show here that expression of the HPV-16 E1-E4 protein in human keratinocytes (the natural host cell for HPV infection) results in the total collapse of the cytokeratin matrix. Tubulin and actin networks are unaffected by E1-E4, as are the nuclear lamins.
Twelve consecuttive passages of simian virus 40, made in the presence of adenovirus 4 and antiserum to simian virus 40, indicated that simian virus 40 would multiply almost indefinitely under these conditions. The adenovirus and the simian virus had previously replicated together in the absence of antiserum. These data support the conclusion that the SV-40 genome is incorporated within the protein coats of adenovirus 4.
Synthetic vaccines for viral diseases can use defined regions of viral proteins as immunogens: the peptide sequence of amino acids 141-160 of the VP1 protein of foot and mouth disease virus (FMDV) elicits virus-neutralizing antibodies to protect guinea pigs, cattle and pigs either when coupled to a carrier protein or when administered in liposomes or in incomplete Freund's adjuvant. The immune response to these peptides is much lower than that to complete virus particles and the same sequence fused to the N terminus of beta-galactosidase did not produce a more potent immunogen than synthetic peptide alone. We report here an expression system for immunogenic epitopes linked to a carrier protein, hepatitis B core antigen, to form part of a virus-like complex which can present these epitopes to the immune system at high density. The immunogenicity of these structures approaches that of FMDV particles.
The human adenoviruses are classified according to their nucleotide sequence homology and their oncogenic potential in rodents. The left-hand end of the genome of the adenovirus types 5 (ad5), 7 (ad7) and 12 (ad12), which are respectively, non-oncogenic (subgroup C), weakly oncogenic (subgroup B) and highly oncogenic (subgroup A), contains all the genetic information needed to induce and maintain the transformed phenotype. This part of the genome contains the early transcription unit designated E1 which is subdivided in two transcription units E1A and E1B. Two spliced mRNAs are transcribed from the E1A region which codes for several phosphorylated polypeptides. These polypeptides play a key role by controlling the expression of the other early transcription units. The major role of region E1A in adenovirus cell transformation might not be activate the true transforming genes of the region E1B. An additional role probably consists of the activation of some cellular genes as a restriction fragment containing this region can immortalize rodent cells in vitro. An important question is why some adenoviruses are oncogenic and others are not. We report here differences in the structures of the E1A polypeptides from ad7 and ad12, compared to ad5, which may partially account for their differing oncogenicity.
RNA silencing (also known as RNA interference) is a conserved biological response to double-stranded RNA that regulates gene expression, and has evolved in plants as a defence against viruses. The response is mediated by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), which guide the sequence-specific degradation of cognate messenger RNAs. As a counter-defence, many viruses encode proteins that specifically inhibit the silencing machinery. The p19 protein from the tombusvirus is such a viral suppressor of RNA silencing and has been shown to bind specifically to siRNA. Here, we report the 1.85-A crystal structure of p19 bound to a 21-nucleotide siRNA, where the 19-base-pair RNA duplex is cradled within the concave face of a continuous eight-stranded beta-sheet, formed across the p19 homodimer interface. Direct and water-mediated intermolecular contacts are restricted to the backbone phosphates and sugar 2'-OH groups, consistent with sequence-independent p19-siRNA recognition. Two alpha-helical 'reading heads' project from opposite ends of the p19 homodimer and position pairs of tryptophans for stacking over the terminal base pairs, thereby measuring and bracketing both ends of the siRNA duplex. Our structure provides an illustration of siRNA sequestering by a viral protein.
Combined analyses of gene networks and DNA sequence variation can provide new insights into the aetiology of common diseases that may not be apparent from genome-wide association studies alone. Recent advances in rat genomics are facilitating systems-genetics approaches. Here we report the use of integrated genome-wide approaches across seven rat tissues to identify gene networks and the loci underlying their regulation. We defined an interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-driven inflammatory network (IDIN) enriched for viral response genes, which represents a molecular biomarker for macrophages and which was regulated in multiple tissues by a locus on rat chromosome 15q25. We show that Epstein-Barr virus induced gene 2 (Ebi2, also known as Gpr183), which lies at this locus and controls B lymphocyte migration, is expressed in macrophages and regulates the IDIN. The human orthologous locus on chromosome 13q32 controlled the human equivalent of the IDIN, which was conserved in monocytes. IDIN genes were more likely to associate with susceptibility to type 1 diabetes (T1D)-a macrophage-associated autoimmune disease-than randomly selected immune response genes (P = 8.85 x 10(-6)). The human locus controlling the IDIN was associated with the risk of T1D at single nucleotide polymorphism rs9585056 (P = 7.0 x 10(-10); odds ratio, 1.15), which was one of five single nucleotide polymorphisms in this region associated with EBI2 (GPR183) expression. These data implicate IRF7 network genes and their regulatory locus in the pathogenesis of T1D.
The level of synthesis of viral proteins and heterologous proteins under the control of long terminal repeat sequences of human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III or LAV) increases dramatically in cells that constitutively express the HTLV-III trans-activator protein. Increased levels of protein synthesis occur without a comparable increase in the levels of corresponding messenger RNA. We propose that post-transcriptional events mediated by the HTLV-III trans-activator protein account for positive regulation of HTLV-III gene products in infected cells.
Antiviral compounds have been developed for use in chemoprophylaxis and chemotherapy of a variety of infections in humans, including those caused by influenza viruses, respiratory syncytial virus, and herpesviruses. The efficacy of several of these compounds has been demonstrated in rigorously controlled trials. Advances in molecular virology have led to the identification of biochemically defined, virus-specific functions that serve as appropriate targets for the future development of antiviral compounds. Clinical investigators and practicing physicians are now confronting questions previously raised with the use of antibacterial antibiotics. These questions concern appropriate routes of administration for antiviral compounds, optimal dosage regimens, risks of long-term prophylaxis, and the emergence of resistant organisms.
The mouse genome contains multiple copies of a dispersed gene family known individually as VL30 genes which are thought to be associated with retroviruses. The copies consist of closely related 5.2-kilobase DNA sequences flanked by unrelated cellular DNA, and although no sequence homology has been found between the genes and the exogenous or endogenous retroviruses so far tested, the 30S RNA transcripts expressed by the genes are efficiently packaged into virions, recovered from infected cells and transmitted to other cells by pseudo-type infection. Stimulated by recent reports of the similarity between retroviruses and transposons (from which retroviruses may have evolved), and in particular by the recognition that both types of genetic elements are characterized by a large terminal repeat (LTR), we set out to determine whether the VL30 genes are also distinguished by this property. Using cloned DNAs from a mouse gene library and heteroduplex analysis, we have now found that the VL30 genes do indeed carry terminal direct repeats 400 base pairs long.
Influenza viruses cause annual epidemics and occasional pandemics that have claimed the lives of millions. The emergence of new strains will continue to pose challenges to public health and the scientific communities. A prime example is the recent emergence of swine-origin H1N1 viruses that have transmitted to and spread among humans, resulting in outbreaks internationally. Efforts to control these outbreaks and real-time monitoring of the evolution of this virus should provide us with invaluable information to direct infectious disease control programmes and to improve understanding of the factors that determine viral pathogenicity and/or transmissibility.
Studies of the actin-based motility of the intracellular pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Shigella flexneri have provided important insight into the events occurring at the leading edges of motile cells. Like the bacteria Listeria and Shigella, vaccinia virus, a relative of the causative agent of smallpox, uses actin-based motility to spread between cells. In contrast to Listeria or Shigella, the actin-based motility of vaccinia is dependent on an unknown phosphotyrosine protein, but the underlying mechanism remains obscure. Here we show that phosphorylation of tyrosine 112 in the viral protein A36R by Src-family kinases is essential for the actin-based motility of vaccinia. Tyrosine phosphorylation of A36R results in a direct interaction with the adaptor protein Nck and the recruitment of the Ena/VASP family member N-WASP to the site of actin assembly. We also show that Nck and N-WASP are essential for the actin-based motility of vaccinia virus. We suggest that vaccinia virus spreads by mimicking the signalling pathways that are normally involved in actin polymerization at the plasma membrane.
Purified DNA of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is regularly infectious by means of the "calcium" method of transfection. Cultured human placental cells exposed to EBV DNA of two transforming strains, FF41 and B95, produce virus that is capable of converting normal B lymphocytes into established cell lines. After treatment with EBV (FF41) DNA and EBV (HR-1) DNA the placental cells display antigens associated with the productive viral cycle. The placental cells have not developed foci or other signs of morphologic transformation.
Activated CD8+ T cells detect virally infected cells and tumor cells by recognition of major histocompatibility complex class I-bound peptides derived from degraded, endogenously produced proteins. In contrast, CD8+ T cell activation often occurs through interaction with specialized antigen-presenting cells displaying peptides acquired from an exogenous cellular source, a process termed cross-priming. Here, we observed a marked inefficiency in exogenous presentation of epitopes derived from signal sequences in mouse models. These data indicate that certain virus- and tumor-associated antigens may not be detected by CD8+ T cells because of impaired cross-priming. Such differences in the ability to cross-present antigens should form important considerations in vaccine design.
Transmission of the bovine papillomavirus-1 (BPV-1) genome through the mouse germ line results in the heritable formation of fibropapillomas of the skin, a tissue-specific phenotype analogous to that observed in natural BPV-1 infection of cattle. Oncogenesis is slow, with tumours first arising at 8-9 months of age, usually in areas prone to wounding. Extrachromosomal BPV-1 DNA is detected in all tumours, whereas normal tissues show only integrated DNA.
Vaccine-induced cellular immunity controls virus replication in simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-infected monkeys only transiently, leading to the question of whether such vaccines for AIDS will be effective. We immunized monkeys with plasmid DNA and replication-defective adenoviral vectors encoding SIV proteins and then challenged them with pathogenic SIV. Although these monkeys demonstrated a reduction in viremia restricted to the early phase of SIV infection, they showed a prolonged survival. This survival was associated with preserved central memory CD4+ T lymphocytes and could be predicted by the magnitude of the vaccine-induced cellular immune response. These immune correlates of vaccine efficacy should guide the evaluation of AIDS vaccines in humans.
The virions of all known viruses are composed of small amounts of genomic nucleic acid enveloped by proteins and other macromolecules. The aetiological agents of scrapie disease and the other subacute spongiform virus encephalopathies (SSVE), a group of slow, fatal degenerative diseases of the central nervous system, are, based on their resistance to sterilization and on indirect measurements suggesting subviral size, thought to have non-viral structures (see refs 1-3 for reviews). The kinetic studies reported here demonstrate that scrapie's resistance to many inactivants is limited to small subpopulations of the total infectivity, the majority population being highly sensitive to inactivation. Moreover, control inactivations of conventional viruses provide examples of both scrapie-like resistant subpopulations and complete insensitivity to virucidal agents, especially when those viruses, like scrapie, are suspended in hamster brain homogenate. Virus controls further establish that the ability of the scrapie agent to penetrate dilute agarose-acrylamide electrophoretic gels is shared by conventional viruses. Direct comparison of scrapie's resistance to ionizing radiation with the resistances of other viruses places scrapie with the smaller viruses, as opposed to requiring a subviral size as claimed.
An influenza A reassortant virus that contained the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes of a virulent human virus, A/Udorn/72 (H3N2), and the six other influenza A virus genome segments from an avirulent avian virus, A/Mallard/New York/6750/78 (H2N2), was evaluated for its level of replication is squirrel monkeys and hamsters. In monkeys, the reassortant virus was as attenuated and as restricted in its level of replication in the upper and lower respiratory tract as its avian influenza virus parent. Nonetheless, infection with the reassortant induced significant resistant to challenge with virulent human influenza virus. In hamsters, the reassortant virus replicated to a level intermediate between that of its parents. These findings suggest that the nonsurface antigen genes of the avian parental virus are the primary determinants of restriction of replication of the reassortant virus in monkeys. Attenuation of the reassortant virus for primates is achieved by inefficient functioning of the avian influenza genes in primate cells, while antigenic specificity of the human influenza virus is provided by the neuraminidase and hemagglutinin genes derived from the human virus. This approach could lead to the development of a live influenza A virus vaccine that is attenuated for man if the avian influenza genes are similarly restricted in human cells.
Structural comparison of the major envelope glycoproteins (gp70) from 35 different murine type C viruses and free gp70 expressed at various anatomical sites in the mouse showed that the gp70s are polymorphic products of a large multi-gene family encoding viral and differentiation antigens. Different proviruses are expressed in cells following distinct pathways of differentiation. When the various gp70s are grouped according to primary structure they fall naturally into viral host range classes, confirming the suspicion that C-type viral tropism is largely determined by the nature of the gp70 product expressed.
Oncogenic viruses demonstrating a strict tropism for the mammary gland provide special opportunities to study the susceptibility of this tissue to neoplasia. In rats, human adenovirus type 9 (Ad9) elicits mammary fibroadenomas that are similar to common breast tumors in women, as well as phyllodes-like tumors and mammary sarcomas. By constructing recombinant adenoviruses between Ad9 and Ad26 (a related nontumorigenic virus), it was shown that the Ad9 E4 region was absolutely required to produce these mammary tumors. This indicates that an adenovirus gene located outside the classic transforming region (E1) can significantly influence the in vivo oncogenicity of an adenovirus. Consistent with a direct role in mammary gland oncogenesis, the Ad9 E4 region also exhibited transforming properties in vitro. Therefore, the Ad9 E4 region is a viral oncogene specifically involved in mammary gland tumorigenesis.
Little is known about host factors necessary for retroviral virion assembly or uncoating. We have previously shown that the principal structural protein of the human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1, the Gag polyprotein, binds the cyclophilin peptidyl-prolyl isomerases; cyclophilins catalyse a rate-limiting step in protein folding and protect cells from heat shock. Here we demonstrate that cyclophilin A is specifically incorporated into HIV-1 virions but not into virions of other primate immunodeficiency viruses. A proline-rich region conserved in all HIV-1 Gag polyproteins is required for cyclophilin A binding and incorporation. Disruption of a single proline blocks the Gag-cyclophilin interaction in vitro, prevents cyclophilin A incorporation into virions, and inhibits HIV-1 replication. Our results indicate that the interaction of Gag with cyclophilin A is necessary for the formation of infectious HIV-1 virions.
With accumulating evidence indicating the importance of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in containing human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) replication in infected individuals, strategies are being pursued to elicit virus-specific CTLs with prototype HIV-1 vaccines. Here, we report the protective efficacy of vaccine-elicited immune responses against a pathogenic SHIV-89.6P challenge in rhesus monkeys. Immune responses were elicited by DNA vaccines expressing SIVmac239 Gag and HIV-1 89.6P Env, augmented by the administration of the purified fusion protein IL-2/Ig, consisting of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and the Fc portion of immunoglobulin G (IgG), or a plasmid encoding IL-2/Ig. After SHIV-89.6P infection, sham-vaccinated monkeys developed weak CTL responses, rapid loss of CD4+ T cells, no virus-specific CD4+ T cell responses, high setpoint viral loads, significant clinical disease progression, and death in half of the animals by day 140 after challenge. In contrast, all monkeys that received the DNA vaccines augmented with IL-2/Ig were infected, but demonstrated potent secondary CTL responses, stable CD4+ T cell counts, preserved virus-specific CD4+ T cell responses, low to undetectable setpoint viral loads, and no evidence of clinical disease or mortality by day 140 after challenge.
Multiple human immunodeficiency virus type-1 sequences from the V3 and V4-V5 regions of the envelope gene were analyzed from three mother-infant pairs. The infants' viral sequences were less diverse than those of their mothers. In two pairs, a proviral form infrequently found in the mother predominated in her infant. A conserved N-linked glycosylation site within the V3 region, present in each mother's sequence set, was absent in all of the infants' sequence sets. These findings demonstrate that a minor subset of maternal virus is transmitted to the infant.
Long-lived plasma cells and memory B cells are the primary cellular components of long-term humoral immunity and as such are vitally important for the protection afforded by most vaccines. The SAP gene has been identified as the genetic locus responsible for X-linked lymphoproliferative disease, a fatal immunodeficiency. Mutations in SAP have also been identified in some cases of severe common variable immunodeficiency disease. The underlying cellular basis of this genetic disorder remains unclear. We have used a SAP knockout mouse model system to explore the role of SAP in immune responses. Here we report that mice lacking expression of SAP generate strong acute IgG antibody responses after viral infection, but show a near complete absence of virus-specific long-lived plasma cells and memory B cells, despite the presence of virus-specific memory CD4+ T cells. Adoptive transfer experiments show that SAP-deficient B cells are normal and the defect is in CD4+ T cells. Thus, SAP has a crucial role in CD4+ T-cell function: it is essential for late B-cell help and the development of long-term humoral immunity but is not required for early B-cell help and class switching.
Mice lacking the known subunit of the type I interferon (IFN) receptor were completely unresponsive to type I IFNs, suggesting that this receptor chain is essential for type I IFN-mediated signal transduction. These mice showed no overt anomalies but were unable to cope with viral infections, despite otherwise normal immune responses. Comparison of mice lacking either type I or type II IFN receptors showed that, at least in response to some viruses, both IFN systems are essential for antiviral defense and are functionally nonredundant.
The human suffering exacted by the hepatitis C virus is enormous. Hundreds of thousands of people die each year from liver failure and cancer caused by this infection. There is no vaccine, and the available antiviral drugs are toxic, expensive and only partly effective. Progress has been hindered by the absence of cell culture and small-animal models of the infection. Nonetheless, recent advances have yielded several promising new antiviral drugs and enhanced the prospects of developing a vaccine. The recent development of a robust in vitro hepatitis C virus infection system will aid this search.
The activity and products of cellular oncogenes can be altered by various processes, such as the nearby integration of a retroviral genome, point mutation within the oncogene coding region, gene amplification, and chromosomal translocation (reviewed in ref. 1). Our work has provided an example of oncogene activation by yet a different process; the integration of an endogenous retrovirus-like DNA element (identified as an intracisternal A particle or IAP genome) within the coding region of the oncogene c-mos in a mouse plasmacytoma, XRPC 24. The rearranged c-mos gene of XRPC24 is actively transcribed and has transforming activity, suggesting some role for activated c-mos in the progression of the XRPC24 tumour. In this report we describe rearrangement of c-mos in a second mouse plasmacytoma, NSI, and in two hybridomas. In this case, as in XRPC24, c-mos was split by the insertion of a IAP genome. The rearranged c-mos genes (rc-mos) of NSI and XRPC24 differ in three major aspects: (1) The site of IAP integration in c-mos is in codon 30 in NSI but in codon 88 in XRPC24; (2) The orientation of the integrated IAP relative to c-mos is 'tail-to-head' in NSI and 'head-to-head' in XRPC24; and (3) transcriptional activity of rc-mos in NSI is much lower than in XRPC24. The two latter points suggest a correlation between the orientation of the long terminal repeat (LTR) of IAP relative to c-mos and its activity upon IAP integration.
Retroviruses contain two copies of the plus stranded viral RNA genome. As a means of determining whether both of these RNA's are used in the reverse transcription reaction, cells were infected with heterozygous virus particles that varied in nucleotide sequence at two separate locations at the RNA termini. The DNA proviruses formed from a single cycle of reverse transcription were then examined. Of the 12 proviruses that were characterized, all exhibited long terminal repeats (LTR's) that would be expected to arise only if both RNA templates were used for the generation of minus strand DNA. In contrast, only a single minus strand DNA appeared to be used as template for the plus strand DNA in the generation of fully double-stranded viral DNA. These results indicate that the first strand transfer step in reverse transcription is an intermolecular event while that of the second transfer is intramolecular. Thus, retroviruses contain two functionally active RNA's, and both may be required for the generation of a single linear DNA molecule. Formation of heterozygotes during retrovirus infection would be expected to result in the efficient generation of LTR recombinants.
The immunoprophylaxis of hepatitis B is hampered by the lack of a technique for growing hepatitis B virus (HBV) in tissue culture. Plasma from persistently infected individuals, one source of viral antigen, contains characteristic 22-nm spherical particles which share a common antigen (the hepatitis B surface antigen or HBsAg) with the outer envelope of the 42-nm double-shelled DNA virus. Highly purified inactivated 22-nm particles have been shown to be safe and to confer protective immunity against HBV in a recent large-scale clinical trial. We have already described the extraction from the particles of a complex of two proteins which are antigenic determinants of HBV--the polypeptide with molecular weight (MW) between 22,000 and 24,000 (called p23) and the glycosylated polypeptide (called gp28) with MW in the range 26,000--29,000 which is thought to be the glycosylated form of p23. We now report the preparation from this complex of water-soluble protein micelles which may be a suitable basis for a second-generation hepatitis B vaccine.
Broadly neutralizing antibodies against highly variable viral pathogens are much sought after to treat or protect against global circulating viruses. Here we probed the neutralizing antibody repertoires of four human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected donors with remarkably broad and potent neutralizing responses and rescued 17 new monoclonal antibodies that neutralize broadly across clades. Many of the new monoclonal antibodies are almost tenfold more potent than the recently described PG9, PG16 and VRC01 broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibodies and 100-fold more potent than the original prototype HIV broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibodies. The monoclonal antibodies largely recapitulate the neutralization breadth found in the corresponding donor serum and many recognize novel epitopes on envelope (Env) glycoprotein gp120, illuminating new targets for vaccine design. Analysis of neutralization by the full complement of anti-HIV broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibodies now available reveals that certain combinations of antibodies should offer markedly more favourable coverage of the enormous diversity of global circulating viruses than others and these combinations might be sought in active or passive immunization regimes. Overall, the isolation of multiple HIV broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibodies from several donors that, in aggregate, provide broad coverage at low concentrations is a highly positive indicator for the eventual design of an effective antibody-based HIV vaccine.
Chicken erythroid cells contain a tissue specific histone known as H5 in addition to the five major histone species found in other organisms. The mRNA coding for this histone has been isolated by indirect immunoprecipitation from immature, non-dividing reticulocytes in which this is the only histone synthesised. The mRNA has been modified by the enzymatic addition of a 3' polyadenylic acid tract, and transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) using the RNA-dependent DNA-polymerase from avian myeloblastosis virus. Studies on the hybridisation of this cDNA indicate that the gene coding for the H5 histone is reiterated 10 times in the chicken genome.
RNA silencing is a remarkable type of gene regulation based on sequence-specific targeting and degradation of RNA. The term encompasses related pathways found in a broad range of eukaryotic organisms, including fungi, plants, and animals. In plants, it serves as an antiviral defense, and many plant viruses encode suppressors of silencing. The emerging view is that RNA silencing is part of a sophisticated network of interconnected pathways for cellular defense, RNA surveillance, and development and that it may become a powerful tool to manipulate gene expression experimentally.
Plasma of cattle infected with bovine leukemia virus contains a soluble factor that blocks the expression of the viral genome in cultured lymphocytes. The blocking factor is not present in plasma of bovine leukemia virus-free cattle or of cattle infected with common bovine viruses. Blocking of bovine leukemia virus expression by the plasma factor is reversible, and seems to be mediated by a nonimmunoglobulin protein molecule.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), a virus with known carcinogenic potential, integrates into cellular DNA during long-term persistent infection in man. Hepatocellular carcinomas isolated from viral carriers often contain clonally propagated viral DNA integrations. As small chromosomal deletions are associated with several types of carcinomas, the occurrence of chromosomal deletions in association with HBV integration in hepatocellular carcinoma was studied. HBV integration was accompanied by a deletion of at least 13.5 kilobases of cellular sequences in a human hepatocellular carcinoma. The viral DNA integration and deletion of cellular sequences occurred on the short arm of chromosome 11 at location 11p13-11p14. The cellular sequences that were deleted at the site of HBV integration were lost from the tumor cells, leaving only a single copy of the remaining cellular allele.
The biological importance of DNA methylation for gene expression in eukaryotes is becoming increasingly evident, and a direct role of methylation in gene expression has been suggested by an analysis of the infectivity of integrated retroviral genomes in a transfection assay. These studies, however, did not address whether specific methylatable residues are involved in gene regulation. Methylation by sequence-specific bacterial DNA methylases has been shown to suppress the expression of some genes, but not others. To investigate the effect of methylation on gene expression without having to rely on sequence-specific methylases, a rat liver enzyme was used to methylate in vitro all C-G dinucleotides of a proviral genomic clone. This treatment reduced the biological activity of Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV) proviral DNA by more than three orders of magnitude, whereas complete methylation of 35 HpaII sites in the same DNA had only a marginal effect. The rat methylase-induced inactivation was reversible, as treatment of recipient cells with 5-azacytidine rendered the non-infectious viral genomes biologically active. This suggests that methylation in other C-G dinucleotides than those detectable with restriction enzymes can be crucial for gene expression.
Although cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) are thought to be involved in the control of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) infection, it has not been possible to demonstrate a direct relation between CTL activity and plasma RNA viral load. Human leukocyte antigen-peptide tetrameric complexes offer a specific means to directly quantitate circulating CTLs ex vivo. With the use of the tetrameric complexes, a significant inverse correlation was observed between HIV-specific CTL frequency and plasma RNA viral load. In contrast, no significant association was detected between the clearance rate of productively infected cells and frequency of HIV-specific CTLs. These data are consistent with a significant role for HIV-specific CTLs in the control of HIV infection and suggest a considerable cytopathic effect of the virus in vivo.
RNA interference (RNAi) is an evolutionarily conserved sequence-specific post-transcriptional gene silencing mechanism that is well defined genetically in Caenorhabditis elegans. RNAi has been postulated to function as an adaptive antiviral immune mechanism in the worm, but there is no experimental evidence for this. Part of the limitation is that there are no known natural viral pathogens of C. elegans. Here we describe an infection model in C. elegans using the mammalian pathogen vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) to study the role of RNAi in antiviral immunity. VSV infection is potentiated in cells derived from RNAi-defective worm mutants (rde-1; rde-4), leading to the production of infectious progeny virus, and is inhibited in mutants with an enhanced RNAi response (rrf-3; eri-1). Because the RNAi response occurs in the absence of exogenously added VSV small interfering RNAs, these results show that RNAi is activated during VSV infection and that RNAi is a genuine antiviral immune defence mechanism in the worm.
The extensive range of specificities of T-cell receptors is generated, as for immunoglobulins, by rearrangement of genetic information. Much valuable information about rearrangement processes has been inferred by comparing DNA from (monoclonal) lymphoid lines with germ-line DNA and, for B cells, from rearrangements in some Abelson murine leukaemia virus-transformed cell lines. However, because it is difficult to isolate and grow precursor populations, it has not proved possible to study rearrangements occurring in normal untransformed cells in vitro. Here we show that a single T-cell precursor colonizing an alymphoid thymus lobe in organ culture can generate multiple receptor beta-chain gene rearrangements. These observations provide unequivocal evidence for the intra-thymic diversification of the T-cell repertoire. They also offer the possibility of investigating rearrangement and its control in the clonal progeny of a single normal T-cell precursor without the perturbations involved in the use of viral transformation or the production of T-cell hybridomas.
The apparent enhancement of 2-deoxy-D-glucose uptake by mouse 3T3 cells accompanying transformation by SV40 virus is not due primarily to an effect on the transport process but to enhanced phosphorylation of the sugar by intracellular kinases. Moreover, the effect is not specifically a function of the presence of the viral genome, but is a reflection of the overall growth rate and physiological state of the cell.
The purine analog 2',3'-dideoxyinosine (ddI), which has anti-retroviral activity in vitro was administered for up to 42 weeks to 26 patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or severe AIDS-related complex (ARC). Ten of these individuals were AZT-intolerant. Eight dose regimens were studied. The drug was orally bioavailable and penetrated into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Comparatively little evidence of an effect against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was seen at the lowest four doses. However, patients in the four highest dose groups (ddI at 1.6 milligrams per kilogram intravenously and then greater than or equal to 3.2 milligrams per kilogram orally at least every 12 hours or higher) had increases in their circulating CD4+ T cells (P less than 0.0005), increased CD4/CD8 T cell ratios (P less than 0.01), and, where evaluable, more than an 80% decrease in serum HIV p24 antigen (P less than 0.05). The patients also had evidence of improved immunologic function, had reduced viremic symptomatology, and gained a mean of 1.6 kilogram with these comparatively infrequent dosing schedules (every 8 or 12 hours). The most notable adverse effects directly attributable to ddI administration at the doses used in this study included increases in serum uric acid (due to hypoxanthine release) and mild headaches and insomnia. These results suggest that serious short-term toxicity at therapeutic doses is not an inherent feature in the profile of agents with clinical anti-HIV activity. Further controlled studies to define the safety and efficacy of this agent may be worth considering.
Thymus-derived (T) lymphocytes recognize antigen in conjunction with surface glycoproteins encoded by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes. Whereas fragments of soluble antigens are presented to T helper lymphocytes (TH), which carry the CD4 antigen, in association with class II MHC molecules, CD8-bearing cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) usually see cellular antigens (for instance virally-encoded proteins) in conjunction with MHC class I molecules. The different modes of antigen presentation may result from separate intracellular transport: vesicles containing class II molecules are thought to fuse with those carrying endocytosed soluble proteins. Class I molecules, in contrast, can only pick up degradation products of intracellular proteins (see refs 7 and 8). This makes biological sense; during an attack of a virus, class I-restricted CTL destroy infected cells and class II-restricted TH guide the humoural response to neutralize virus particles and toxins. But here we provide evidence that CTL specific for ovalbumin fragments can be induced with soluble protein, and that intracellular protein degradation provides epitopes recognized by these CTL. These findings suggest the existence of an antigen presenting cell that takes up soluble material and induces CTL.
Serologically unrelated bacteriophages P22 and P221 that grow on Salmonella typhimurium are described. The phage P22 and a mutant P22h have short tails with hexagonal base plates, whereas P221 has a long, flexible tail without a base plate. P22h and P221 can recombine to exchange genetic markers. In the course of the recombination experiment, an unusual hybrid, P22-221Hy, was found. It mutates to P221 and P22S at a frequency of 10(-4) and 1O(-5), respectively. Unlike P22h, P22S gives clear plaques on both S. typhimurium, St, and its mutant, St/22, but is morphologically and serologically indistinguishable from P22 and P22h. The use of single-clone technique on P22-221Hy proved that a P22-221Hy genome consists of a P22h and a P221 genome and is carried by the P22h capsid. However, it seems probable that the information for synthesizing the P221 capsid may be suppressed by the information for synthesizing the P22h capsid. P22-221Hy is a stable hybrid rather than a heterozygote, because it does not segregate by passing through host cells. Thus,, one bacteriophage can carry the genetic information for two distinct bacteriophages.
The replication of many viruses is associated with specific intracellular compartments called virus factories or virioplasm. These are thought to provide a physical scaffold to concentrate viral components and thereby increase the efficiency of replication. The formation of virus replication sites often results in rearrangement of cellular membranes and reorganization of the cytoskeleton. Similar rearrangements are seen in cells in response to protein aggregation, where aggresomes and autophagosomes are produced to facilitate protein degradation. Here I review the evidence that some viruses induce aggresomes and autophagosomes to generate sites of replication.
The worldwide prevalence of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is estimated to be approaching 200 million people. Current therapy relies upon a combination of pegylated interferon-alpha and ribavirin, a poorly tolerated regimen typically associated with less than 50% sustained virological response rate in those infected with genotype 1 virus. The development of direct-acting antiviral agents to treat HCV has focused predominantly on inhibitors of the viral enzymes NS3 protease and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase NS5B. Here we describe the profile of BMS-790052, a small molecule inhibitor of the HCV NS5A protein that exhibits picomolar half-maximum effective concentrations (EC(50)) towards replicons expressing a broad range of HCV genotypes and the JFH-1 genotype 2a infectious virus in cell culture. In a phase I clinical trial in patients chronically infected with HCV, administration of a single 100-mg dose of BMS-790052 was associated with a 3.3 log(10) reduction in mean viral load measured 24 h post-dose that was sustained for an additional 120 h in two patients infected with genotype 1b virus. Genotypic analysis of samples taken at baseline, 24 and 144 h post-dose revealed that the major HCV variants observed had substitutions at amino-acid positions identified using the in vitro replicon system. These results provide the first clinical validation of an inhibitor of HCV NS5A, a protein with no known enzymatic function, as an approach to the suppression of virus replication that offers potential as part of a therapeutic regimen based on combinations of HCV inhibitors.
In viruses, as in eukaryotes, elaborate mechanisms have evolved to protect the genome and to ensure its timely replication and reliable transmission to progeny. Influenza A viruses are enveloped, spherical or filamentous structures, ranging from 80 to 120 nm in diameter. Inside each envelope is a viral genome consisting of eight single-stranded negative-sense RNA segments of 890 to 2,341 nucleotides each. These segments are associated with nucleoprotein and three polymerase subunits, designated PA, PB1 and PB2; the resultant ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) resemble a twisted rod (10-15 nm in width and 30-120 nm in length) that is folded back and coiled on itself. Late in viral infection, newly synthesized RNPs are transported from the nucleus to the plasma membrane, where they are incorporated into progeny virions capable of infecting other cells. Here we show, by transmission electron microscopy of serially sectioned virions, that the RNPs of influenza A virus are organized in a distinct pattern (seven segments of different lengths surrounding a central segment). The individual RNPs are suspended from the interior of the viral envelope at the distal end of the budding virion and are oriented perpendicular to the budding tip. This finding argues against random incorporation of RNPs into virions, supporting instead a model in which each segment contains specific incorporation signals that enable the RNPs to be recruited and packaged as a complete set. A selective mechanism of RNP incorporation into virions and the unique organization of the eight RNP segments may be crucial to maintaining the integrity of the viral genome during repeated cycles of replication.
A study was undertaken in rabbits to determine how late in the course of keratoconjunctivitis caused by herpes simplex recovery could be effected by an inducer of interferon. Interferon was induced by means of synthetic double-stranded RNA copolymer formed with polynosinic acid: polycytidilic acid RNA. Therapy promotes recovery from severe and fully established keratoconjunctivitis for which treatment was begun as late as 3 days after virus inoculation. No drug toxicity was observed in the therapeutic dose range. These findings further support the proposed role of the interferon mechanism in the natural recovery of already established viral infection. They also suggest the usefulness of interferon inducers in viral infections of man.
DNA sequences capable of inducing oncogenic transformation of NIH3T3 mouse cells are found in a number of human tumour cell lines. When DNAs of these cell lines are applied to monolayer cultures of the mouse fibroblasts, foci of transformed cells are observed 2-3 weeks later. DNA from cells of such primary foci can be used in turn to induce foci in a second cycle of gene transfer. The human DNA sequences responsible for transformation have been called oncogenes, the best characterized of which is closely related to the Harvey murine sarcoma virus oncogene. Here we present a characterization of an oncogene which we found originally to be present in DNA of the SW480 colon carcinoma cell line. We indicate its structural outlines and demonstrate, in extension of reported results, its presence in an activated form in the genome of several types of human tumour cell lines as well as in biopsy tissue from an adenocarcinoma of the large bowel. We identify this tumour oncogene with c-Ki-ras2, one of two known members of the Kirsten ras family of human proto-oncogenes, extending a series of recent reports which have demonstrated homologies between human oncogenes and those of Harvey and Kirsten murine sarcoma viruses. The c-Ki-ras2 oncogene of several tumour cell lines is shown to be amplified.
T-lymphocyte immunity is likely to be an important component of the immune defence against the AIDS virus, because helper T cells are necessary for the antibody response as well as the cytotoxic response. We have previously predicted two antigenic sites of the viral envelope protein gp120 likely to be recognized by T lymphocytes, based on their ability to fold as amphipathic helices, and have demonstrated that these are recognized by T cells of mice immunized with gp120 (ref. 1). A peptide corresponding to one of these sites can also be induce immunity in mice to the whole gp120 protein. Because many clinically healthy seropositive blood donors have already lost their T-cell proliferative response to specific antigen, we tested the response to these synthetic peptides of lymphocytes from 14 healthy human volunteers who had been immunized with a recombinant vaccinia virus containing the AIDS viral envelope gene and boosted with a recombinant fragment. Eight of the 14 responded to one peptide, and four to the other peptide, not included in the boost. These antigenic sites recognized by human T cells may be useful components of a vaccine against AIDS. We also found a correlation between boosting with antigen-antibody complexes (compared to free antigen) and higher stimulation indices, suggesting a more effective method of immunization.
In infected cells, the RNA genomes of RNA tumour viruses are copied into DNA by a virus-encoded reverse transcriptase enzyme. This transfer of information from RNA into DNA was thought to be a unique feature of RNA tumour viruses, but recent results suggest it may be a more general strategy. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) has a double-stranded DNA genome, and it has recently been shown that the minus DNA strand of the HBV genome is copied from a plus-strand RNA template, leading to the suggestion that reverse transcription is central to the life cycle of HBV. More recently it has been suggested that the replication cycle of a plant virus, cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV), includes a reverse transcription step. We report here the existence of amino acid sequence homology between retroviral reverse transcriptase and the putative polymerases of HBV and CaMV.
Transcription of protein-encoding genes by human RNA polymerase II requires multiple ancillary proteins (transcription factors). Interactions between these proteins and the promoter DNA of a viral class II gene (the major late transcription unit of adenovirus) were investigated by enzymatic and chemical footprinting. The experiments indicated that the assembly of functionally active RNA polymerase II-containing transcription preinitiation complexes requires a complete set of transcription factors, and that both specific protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions are involved. This allows individual steps along the transcription reaction pathway to be tested directly, thus providing a basis for understanding basic transcription initiation mechanisms as well as the regulatory processes that act on them.
The hepatitis B virus (HBV) X gene product trans-activates viral and cellular genes. The X protein (pX) does not bind independently to nucleic acids. The data presented here demonstrate that pX entered into a protein-protein complex with the cellular transcriptional factors CREB and ATF-2 and altered their DNA binding specificities. Although CREB and ATF-2 alone did not bind to the HBV enhancer element, a pX-CREB or pX-ATF-2 complex did bind to the HBV enhancer. Thus, the ability of pX to interact with cellular factors broadened the DNA binding specificity of these regulatory proteins and provides a mechanism for pX to participate in transcriptional regulation. This strategy of altered binding specificity may modify the repertoire of genes that can be regulated by transcriptional factors during viral infection.
Spontaneous thymic leukaemia in experimental mice is the result of a complex series of genetically controlled events. An important step in this process involves the production by thymocytes of recombinant polytropic retroviruses (MCF viruses). These leukaemogenic agents arise by recombination of genes from the env regions of endogenous precursor viruses. Sequences in these regions encode the envelope glycoprotein gp70 (ref. 6). Thus far, each cloned isolate of recombinant virus from AKR and HRS/J mice has been found to possess unique oligonucleotide sequences in its env region, as well as clone-specific peptides in its gp70 (refs 7,8). Therefore, the polytropic viruses of these leukaemia-susceptible mice are extremely diverse. These findings suggest that random recombination of env genes gives rise to leukaemogenic polytropic viruses. McGrath and Weissman have proposed that thymocytes with cell surface receptors for the gp70 of a particular leukaemogenic virus are the target cells for malignant transformation by that specific virus. In view of the diversity of polytropic viral gp70, their hypothesis would predict extensive phenotypic diversity among spontaneous thymic leukaemias. In contrast, leukaemias induced by a particular leukaemogenic recombinant virus would always have the same phenotype. Here we verify these predictions experimentally.
For the IIIB isolate of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1), the immunodominant determinant of the envelope protein gp160 for cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) of H-2d mice is in a region of high sequence variability among HIV-1 isolates. The general requirements for CTL recognition of peptide antigens and the relation of recognition requirements to the natural variation in sequence of the HIV were investigated. For this purpose, a CTL line specific for the homologous segment of the envelope from the MN isolate of HIV-1 and restricted by the same class I major histocompatibility (MHC) molecule (Dd) as the IIIB-specific CTLs was raised from mice immunized with MN-env-recombinant vaccinia virus. The IIIB-specific and MN-specific CTLs were completely non-cross-reactive. Reciprocal exchange of a single amino acid between the two peptide sequences, which differed in 6 of 15 residues, led to a complete reversal of the specificity of the peptides in sensitizing targets, such that the IIIB-specific CTLs lysed targets exposed to the singly substituted MN peptide and vice versa. These data indicate the importance of single residues in defining peptide epitopic specificity and have implications for both the effect of immune pressure on selection of viral mutants and the design of effective vaccines.
RNA similar in base composition to viral DNA is formed in the cytoplasm of HeLa cells infected with vaccinia virus. This RNA is found both in polyribosomes and in a broad 30S to 74S region in a sucrose density gradient. When infected cells are exposed to actinomycin, the amount of this DNA-like RNA in the 30S to 74S region is unchanged. Under the same conditions, 70 percent of the polyribosome-associated DNA-like RNA is degraded to acidsoluble fragments within 2 hours, and protein synthesis is reduced by 90 percent.
Retroviral DNA integration is catalyzed by the viral protein integrase. Here, it is shown that DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), a host cell protein, also participates in the reaction. DNA-PK-deficient murine scid cells infected with three different retroviruses showed a substantial reduction in retroviral DNA integration and died by apoptosis. Scid cell killing was not observed after infection with an integrase-defective virus, suggesting that abortive integration is the trigger for death in these DNA repair-deficient cells. These results suggest that the initial events in retroviral integration are detected as DNA damage by the host cell and that completion of the integration process requires the DNA-PK-mediated repair pathway.
The comprehensive yeast two-hybrid analysis of intraviral protein interactions in two members of the herpesvirus family, Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) and varicella-zoster virus (VZV), revealed 123 and 173 interactions, respectively. Viral protein interaction networks resemble single, highly coupled modules, whereas cellular networks are organized in separate functional submodules. Predicted and experimentally verified interactions between KSHV and human proteins were used to connect the viral interactome into a prototypical human interactome and to simulate infection. The analysis of the combined system showed that the viral network adopts cellular network features and that protein networks of herpesviruses and possibly other intracellular pathogens have distinguishing topologies.
Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) causes a contagious disease of horses, cattle, and pigs. When DNA copies of messenger RNA's for the G or N proteins of VSV were linked to a vaccinia virus promoter and inserted into the vaccinia genome, the recombinants retained infectivity and synthesized VSV polypeptides. After intradermal vaccination with live recombinant virus expressing the G protein, mice produced VSV-neutralizing antibodies and were protected against lethal encephalitis upon intravenous challenge with VSV. In cattle, the degree of protection against intradermalingually injected VSV was correlated with the level of neutralizing antibody produced following vaccination.
Natural antibodies are often dismissed from immunological analysis as "background," but they may play an important role in conferring immunity against infections. In antibody-free mice infected with various viruses or with Listeria monocytogenes, viral or bacterial titers in peripheral organs, including the kidney and brain, were 10 to 100 times greater than in antibody-competent mice (and enhanced their susceptibility to some infections), and titers in secondary lymphoid organs were 10 to 100 times lower than in antibody-competent mice. Thus, natural antibodies play a crucial role by preventing pathogen dissemination to vital organs and by improving immunogenicity through enhanced antigen-trapping in secondary lymphoid organs.
U2 RNA is one of the abundant, highly conserved species of small nuclear RNA (snRNA) molecules implicated in RNA processing. As is typical of mammalian snRNAs, human U1 and U2 are each encoded by a multigene family. In the human genome, defective copies of the genes (pseudogenes) far outnumber the authentic genes. The majority or all of the 35 to 100 bona fide U1 genes have at least 20 kilobases (kb) of nearly perfect 5' and 3' flanking homology in common with each other; these U1 genes are clustered loosely in chromosome band 1p36 (refs 5, 7) with intergenic distances exceeding 44 kb. In contrast, the 10 to 20 U2 genes are clustered tightly in a virtually perfect tandem array which has a strict 6-kb repeating unit. We report here the assignment, by in situ hybridization, of the U2 gene cluster to chromosome 17, bands q21-q22. Surprisingly, this region is one of three major adenovirus 12 modification sites which undergo chromosome decondensation ('uncoiling') in permissive human cells infected by highly oncogenic strains of adenovirus. The two other major modification sites, 1p36 and 1q21, coincide with the locations of U1 genes and class I U1 pseudogenes, respectively. We suggest that snRNA genes are the major targets of viral chromosome modification.
The nature and position of transcriptional control elements responsible for the expression of genes encoded by the retrovirus associated with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) have not been precisely defined. In this study it is shown that the mammalian Sp1 transcription factor binds to promoter sequences within the AIDS retrovirus long terminal repeat (LTR) and activates RNA synthesis five- to eightfold in reconstituted reactions in vitro. Experiments in which regions of DNA were protected from added reagents by specifically bound proteins (footprinting) indicated that the upstream promoter region of the AIDS virus LTR lies between -45 and -77 (relative to the RNA start site, +1) and contains three tandem, closely spaced SP1 binding sites of variable affinity. Base-substitution mutations targeted to one or all three Sp1 binding sites were found both to eliminate the binding of Sp1 and to cause up to a tenfold reduction in transcriptional efficiency in vitro. These findings suggest that one important component of the AIDS virus transcriptional control region interacts with a cellular transcription factor, Sp1, and that this factor must function in conjunction with transcriptional elements located downstream of the RNA cap site to mediate the response of the LTR to viral trans-activation.
The human APOBEC3G (apolipoprotein B messenger-RNA-editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G) protein is a single-strand DNA deaminase that inhibits the replication of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1), other retroviruses and retrotransposons. APOBEC3G anti-viral activity is circumvented by most retroelements, such as through degradation by HIV-1 Vif. APOBEC3G is a member of a family of polynucleotide cytosine deaminases, several of which also target distinct physiological substrates. For instance, APOBEC1 edits APOB mRNA and AID deaminates antibody gene DNA. Although structures of other family members exist, none of these proteins has elicited polynucleotide cytosine deaminase or anti-viral activity. Here we report a solution structure of the human APOBEC3G catalytic domain. Five alpha-helices, including two that form the zinc-coordinating active site, are arranged over a hydrophobic platform consisting of five beta-strands. NMR DNA titration experiments, computational modelling, phylogenetic conservation and Escherichia coli-based activity assays combine to suggest a DNA-binding model in which a brim of positively charged residues positions the target cytosine for catalysis. The structure of the APOBEC3G catalytic domain will help us to understand functions of other family members and interactions that occur with pathogenic proteins such as HIV-1 Vif.
Post-infectious or post-vaccinal demyelinating encephalomyelitis and neuritis may be due to immunological cross-reactions evoked by specific viral antigenic determinants (epitopes) that are homologous to regions in the target myelins of the central and peripheral nervous systems. Such homologies have been found by computer searches in which decapeptides in two human myelin proteins were compared with proteins of viruses known to infect humans. These viruses include measles, Epstein-Barr, influenza A and B, and others that cause upper respiratory infections. Several regions identified in myelin basic protein and P2 protein can be related to experimental allergic encephalomyelitis or neuritis in laboratory animals.
Cell-free replication systems for simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA are taken to be a model for the replication of eukaryotic chromosomes, because only one viral protein is required to supplement the replication proteins provided by a human cell extract. To prove that these cellular proteins function in chromosomal DNA replication we have begun to identify homologous proteins in an organism that can be genetically manipulated. Here we report the identification of yeast replication factor-A (yRF-A) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and show that it is functionally and structurally related to a human protein that is required for the initiation and elongation of SV40 DNA replication. Yeast RF-A, a multi-subunit phosphoprotein, is similar to the human protein in its chromatographic behaviour, subunit structure and DNA-binding activity. The yeast protein will fully substitute for the human protein in an early stage of the initiation of SV40 DNA replication. Substitution of yRF-A in the complete SV40 replication system, however, results in reduced DNA replication, presumably due to a requirement for species-specific interactions between yeast RF-A and the DNA polymerase complex.
There is increasing evidence that at least some of the cellular homologues to retroviral oncogenes (c-onc or proto-oncogenes) are directly linked to the control of cell growth (for a review see ref. 1). Among these, c-myc, the cellular homologue to the avian myelocytomatosis virus (MC29) oncogene, has been shown to express high levels of mRNA during early G0/G1 phase after mitogenic stimulation of T lymphocytes by concanavalin A or of fibroblasts by platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) or serum. An attractive model proposed for this regulation is that the c-myc gene is strongly repressed in cells arrested in the G0 phase of the cell cycle by a growth factor-sensitive repressor. We have investigated an alternative model of post-transcriptional regulation. This latter model leads to two testable predictions. First, that c-myc mRNA should be unusually unstable, which we have confirmed. And second, that there would be a high level of constitutive expression, a situation opposite to that implied by the repressor model. Here we report that c-myc gene is indeed transcribed at a high rate in G0-arrested chinese hamster lung fibroblasts, although the level of mature c-myc mRNA is barely detectable. The early and dramatic increase in c-myc mRNA levels when these resting cells are stimulated by growth factors is not accompanied by any appreciable change in the transcription rate of c-myc gene. Taken together these findings support a model of post-transcriptional regulation of c-myc expression at the level of mRNA degradation.
Oncogenic avian retroviruses can be classified into three groups: sarcoma viruses, acute leukaemia viruses and lymphoid leukosis viruses (LLVs). Sarcoma and acute leukaemia viruses transform fibroblasts and/or haematopoietic cells in culture and induce tumours with short latent periods in infected birds. In contrast, LLVs do not transform cells in vitro and require long latent periods before formation of neoplasms in vivo. The most frequent neoplasm induced by LLVs is malignant lymphoma of the bursa of Fabricius, but LLVs also induce other neoplasms, including sarcomas, nephroblastomas and erythroblastosis. The genomes of both sarcoma and acute leukaemai viruses contain specific genes responsible for viral oncogenicity, whereas the genome of LLVs apparently includes only genes required for virus replication. The genetic basis for the low oncogenic potential of LLVs is therefore obscure. The present experiments indicate that LLV-induced tumours contain transforming genes that can be detected by transfection of NH 3T3 mouse cells. These transforming genes are not linked to LLV DNA sequences, suggesting that oncogenesis by LLVs may result from indirect activation of cellular transforming genes.
Multicellular organisms evolved sophisticated defence systems to confer protection against pathogens. An important characteristic of these immune systems is their ability to act both locally at the site of infection and at distal uninfected locations. In insects, such as Drosophila melanogaster, RNA interference (RNAi) mediates antiviral immunity. However, the antiviral RNAi defence in flies seems to be a local, cell-autonomous process, as flies are thought to be unable to generate a systemic RNAi response. Here we show that a recently defined double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) uptake pathway is essential for effective antiviral RNAi immunity in adult flies. Mutant flies defective in this dsRNA uptake pathway were hypersensitive to infection with Drosophila C virus and Sindbis virus. Mortality in dsRNA-uptake-defective flies was accompanied by 100-to 10(5)-fold increases in viral titres and higher levels of viral RNA. Furthermore, inoculating naked dsRNA into flies elicited a sequence-specific antiviral immune response that required an intact dsRNA uptake pathway. These findings suggest that spread of dsRNA to uninfected sites is essential for effective antiviral immunity. Notably, infection with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged Sindbis virus suppressed expression of host-encoded GFP at a distal site. Thus, similar to protein-based immunity in vertebrates, the antiviral RNAi response in flies also relies on the systemic spread of a virus-specific immunity signal.
The transforming protein of Kirsten murine sarcoma virus (Ki-MuSV) is a virally encoded 21-kilodalton protein called p21 kis. The sequences encoding p21 kis were genetically localized to a 1.3-kilobase segment near the 5' end of the viral genome by assaying the capacity of a series of defined deletion mutants of molecularly cloned Ki-MuSV DNA to induce focal transformation of mouse cells. Nucleotide sequencing of a portion of this region has led to the identification of an open reading frame of 567 nucleotides coding for p21 kis protein.
Hepatitis B virus, a major human pathogen with an estimated 300 million carriers worldwide, can lead to cirrhosis and liver cancer in cases of chronic infection. The virus consists of an inner nucleocapsid or core, surrounded by a lipid envelope containing virally encoded surface proteins. The core protein, when expressed in bacteria, assembles into core shell particles, closely resembling the native core of the virus. Here we use electron cryomicroscopy to solve the structure of the core protein to 7.4 A resolution. Images of about 6,400 individual particles from 34 micrographs at different levels of defocus were combined, imposing icosahedral symmetry. The three-dimensional map reveals the complete fold of the polypeptide chain, which is quite unlike previously solved viral capsid proteins and is largely alpha-helical. The dimer clustering of subunits produces spikes on the surface of the shell, which consist of radial bundles of four long alpha-helices. Our model implies that the sequence corresponding to the immunodominant region of the core protein lies at the tip of the spike and also explains other properties of the core protein.
Most of the nuclear genome of warm-blooded vertebrates is a mosaic of very long (much greater than 200 kilobases) DNA segments, the isochores; these isochores are fairly homogeneous in base composition and belong to a small number of major classes distinguished by differences in guanine-cytosine (GC) content. The families of DNA molecules derived from such classes can be separated and used to study the genome distribution of any sequence which can be probed. This approach has revealed (i) that the distribution of genes, integrated viral sequences, and interspersed repeats is highly nonuniform in the genome, and (ii) that the base composition and ratio of CpG to GpC in both coding and noncoding sequences, as well as codon usage, mainly depend on the GC content of the isochores harboring the sequences. The compositional compartmentalization of the genome of warm-blooded vertebrates is discussed with respect to its evolutionary origin, its causes, and its effects on chromosome structure and function.
Natural killer (NK) cells have an important role in the control of viral infections, recognizing virally infected cells through a variety of activating and inhibitory receptors. Epidemiological and functional studies have recently suggested that NK cells can also contribute to the control of HIV-1 infection through recognition of virally infected cells by both activating and inhibitory killer immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs). However, it remains unknown whether NK cells can directly mediate antiviral immune pressure in vivo in humans. Here we describe KIR-associated amino-acid polymorphisms in the HIV-1 sequence of chronically infected individuals, on a population level. We show that these KIR-associated HIV-1 sequence polymorphisms can enhance the binding of inhibitory KIRs to HIV-1-infected CD4(+) T cells, and reduce the antiviral activity of KIR-positive NK cells. These data demonstrate that KIR-positive NK cells can place immunological pressure on HIV-1, and that the virus can evade such NK-cell-mediated immune pressure by selecting for sequence polymorphisms, as was previously described for virus-specific T cells and neutralizing antibodies. NK cells might therefore have a previously underappreciated role in contributing to viral evolution.
The CD4 receptor on human T cells has been shown to play an integral part in the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection process. Recombinant soluble human CD4 (rCD4) was tested for its ability to inhibit SIVagm, an HIV-like virus that naturally infects African green monkeys, in order to define T cell surface receptors critical for SIVagm infection. The rCD4 was found to enhance SIVagm infection of a human T cell line by as much as 18-fold, whereas HIV-1 infection was blocked by rCD4. Induction of syncytium formation and de novo protein synthesis were observed within the first 24 hours after SIVagm infection, whereas this process took 4 to 6 days in the absence of rCD4. This enhancing effect could be inhibited by monoclonal antibodies directed to rCD4. The enhancing effect could be abrogated with antibodies from naturally infected African green monkeys with inhibitory titers of from 1:2,000 to 1:10,000; these antibodies did not neutralize SIVagm infection in the absence of rCD4. Viral enhancement of SIVagm infection by rCD4 may result from the modulation of the viral membrane through gp120-CD4 binding, thus facilitating secondary events involved in viral fusion and penetration.
The coronavirus, mouse hepatitis virus strain A59 (MHV-A59), causes mild encephalitis and chronic demyelination. Immunohistochemical techniques showed that MHV-A59-infected C57BL/6 mice contained dense deposits of viral antigen in the subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra, with fewer signs of infection in other regions of the brain. The animals showed extra- and intracellular vacuolation, neuronal loss, and gliosis in the subthalamic-nigral region. Such localization is unprecedented among known viral encephalitides of humans and other species. This infection by a member of a viral class capable of causing both encephalitis and persistent infection in several species may be related to postencephalitic parkinsonism.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a family of innate immune-recognition receptors that recognize molecular patterns associated with microbial pathogens, and induce antimicrobial immune responses. Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is a molecular pattern associated with viral infection, because it is produced by most viruses at some point during their replication. Here we show that mammalian TLR3 recognizes dsRNA, and that activation of the receptor induces the activation of NF-kappaB and the production of type I interferons (IFNs). TLR3-deficient (TLR3-/-) mice showed reduced responses to polyinosine-polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)), resistance to the lethal effect of poly(I:C) when sensitized with d-galactosamine (d-GalN), and reduced production of inflammatory cytokines. MyD88 is an adaptor protein that is shared by all the known TLRs. When activated by poly(I:C), TLR3 induces cytokine production through a signalling pathway dependent on MyD88. Moreover, poly(I:C) can induce activation of NF-kappaB and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases independently of MyD88, and cause dendritic cells to mature.
Although there has been some success in treating human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients with triple drug therapy (highly active antiretroviral therapy or HAART), the best hope for combating AIDS (the disease caused by HIV) could be a combination of drug therapy and vaccination, according to Shen and Siliciano in their Perspective. A new study in rhesus monkeys treated with a DNA vaccine (Barouch et al.) demonstrates that a powerful vaccine-induced CD8(+) cytolytic T cell response reduces the amount of virus in the blood to very low levels preventing the drastic decrease in CD4(+) T helper cells and subsequent immunodeficiency. As the Perspective authors explain, vaccinating HIV patients that are receiving HAART may enable HIV levels to be permanently brought under control such that the drug treatment can eventually be stopped.
Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) membrane fusion is promoted by the formation of a trimer-of-hairpins structure that brings the amino- and carboxyl-terminal regions of the gp41 envelope glycoprotein ectodomain into close proximity. Peptides derived from the carboxyl-terminal region (called C-peptides) potently inhibit HIV-1 entry by binding to the gp41 amino-terminal region. To test the converse of this inhibitory strategy, we designed a small protein, denoted 5-Helix, that binds the C-peptide region of gp41. The 5-Helix protein displays potent (nanomolar) inhibitory activity against diverse HIV-1 variants and may serve as the basis for a new class of antiviral agents. The inhibitory activity of 5-Helix also suggests a strategy for generating an HIV-1 neutralizing antibody response that targets the carboxyl-terminal region of the gp41 ectodomain.
Binding of virus particles to specific host cell surface receptors is known to be an obligatory step in infection even though the molecular basis for these interactions is not well characterized. The crystal structure of the adenovirus fiber knob domain in complex with domain I of its human cellular receptor, coxsackie and adenovirus receptor (CAR), is presented here. Surface-exposed loops on knob contact one face of CAR, forming a high-affinity complex. Topology mismatches between interacting surfaces create interfacial solvent-filled cavities and channels that may be targets for antiviral drug therapy. The structure identifies key determinants of binding specificity, which may suggest ways to modify the tropism of adenovirus-based gene therapy vectors.
The presurface (preS) proteins of hepatitis B virus are structural components of the viral envelope that may play important roles in virion assembly and infectivity. They are specified by a large open reading frame that includes the coding region for the major surface (S) protein in its 3' half. Translation of the preS proteins initiates upstream from the S region, giving rise to proteins that are composed of the S domain and an additional 163 (preS1) or 55 (preS2) amino acids. Little is known about the biosynthesis and assembly of these proteins. The expression of the S and preS1 proteins was examined by transfecting cultured mammalian cells with viral DNA and injecting synthetic messenger RNA's into Xenopus oocytes. In contrast to the proteins encoded by the S region, the preS1 proteins are not detectably secreted into the culture medium. Furthermore, when the S and preS1 proteins are synthesized together, secretion of the S proteins is specifically and strongly inhibited. The results suggest a unique molecular interaction during secretion of the S and preS proteins that may be important for virus assembly.
Virus-infected cells can be eliminated by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), which recognize virus-derived peptides bound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules on the cell surface. Until now, this notion has relied on overwhelming but indirect evidence, as the existence of naturally processed viral peptides has not been previously reported. Here we show that such peptides can be extracted from virus-infected cells by acid elution. Both the naturally processed H-2-Db-restricted and H-2-Kd-restricted peptides from influenza nucleoprotein are smaller than the corresponding synthetic peptides, which have first been used to determine the respective CTL epitopes. As with minor histocompatibility antigens, occurrence of viral peptides seems to be heavily dependent on MHC class I molecules, because infected H-2d cells do not contain the H-2-Db-restricted peptide, and infected H-2b cells do not contain the H-2-Kd-restricted peptide. Our data provide direct experimental proof for the above notion on MHC-associated viral peptides on virus-infected cells.
Strains of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) display a high degree of biological heterogeneity which may be linked to certain clinical manifestation of AIDS. They vary in their ability to infect different cell types, to replicate rapidly and to high titre in culture, to down-modulate the CD4 receptor, and to cause cytopathic changes in infected cells. Some of these in vitro properties correlate with pathogenicity of the virus in vivo. To map the viral determinants of the cellular host range of HIV-1, recombinant viruses were generated between biologically active molecular clones of HIV-1 isolates showing differences in infection of primary peripheral blood macrophages and established T-cell lines. We report here that a specific region of the envelope gp120 gene representing 159 amino-acid residues of glycoprotein gp120 seems to determine macrophage tropism, whereas an overlapping region representing 321 amino-acid residues determines T cell-line tropism. These studies provide a basis for relating functional domains of the HIV-1 env gene to pathogenic potential.
Among the devastating consequences of AIDS has been its epidemic spread in the developing world. The disease has caused unprecedented suffering, debilitation, loss of life and disruption of family, social and economic stability. Because of the considerable expense and logistical difficulty in providing antiviral drugs to populations infected with the human immunodeficiency virus throughout the world, the biomedical community is looking towards vaccines to help solve this compelling problem.
Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) produced during viral replication is believed to be the critical trigger for activation of antiviral immunity mediated by the RNA helicase enzymes retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5). We showed that influenza A virus infection does not generate dsRNA and that RIG-I is activated by viral genomic single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) bearing 5'-phosphates. This is blocked by the influenza protein nonstructured protein 1 (NS1), which is found in a complex with RIG-I in infected cells. These results identify RIG-I as a ssRNA sensor and potential target of viral immune evasion and suggest that its ability to sense 5'-phosphorylated RNA evolved in the innate immune system as a means of discriminating between self and nonself.
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) causes chickenpox and shingles. Clinical and epidemiological evidence indicates that following an episode of childhood chickenpox (varicella), VZV becomes latent, presumably in dorsal root ganglia, and is reactivated many years later to produce shingles (zoster) in adults. VZV has been demonstrated in ganglia by electron microscopy and by indirect immunofluorescence, and infectious viral particles have been isolated from acutely infected ganglia of patients who died of disseminated VZV infection. However, VZV has not been detected in the ganglia of humans without recent exposure to VZV. Tissue culture explant methods that have been successful in the isolation of herpes simplex virus from ganglia have so far failed in the isolation or reactivation of VZV from trigeminal and other dorsal root ganglia. We describe here the detection of VZV DNA sequences in an acutely infected human sacral ganglion and in normal trigeminal ganglia. These findings support the hypothesis that VZV is latent in normal human ganglia.
Local degradation of extracellular fibronectin, a major extracellular adhesive protein, is believed to play an important part in the migration of cells through the extracellular matrix during tumour invasion, morphogenetic movement and trophoblast implantation. Fibronectin is lost from the cell surface after transformation with Rous sarcoma virus (RSV). By using fluorescent and radiolabelled probes covalently coupled to the surface of substrata, we have recently identified a proteolytic activity that is expressed in RSV-transformed cells and is involved in the local degradation of fibronectin at cell-substratum contact sites. Here, we extend the relevance of these findings and gain some insight into the cellular functions of pp60src, the transforming gene product of RSV. We show that newly expressed viral pp60src is localized at the cytoplasmic surface of the cell membrane, corresponding to the cell contact sites where degradation of extracellular fibronectin occurs.
The entire Epstein-Barr virus genome is integrated into Burkitt tumor cell DNA at the terminal direct repeat sequence of the virus. There is no homology between the GC-rich (G, guanine; C, cytosine) terminal repeat and the AT-rich (A, adenine; T, thymine) cell sequences with which it has recombined. More than 15 kilobases of cell DNA have been deleted and 236 base pairs are duplicated at one virus-cell junction site.
The vagus nerve exerts a profound influence on the heart, regulating the heart rate and rhythm. An extensive vagal innervation of the cardiac ventricles and the central origin and extent of this innervation was demonstrated by transynaptic transport of pseudorabies virus with a virulent and two attenuated pseudorabies viral strains. The neurons that innervate the ventricles are numerous, and their distribution within the nucleus ambiguus and dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus is similar to that of neurons innervating other cardiac targets, such as the sino-atrial node. These data provide a neuroanatomical correlate to the physiological influence of the vagus nerve on ventricular function.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infections are characterized by early peaks of viraemia that decline as strong cellular immune responses develop. Although it has been shown that virus-specific CD8-positive cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) exert selective pressure during HIV and SIV infection, the data have been controversial. Here we show that Tat-specific CD8-positive T-lymphocyte responses select for new viral escape variants during the acute phase of infection. We sequenced the entire virus immediately after the acute phase, and found that amino-acid replacements accumulated primarily in Tat CTL epitopes. This implies that Tat-specific CTLs may be significantly involved in controlling wild-type virus replication, and suggests that responses against viral proteins that are expressed early during the viral life cycle might be attractive targets for HIV vaccine development.
The genome of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is known to contain eight open reading frames (ORFs) on the minus strand of the double-stranded DNA replicative intermediate. Data presented here indicate that the DNA plus strand of HIV contains a previously unidentified ORF in a region complementary to the envelope gene sequence. This ORF could encode a protein of approximately 190 amino acid residues with a relative molecular mass of 20 kilodaltons if translation began from the first initiation codon. The predicted protein is highly hydrophobic and thus could be membrane associated. It is possible, therefore, that the HIV genome encodes a protein on antisense messenger RNA.
It has been suggested that the middle repetitive class of sequences that make up a large proportion of the eukaryotic genome have been amplified and dispersed by DNA transposition. Transposition is a phenomenon first postulated by Barbara McClintock on the basis of her genetic analysis of mutants in Zea mays. Since then, DNA transposition has been studied genetically in various plant systems and is well documented on the molecular level in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. This has included the isolation of DNA inserts at various loci in several plants; however, the prevalence of transposition in plants is not established. We report here DNA nucleotide sequence data which show that some members of the Cin1 middle repetitive family of maize have features characteristic of known transposable elements. One cloned Cin1 repeat has a 6-base pair (bp) perfect inverted repeat sequence at its ends. The terminal five base pairs (5' TGTTG . . . CAACA 3') are identical to the termini of Drosophila copia transposable elements. Two other Cin1 alleles are flanked by 5-bp direct repeats. A comparison is made with the long terminal repeat (LTR) of the copia-Ty1-retrovirus families of moveable genetic elements.
Retroviruses are the only group of viruses known to have left a fossil record, in the form of endogenous proviruses, and approximately 8% of the human genome is made up of these elements. Although many other viruses, including non-retroviral RNA viruses, are known to generate DNA forms of their own genomes during replication, none has been found as DNA in the germline of animals. Bornaviruses, a genus of non-segmented, negative-sense RNA virus, are unique among RNA viruses in that they establish persistent infection in the cell nucleus. Here we show that elements homologous to the nucleoprotein (N) gene of bornavirus exist in the genomes of several mammalian species, including humans, non-human primates, rodents and elephants. These sequences have been designated endogenous Borna-like N (EBLN) elements. Some of the primate EBLNs contain an intact open reading frame (ORF) and are expressed as mRNA. Phylogenetic analyses showed that EBLNs seem to have been generated by different insertional events in each specific animal family. Furthermore, the EBLN of a ground squirrel was formed by a recent integration event, whereas those in primates must have been formed more than 40 million years ago. We also show that the N mRNA of a current mammalian bornavirus, Borna disease virus (BDV), can form EBLN-like elements in the genomes of persistently infected cultured cells. Our results provide the first evidence for endogenization of non-retroviral virus-derived elements in mammalian genomes and give novel insights not only into generation of endogenous elements, but also into a role of bornavirus as a source of genetic novelty in its host.
Sendai virus-infected mouse cells can be lysed by mouse cytolytic thymus-dependent lymphocytes (CTL) directed specifically against the infected cells. The CTL is known to recognise the H-2 antigens on the target cells together with structure(s) including at least the two viral surface glycoproteins also found on purified virus. We report here that anti-Sendai CTL can be stimulated in vitro by detergent-solubilised viral haemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN), either as the isolated protein or coupled to agarose beads. We further show stimulation by the hydrophilic portion of a protein removed from the virus by the protease subtilisin BPN', and we demonstrate that cyanogen bromide- (CNBr-) cleaved viral peptides also produce such stimulation.
When simian virus 40 (SV40) infects host cells, the viral genes are expressed in two phases. Early in infection, the virus genome is transcribed and translated to yield two related proteins, 'large T' and 'small t' antigens. Later the rate of synthesis of the early messenger RNA falls and the viral genes coding for the coat proteins are transcribed and translated. Early gene transcription is inhibited only when an active large T antigen is present in the cell (for review see ref. 1). These and other observations have led to the hypothesis that T antigen acts as a negative feedback repressor of its own RNA transcript. The properties of SV40 tsA mutants, which produce temperature-sensitive T antigen, provide evidence for another role of T antigen--in the initiation of viral DNA replication. Mutations around the origin of DNA replication in SV40 lead to a cis-acting defect in DNA replication. These mutations fall outside the region of the A gene which codes for T antigen but within the region known to bind T antigen and the closely related and more easily prepared D2T protein which is synthesized by an adeno-SV40 hybrid virus Ad2D2 and seems to differ from SV40 T antigen only in its amino-terminal segment. Revertants of origin-defective mutants have been isolated with second site mutations within the DNA A gene coding sequence. These data support the view that T antigen modulates transcription and replication of SV40 DNA by binding to one or more sites in and around the viral origin of replication. We present here evidence to show that mutants of SV40 carrying constructed mutations in the regulatory region show reduced binding of D2T protein in vitro. This is the first demonstration in a eukaryote that a mutation in a regulatory DNA sequence alters the binding of a controlling protein in vitro.
Rat virus selectively destroys the external germinal layer of the cerebellar cortex when inoculated intracerebrally into newborn cats. The lesions are marked by numerous intranuclear inclusion bodies and a rise of virus titers. These effects suggest that the spontaneous ataxia of cats which is accompanied by cerebellar hypoplasia, may be of viral origin.
The specific binding of iodine-125-labeled antibody to viral antigens can be used to detect newly synthesized viral antigens and determine the time of appearance of these antigens on the surface of infected cells. Incubation of infected cells with unlabeled antibody to viral antigens specifically blocks the attachment of labeled antibody, and by this inhibition technique the titer of unlabeled antibody to viral antigens can be calculated. The attachment of the labeled antibody to virus-infected cells offers an objective and sensitive method of detecting viral antigens and measuring antibody to virus.
Containment of highly lethal Ebola virus outbreaks poses a serious public health challenge. Although an experimental vaccine has successfully protected non-human primates against disease, more than six months was required to complete the immunizations, making it impractical to limit an acute epidemic. Here, we report the development of accelerated vaccination against Ebola virus in non-human primates. The antibody response to immunization with an adenoviral (ADV) vector encoding the Ebola glycoprotein (GP) was induced more rapidly than with DNA priming and ADV boosting, but it was of lower magnitude. To determine whether this earlier immune response could nonetheless protect against disease, cynomolgus macaques were challenged with Ebola virus after vaccination with ADV-GP and nucleoprotein (NP) vectors. Protection was highly effective and correlated with the generation of Ebola-specific CD8(+) T-cell and antibody responses. Even when animals were immunized once with ADV-GP/NP and challenged 28 days later, they remained resistant to challenge with either low or high doses of virus. This accelerated vaccine provides an intervention that may help to limit the epidemic spread of Ebola, and is applicable to other viruses.
Infection by influenza virus results in the stimulation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes specific for killing virally infected cells. Specificity is provided by clonally distributed, hypervariable T-cell receptors on cytotoxic T lymphocytes which react with peptide fragments that are derived from viral proteins expressed in the cytoplasm and 'presented' on the surface of infected cells, bound to class I histocompatibility glycoproteins. Here we describe the structure of the complex between the human class I histocompatibility glycoprotein HLA-Aw68 and the influenza virus nucleoprotein peptide Np 91-99 as determined by X-ray cryocrystallography. Residues at both ends of the peptide are substantially buried in the peptide binding-site, whereas those in the middle of the peptide, P4 to P8, are predominantly exposed and could be recognized directly by T-cell receptors. The extended conformation of the bound viral peptide is remarkably similar to that of a collection of endogenous peptides with a different sequence motif bound to another human allele, HLA-B27. The structure defines in atomic detail the antigenic surface constructed of major histocompatibility complex and viral peptide atoms that is recognized by T-cell receptors.
Retroviral proviruses and the transposable elements of eukaryotic genomes are structurally similar. The biological significance of eukaryotic transposable elements has not been examined extensively but it is known that, like prokaryotic transposons, these elements can induce mutations in adjacent genes and cause their transposition. It is of interest to determine whether retroviral proviruses have the same mutagenic and gene transposing ability as transposable elements, particularly because the retrovirus genome is assumed to have originated from transposable elements of lower eukaryotes. The transfer of DNA sequences into animal zygotes or embryos by microinjection is a promising experimental approach for eluxidating their functions: when foreign DNAs were introduced into a mouse germ line, mutations were induced and at least in some mice, the mutation was caused by the insertion of a retroviral sequence. We have introduced Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) DNA into a germ line of Drosophila melanogaster, and describe here the resultant genetic effects.
RNA interference (RNAi) is a universal and evolutionarily conserved phenomenon of post-transcriptional gene silencing by means of sequence-specific mRNA degradation, triggered by small double-stranded RNAs. Because this mechanism can be efficiently induced in vivo by expressing target-complementary short hairpin RNA (shRNA) from non-viral and viral vectors, RNAi is attractive for functional genomics and human therapeutics. Here we systematically investigate the long-term effects of sustained high-level shRNA expression in livers of adult mice. Robust shRNA expression in all the hepatocytes after intravenous infusion was achieved with an optimized shRNA delivery vector based on duplex-DNA-containing adeno-associated virus type 8 (AAV8). An evaluation of 49 distinct AAV/shRNA vectors, unique in length and sequence and directed against six targets, showed that 36 resulted in dose-dependent liver injury, with 23 ultimately causing death. Morbidity was associated with the downregulation of liver-derived microRNAs (miRNAs), indicating possible competition of the latter with shRNAs for limiting cellular factors required for the processing of various small RNAs. In vitro and in vivo shRNA transfection studies implied that one such factor, shared by the shRNA/miRNA pathways and readily saturated, is the nuclear karyopherin exportin-5. Our findings have fundamental consequences for future RNAi-based strategies in animals and humans, because controlling intracellular shRNA expression levels will be imperative. However, the risk of oversaturating endogenous small RNA pathways can be minimized by optimizing shRNA dose and sequence, as exemplified here by our report of persistent and therapeutic RNAi against human hepatitis B virus in vivo.
The development of DNA-mediated gene transfer techniques has made it possible to identify transforming genes present in certain human tumour cells. Such genes have been shown to induce morphological transformation when used to transfect suitable assay cells. Recently a transforming gene has been isolated by molecular cloning techniques from the T24 (ref. 11) and EJ (ref. 12) human bladder carcinoma cell lines. This bladder carcinoma oncogene has been shown to be of human origin, less than six kilobase pairs (kbp) in size, and closely related to the onc genes (v-bas and v-ras) of BALB and Harvey murine sarcoma viruses. These transforming retroviruses arose in nature by transduction of cellular genes from mouse and rat cells, respectively. To understand better the relationship of the T24 oncogene with other human cellular genes, we have determined the chromosomal location of its normal allele within the human genome. We show here that it is carried on chromosome 11 in normal cells.
At least five arenaviruses cause viral haemorrhagic fevers in humans. Lassa virus, an Old World arenavirus, uses the cellular receptor alpha-dystroglycan to infect cells. Machupo, Guanarito, Junin and Sabia viruses are New World haemorrhagic fever viruses that do not use alpha-dystroglycan. Here we show a specific, high-affinity association between transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) and the entry glycoprotein (GP) of Machupo virus. Expression of human TfR1, but not human transferrin receptor 2, in hamster cell lines markedly enhanced the infection of viruses pseudotyped with the GP of Machupo, Guanarito and Junin viruses, but not with those of Lassa or lymphocytic choriomeningitis viruses. An anti-TfR1 antibody efficiently inhibited the replication of Machupo, Guanarito, Junin and Sabia viruses, but not that of Lassa virus. Iron depletion of culture medium enhanced, and iron supplementation decreased, the efficiency of infection by Junin and Machupo but not Lassa pseudoviruses. These data indicate that TfR1 is a cellular receptor for New World haemorrhagic fever arenaviruses.
In mammalian cells, a conserved multiprotein complex of Mre11, Rad50 and NBS1 (also known as nibrin and p95) is important for double-strand break repair, meiotic recombination and telomere maintenance. This complex forms nuclear foci and may be a sensor of double-strand breaks. In the absence of the early region E4, the double-stranded DNA genome of adenovirus is joined into concatemers too large to be packaged. We have investigated the cellular proteins involved in this concatemer formation and how they are inactivated by E4 products during a wild-type infection. Here we show that concatemerization requires functional Mre11 and NBS1, and that these proteins are found at foci adjacent to viral replication centres. Infection with wild-type virus results in both reorganization and degradation of members of the Mre11-Rad50-NBS1 complex. These activities are mediated by three viral oncoproteins that prevent concatemerization. This targeting of cellular proteins involved in genomic stability suggests a mechanism for 'hit-and-run' transformation observed for these viral oncoproteins.
Hybridization studies with viral oncogene probes indicate that c-myc, the cellular gene homologous to the transforming gene of avian myelocytomatosis virus, resides on mouse chromosome 15 and in many plasmacytomas is translocated to the antibody heavy chain gene locus on chromosome 12. The transcriptional orientation of the translocated c-myc sequence is opposite the orientation of the adjacent C alpha gene that codes for the heavy chain of immunoglobulin A. The translocated c-myc sequence is not the same oncogene detected in urine plasmacytomas by the NIH-3T3 cell transformation assay.
The RIG-like helicase (RLH) family of intracellular receptors detect viral nucleic acid and signal through the mitochondrial antiviral signalling adaptor MAVS (also known as Cardif, VISA and IPS-1) during a viral infection. MAVS activation leads to the rapid production of antiviral cytokines, including type 1 interferons. Although MAVS is vital to antiviral immunity, its regulation from within the mitochondria remains unknown. Here we describe human NLRX1, a highly conserved nucleotide-binding domain (NBD)- and leucine-rich-repeat (LRR)-containing family member (known as NLR) that localizes to the mitochondrial outer membrane and interacts with MAVS. Expression of NLRX1 results in the potent inhibition of RLH- and MAVS-mediated interferon-beta promoter activity and in the disruption of virus-induced RLH-MAVS interactions. Depletion of NLRX1 with small interference RNA promotes virus-induced type I interferon production and decreases viral replication. This work identifies NLRX1 as a check against mitochondrial antiviral responses and represents an intersection of three ancient cellular processes: NLR signalling, intracellular virus detection and the use of mitochondria as a platform for anti-pathogen signalling. This represents a conceptual advance, in that NLRX1 is a modulator of pathogen-associated molecular pattern receptors rather than a receptor, and identifies a key therapeutic target for enhancing antiviral responses.
Regulation of transcription in eukaryotes is mediated by the specific interaction between cellular factors and promoter sequences. Cis-acting DNA sequences, frequently located upstream of the TATA box, have been implicated in modulating the expression of many genes. We are interested in the transcriptional regulation of proto-oncogenes because they may have a pivotal function in cell growth and differentiation. Expression of the proto-oncogene c-fos is induced in response to a variety of growth factors and differentiation-specific agents. The viral cognate of the c-fos gene is the resident transforming gene of FBJ-murine osteosarcoma virus which causes bone tumours in vivo and cellular transformation in vitro. We report here that transcription of the human c-fos gene is modulated by negatively and positively acting cellular factors.
A study was conducted of the genetic relation between human T-cell lymphotropic retroviruses and visna virus. The human T-cell lymphotropic viruses include those associated with T-cell malignancies (HTLV-I and HTLV-II) as well as the etiologic agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (HTLV-III). Visna virus, a slowly replicating and pathogenic but nononcogenic retrovirus of sheep, is a member of the subfamily Lentivirinae. Results obtained by molecular hybridization and heteroduplex analysis indicated that a greater extent of nucleotide sequence homology exists between HTLV-III and visna virus than between HTLV-III and any of the other viruses. The homology observed under conditions of low stringency spanned the entire genome, but was strongest in the gag/pol region. The morphogenesis and fine structure of HTLV-III and visna virus also demonstrated striking similarities. The data provide strong evidence for a close taxonomic and thus evolutionary relation between HTLV-III and the Lentivirinae subfamily.
Homologous and isologous transfers of Rous sarcoma cells in turkeys indicate that growth of the implanted cells contributes little, if at all, to the formation of these neoplasms. Infection of normal host cells by virus appears to be, at least in this species, the major factor in the induction and progressive growth of Rous sarcomas.
Immune evasion by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is unexplained but may involve the mutation of viral antigens. When cytotoxic T lymphocytes engaged CD4-positive cells that were acutely infected with HIV bearing natural variant epitopes in reverse transcriptase, substantial inhibition of specific antiviral lysis was observed. Mutant viruses capable of these transactive effects could facilitate the persistence of a broad range of HIV variants in the face of an active and specific immune response.
Replication of DNA occurs at discrete sites in eukaryotic cell nuclei, where replication proteins are clustered into large complexes, or 'replicases'. Similarly, viral DNA replication is a highly structured process, notably in herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1; reviewed in ref. 4) in which large globular 'replication compartments' containing the viral replication machinery exist. Replicating cellular DNA redistributes to these compartments upon HSV-1 infection. We have now used antibodies raised against several cellular proteins to detect changes in their subnuclear localization on HSV-1 infection. We found that various proteins involved in cellular DNA replication move to sites of viral DNA synthesis, whereas a selection of non-replication proteins do not. The retinoblastoma protein and p53 (the products of two putative anti-oncogenes) relocate to the same sites as known DNA replication proteins, suggesting that they may be associated with DNA replication complexes in normal, uninfected cells.
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) genome encodes the regulatory protein Rev, of relative molecular mass 13,000, which is synthesized from fully processed viral transcripts before synthesis of HIV-1 structural proteins. Rev has been postulated to exert control within the nucleus at the level of messenger RNA processing. The availability of Rev in the nucleus serves to increase the proportion of unspliced and singly spliced mRNA species relative to fully spliced mRNA molecules, resulting in an increased synthesis of viral structural proteins. A highly conserved cis-acting sequence termed the Rev-responsive element (RRE) has been identified in the envelope gene (env) of the viral transcript that seems to control mRNA processing in a Rev-dependent manner. Genetic studies have identified rev gene mutants with dominant phenotypes, supporting the hypothesis that Rev interacts directly with the RRE. Here we demonstrate that Rev protein, purified from Escherichia coli, binds in a sequence-specific manner to the RRE element in vitro.
Supernatants from cultures of normal feline lymphocytes stimulated with Staphylococcus enterotoxin A showed antiviral activity, characterized as a gamma-like interferon. With the addition of inactivated feline leukemia virus, markedly less interferon was produced. The reduction in interferon production was not attributable to lowered lymphocyte viability or reduced mitogenic properties of Staphylococcus enterotoxin A and appears to be a direct retroviral effect. This finding may reflect clinically relevant events that may contribute to the development of the feline or human states of acquired immunodeficiency.
A tritium-labeled probe that detects measles virus nucleotide sequences was hybridized in situ to cells infected with measles virus and to sections of brain tissue from patients with subacute sclerosing panencephalitis and from patients with multiple sclerosis. The measles virus genome was detected in many cells in subacute sclerosing panencephalitis where this virus would have been missed by methods such as immunofluorescence. Measles virus sequences were also found in two foci in one of four cases of multiple sclerosis. This refined method of hybridization in situ, which can be useful in the search for covert virus infections of man, provides evidence that viruses may be involved in multiple sclerosis.
The family of tyrosine-specific protein kinases includes proteins encoded by retroviral oncogenes as well as receptors for insulin and several growth factors. Antibodies to pp60src, the protein encoded by the src oncogene of Rous sarcoma virus (RSV), can specifically immunoprecipitate affinity-labeled insulin receptors from cultured human lymphocytes (IM-9 cells). This precipitation is specifically inhibited by the src gene product purified from RSV-transformed rat cells. These observations provide evidence that there is structural homology between the insulin receptors and pp60src.
The 9,213-nucleotide structure of the AIDS/lymphadenopathy virus has been determined from molecular clones representing the integrated provirus and viral RNA. The sequence reveals that the virus is highly polymorphic and lacks significant nucleotide homology with type C retroviruses characterized previously. Together with an analysis of the two major viral subgenomic RNAs, these studies establish the coding frames for the gag, pol and env genes and predict the expression of a novel gene at the 3' end of the genome unrelated to the X genes of HTLV-1 and -II.
Wild-type reverse transcriptase has evolved for the survival of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) by natural selection. In contrast, therapy relying on inhibitors of reverse transcriptase by nucleosides like zidovudine (AZT) or dideoxyinosine (ddI), and by non-nucleosides like pyridinones or nevirapine, may exert different selection pressures on this enzyme. Therefore the acquisition of resistance to reverse transcriptase inhibitors by selection of mutations in the pol gene may require compromises in enzyme function that affect viral replication. As single mutations are unlikely to confer broad resistance when combinations of reverse transcriptase inhibitors are used, multiple mutations may occur that result in further compromises. Certain drug combinations may prevent the co-existence of adequate reverse transcription function and multi-drug resistance (MDR). Unlike bacterial or eukaryotic drug resistance, retroviral drug resistance is conferred only by mutations in its own genome and is limited by genome size. Combining drugs directed against the same essential viral protein may thus prevent HIV-1 MDR, whereas the conventional approach of targeting different HIV-1 proteins for combination therapy may not, because genomes with resistance mutations in different HIV-1 genes might recombine to develop MDR. Here we show that several mutations in the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase gene that confer resistance to inhibitors of this enzyme can attenuate viral replication. We tested whether combinations of mutations giving rise to single-agent resistance might further compromise or even abolish viral replication, and if multidrug-resistant viruses could be constructed. Certain combinations of mutations conferring resistance to AZT, ddI and pyridinone are incompatible with viral replication. These results indicate that evolutionary limitations exist to restrict development of MDR. Furthermore, a therapeutic strategy exploiting these limitations by using selected multidrug regimens directed against the same target may prevent development of MDR. This approach, which we call convergent combination therapy, eliminated HIV-1 replication and virus breakthrough in vitro, and may be applicable to other viral targets. Moreover, elimination of reverse transcription by convergent combination therapy may also limit MDR.
Each of six mammalian C-type viruses-including two feline leukemia viruses, three murine leukemia viruses, and the human "candidate" virus RD-114-can be distinguished from each other by hybridizing DNA synthesized by viral reverse transcriptase with viral RNA. Characterization of the DNA . RNA hybrids by hydroxylapatite chromatography revealed nucleotide sequence diversity among the viruses, detectable both by the amount of cross-hybridization and by the decreased thermal stability of heterologous hybrids.
Trisodium phosphonoformate selectively inhibits cell-free DNA polymerase activity induced by herpesvirus. The new inhibitor has an antiviral effect on herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, pseudorables virus, and infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus in cell culture. It has a good therapeutic activity against cutaneous herpes simplex virus infection in guinea pigs.
In mice the cytotoxic T-cell response to several types of virus is influenced by genes within the major histocompatibility complex; in particular, genetic control is exercised at the effector cell level through a requirement that virus-specific cytotoxic T cells recognise viral antigens in association with H-2K and H=2D region gene products on the surface of infected cells. In man the restriction which the analogous HLA-A, -B and -C-region gene products might place on virus-specific T-cell function is still in dispute. The earliest and most controversial evidence concerns the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a B lymphotropic agent which causes infectious mononucleosis (IM) and which induces an unusually vigorous T-cell response; cytotoxic T cells from IM patients' blood were shown to be EBV-specific yet, in contrast to mouse systems, apparently free of any obvious HLA restriction. Since then T-cell recognition of EBV-infected B cells has assumed particular significance as a model system for the study of cytotoxic T-cell function in man. This report describes the results of a new approach clearly indicating that HLA-A and -B region products do indeed have a role in this system.
This report describes serologic evidence for a virus similar to that known as simian T-lymphotropic virus type III of African Green monkeys (STLV-IIIAGM) infecting apparently healthy people in Senegal, West Africa, and the isolation of virus from these individuals. Serum samples from selected healthy West African people showed unusual serologic profiles when tested with antigens of HTLV-III/LAV, the etiologic agent of AIDS, and of STLV-IIIAGM. The samples reacted strongly with all of the major viral antigens of STLV-IIIAGM but showed variable or no reactivity with the major viral antigens of HTLV-III/LAV by radioimmunoprecipitation and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. A new human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV-IV) isolated from these people was grown in vitro and shown to have retroviral type particles, growth characteristics, and major viral proteins similar to those of the STLV-III and HTLV-III/LAV group of retroviruses. The gp120/160, gp32, p64, p55, p53, p24, and p15 proteins precipitated were the same size as and reactive with STLV-IIIAGM proteins. The serologic data suggest that this virus shares more common epitopes with STLV-IIIAGM than with the prototype HTLV-III/LAV that infects people in the United States and Europe. Further study of this virus and of the origin of the HTLV-III/LAV group of viruses may expand our understanding of the human AIDS virus.
The human B-lymphotropic virus (HBLV) has a double-stranded DNA genome of greater than 110 kilobase pairs, which is consistent with its morphological classification as a herpesvirus. A 9000-base pair cloned probe of HBLV detected specific sequences in DNA and RNA of infected cells but did not hybridize to the genomic DNA of other human herpesviruses including the Epstein-Barr virus, human cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex type I, and varicella-zoster virus. Conversely, while probes obtained from each of the known human herpesvirus readily detected the homologous viral DNA, they did not hybridize to genomic HBLV DNA. This evidence, in addition to serological and morphological distinctions and the biological effects of this virus demonstrate that HBLV is a novel human herpesvirus.
Human T-cell leukemia-lymphoma virus (HTLV) is a human C-type retrovirus that can transform T lymphocytes in vitro and is associated with certain T-cell neoplasms. Recent data suggest that, in the United States, patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), homosexual men with lymphadenopathy, and hemophiliacs have had significant exposure rates to HTLV, whereas matched and unmatched control American subjects have rarely been exposed to this agent. In the present experiments, T cells specifically reactive against HTLV were propagated from a patient whose HTLV-bearing lymphoma was in remission. The T cells were cloned in the presence of the virus and an HTLV-specific cytotoxic T-cell clone was isolated. This clone was infected and transformed by the virus, with one copy of an HTLV-I provirus being integrated into the genome. This T-cell clone did not exhibit the normal dependence on T-cell growth factor (interleukin-2) and proliferated spontaneously in vitro. Exposure of the clone to HTLV-bearing, autologous tumor cells specifically inhibited its proliferation and resulted in its death. These results may have implications for HTLV-associated inhibition of T-cell responses.
Rearrangement in the c-myb locus of each of four independently derived BALB/c plasmacytoid lymphosarcoma (ABPL's) is due to the insertion of a defective Moloney murine leukemia virus (M-MuLV) into a 1.5-kilobase-pair stretch of cellular DNA at the 5' end of the v-myb-related sequences. This retroviral insertion is associated with abnormal transcription of myb sequences and probably represents a step in the neoplastic transformation of ABPL cells.
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is an infectious disease characterized by severe impairment of the patient's cell-mediated immune system. Several lines of evidence have indicated that the aetiological agent of AIDS is a group of T-lymphotropic retroviruses, variously known as lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV), human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III) and AIDS-associated retrovirus (ARV). Serological surveys have indicated that as many as one million people in the United States may have been infected by LAV/HTLV-III, and the spread of AIDS has become a global concern. The need for a better understanding of the viral immunology and for a vaccine against AIDS is self-evident. To this end, we have constructed recombinant vaccinia viruses containing the envelope (env) gene of LAV, and demonstrate here that cells infected with these viruses express immunoreactive proteins similar to those present on LAV virions. Experimental animals infected with these recombinant viruses elicited antibodies that specifically recognized LAV envelope proteins.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) recognize foreign antigens, including viral proteins, in association with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. Brefeldin A, a specific inhibitor of exocytosis, completely and reversibly inhibited the presentation of viral proteins, but not exogenous peptides, to MHC class I-restricted CTLs directed against influenza virus antigens. The effect of brefeldin A on antigen presentation correlated with its inhibition of intracellular transport of newly synthesized class I molecules. Brefeldin A is thus a specific inhibitor of antigen processing for class I-restricted T cell recognition. Its effect on antigen presentation supports the idea that exogenous peptide antigens associate with cell surface class I molecules, whereas protein antigens processed via the cytosolic route associate with nascent class I molecules before they leave the trans-Golgi complex.
Cells lytically infected with simian virus 40 contain viral DNA in the form of very small chromlosomnes (minichromosomes) segmented into 100-A lengths, each segment containing about 200 base pairs of DNA. This form resembles that of eukaryotic chromnosom1es anid is consistent with the model of chromatin structure proposed recently.
Complementary DNA clones encoding mouse cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor (CSIF; interleukin-10), which inhibits cytokine synthesis by TH1 helper T cells, were isolated and expressed. The predicted protein sequence shows extensive homology with an uncharacterized open reading frame, BCRFI, in the Epstein-Barr virus genome, suggesting the possibility that this herpes virus exploits the biological activity of a captured cytokine gene to enhance its survival in the host.
Eukaryotic transposons such as the Ty element of yeast or the copia-like sequences of Drosophila show structural and functional similarities to both prokaryotic transposons and retroviral proviruses, but the prokaryotic transposons and retroviral proviruses use markedly different expression strategies which yield products having entirely different functions. To determine the phylogenetic relationship between eukaryotic transposons, prokaryotic transposons and retroviruses, we have sought to identify and characterize the proteins encoded by the yeast Ty element and to describe the strategies used to express these proteins. We show here that the yeast transposon produces a fusion protein by a specific frameshifting event that fuses two out-of-phase open reading frames (ORFs). The process is remarkably similar to that used by retroviruses such as Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) to produce Pr180gag-pol.
West Nile virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus closely related to the human epidemic-causing dengue, yellow fever and Japanese encephalitis viruses. In establishing infection these icosahedral viruses undergo endosomal membrane fusion catalysed by envelope glycoprotein rearrangement of the putative receptor-binding domain III (DIII) and exposure of the hydrophobic fusion loop. Humoral immunity has an essential protective function early in the course of West Nile virus infection. Here, we investigate the mechanism of neutralization by the E16 monoclonal antibody that specifically binds DIII. Structurally, the E16 antibody Fab fragment engages 16 residues positioned on four loops of DIII, a consensus neutralizing epitope sequence conserved in West Nile virus and distinct in other flaviviruses. The E16 epitope protrudes from the surface of mature virions in three distinct environments, and docking studies predict Fab binding will leave five-fold clustered epitopes exposed. We also show that E16 inhibits infection primarily at a step after viral attachment, potentially by blocking envelope glycoprotein conformational changes. Collectively, our results suggest that a vaccine strategy targeting the dominant DIII epitope may elicit safe and effective immune responses against flaviviral diseases.
All immune systems must distinguish self from non-self to repel invaders without inducing autoimmunity. Clustered, regularly interspaced, short palindromic repeat (CRISPR) loci protect bacteria and archaea from invasion by phage and plasmid DNA through a genetic interference pathway. CRISPR loci are present in approximately 40% and approximately 90% of sequenced bacterial and archaeal genomes, respectively, and evolve rapidly, acquiring new spacer sequences to adapt to highly dynamic viral populations. Immunity requires a sequence match between the invasive DNA and the spacers that lie between CRISPR repeats. Each cluster is genetically linked to a subset of the cas (CRISPR-associated) genes that collectively encode >40 families of proteins involved in adaptation and interference. CRISPR loci encode small CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) that contain a full spacer flanked by partial repeat sequences. CrRNA spacers are thought to identify targets by direct Watson-Crick pairing with invasive 'protospacer' DNA, but how they avoid targeting the spacer DNA within the encoding CRISPR locus itself is unknown. Here we have defined the mechanism of CRISPR self/non-self discrimination. In Staphylococcus epidermidis, target/crRNA mismatches at specific positions outside of the spacer sequence license foreign DNA for interference, whereas extended pairing between crRNA and CRISPR DNA repeats prevents autoimmunity. Hence, this CRISPR system uses the base-pairing potential of crRNAs not only to specify a target, but also to spare the bacterial chromosome from interference. Differential complementarity outside of the spacer sequence is a built-in feature of all CRISPR systems, indicating that this mechanism is a broadly applicable solution to the self/non-self dilemma that confronts all immune pathways.
The study of recombination in prokaryotes has been facilitated by the availability of recombinational mutants and simple genetic elements such as phages and plasmids. These small but defined molecules of DNA have been especially useful for electron microscopic analysis of structural detail of molecules undergoing recombination both in vivo and in vitro. A limitation in the structural analysis of plasmid recombination is the absolute number of recombining molecules which can be identified and analysed amidst a background of nonrecombining molecules. This limitation would be of even greater consequence in studies of genetic recombination in animal cells. We therefore chose virus-infected animal cells as a model system for the study of the molecular mechanism of genetic recombination in higher organisms. HeLa cells infected with adenovirus serotype 2 (Ad-2) offer several advantages for studying recombination: (1) the virus contains a small and well characterized genome of about 35 kilobases; (2) a large amount of Ad-2 DNA is accumulated during lytic infection and host DNA synthesis is suppressed; (3) Ad-2 recombines at a very high frequency; and (4) similar to phages, animal viruses and Ad-2 in particular are believed to use many of the host cell's enzymes in necessary metabolic processes, presumably including recombination. In this study we used electron microscopic techniques to visualize the structures of in vivo Ad-2 DNA recombination intermediates. Molecules were observed with structures at putative cross-over points which were consistent with the molecular mechanism of recombination proposed by Holliday. In addition, we observed Ad-2 DNA molecules engaged in recombination which were simultaneously serving as templates for replication and/or transcription. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first visualization of in vivo recombination intermediates of discrete DNA molecules isolated from eukaryotic cells.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes kill virally infected cells when they detect antigenic fragments presented by class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens (HLA in humans). The crystal structures of HLA-A2 and HLA-Aw68 reveal that peptide-antigen forms an integral part of the HLA structure, being retained in a prominent groove even after purification and crystallization. Here we report that the heavy chain and beta 2-microglobulin of HLA-A2, after separation and fractionation in denaturants, reassemble efficiently under renaturing conditions only in the presence of MHC-restricted peptides. A complex of heavy chain, beta 2-microglobulin, and viral peptide in the ratio 1:1:1 is formed in up to 46% yield. Reconstitution is not stimulated by either of two peptides not restricted to HLA-A2. The reconstituted complex of HLA-A2 and the influenza virus (B/Lee/40) nucleoprotein peptide, Np (85-94), crystallizes under conditions previously used to crystallize HLA-A2. Peptide-linked folding and assembly suggests mechanisms for the unusual capacity of HLA to bind many peptides of diverse sequence.
The human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) envelope glycoproteins interact with receptors on the target cell and mediate virus entry by fusing the viral and cell membranes. The structure of the envelope glycoproteins has evolved to fulfill these functions while evading the neutralizing antibody response. An understanding of the viral strategies for immune evasion should guide attempts to improve the immunogenicity of the HIV-1 envelope glycoproteins and, ultimately, aid in HIV-1 vaccine development.
Burkitt's-type lymphomas-leukaemias (BL) are monoclonal proliferations of malignant B lymphocytes. Irrespective of whether they carry the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome, these tumour cells have been shown consistently to have one of the specific reciprocal chromosome translocations, t(8; 14), t(2; 8) or t(8; 22), involving the long arm of chromosome 8 (on 8q24) and chromosome 14, 2 or 22 (on 14q32, 2p12 and 22q11, respectively). The latter chromosomes have been shown recently to carry genes for immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chains, and kappa and lambda light chains, respectively. Furthermore, the localization of kappa light chains within 2pcen-2p13 encompasses the breakpoint observed in Burkitt's translocation (2p12). It was therefore considered of interest to determine whether the expression of immunoglobulin chains in BL cells is related to the type of chromosomal anomalies observed. We report here that there is a direct relationship between expression of immunoglobulin light chains and specific type of translocation: BL cells with t(8; 22) express lambda chains, whereas those with t(2; 8) express kappa chains.
An antiserum prepared against thymosin alpha 1, a hormone secreted by the thymus gland, effectively neutralized the AIDS-associated virus [HTLV-III/LAV (clone BH-10)] and blocked its replication in H9 cells. Reverse transcriptase activity and expression of the HTLV-III/LAV antigens p15 and p24 were inhibited by purified immunoglobulin G preparations of antisera to thymosin alpha 1. The antiviral activity of the antiserum was found to be due to a region of homology between thymosin alpha 1 and p17, a product of the gag gene of HTLV-III/LAV. Comparison of the primary sequences of thymosin alpha 1 and the gag protein revealed a 44% to 50% homology in an 18-amino acid region, between positions 11 and 28 on thymosin alpha 1 and 92 and 109 on the gag protein. The effectiveness of the thymosin alpha 1 antiserum and of immunoglobulin G-enriched preparations in blocking replication of HTLV-III(BH-10) in H9 cells suggests a novel approach to the development of an AIDS vaccine. A vaccine directed against the gag protein might overcome the problem of genetic drift in the envelope region of the virus and be useful against all genetic variants of HTLV-III/LAV.
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus encodes a chemokine called vMIP-II. This protein displayed a broader spectrum of receptor activities than any mammalian chemokine as it bound with high affinity to a number of both CC and CXC chemokine receptors. Binding of vMIP-II, however, was not associated with the normal, rapid mobilization of calcium from intracellular stores; instead, it blocked calcium mobilization induced by endogenous chemokines. In freshly isolated human monocytes the virally encoded vMIP-II acted as a potent and efficient antagonist of chemotaxis induced by chemokines. Because vMIP-II could inhibit cell entry of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) mediated through CCR3 and CCR5 as well as CXCR4, this protein may serve as a lead for development of broad-spectrum anti-HIV agents.
A cleavage map of the Moloney murine sarcoma viral DNA was constructed and compared with that of a spontaneously occurring deletion mutant. By restriction enzyme analysis, it was shown that a region encompassing over 40% of the viral information was not essential for transformation or rescue of the deletion mutant. The transforming region was further localised by analysis of the transforming activity in tissue culture of isolated restriction fragments of linear duoble-stranded sarcoma viral DNA. In each case, DNA fragments that retained transforming activity preserved the cell-derived insertion sequences of the viral genome. Moreover, such transformants invariably expressed RNA specific to this region. By these two approaches, it was possible to demonstrate that the transforming region of the viral genome begins very near or within the cell-derived insertion sequences. Thus, the transforming gene of this mammalian sarcoma virus originates from within the mouse cell genome.
The cross-species transmission of lentiviruses from African primates to humans has selected viral adaptations which have subsequently facilitated human-to-human transmission. HIV adapts not only by positive selection through mutation but also by recombination of segments of its genome in individuals who become multiply infected. Naturally infected nonhuman primates are relatively resistant to AIDS-like disease despite high plasma viral loads and sustained viral evolution. Further understanding of host resistance factors and the mechanisms of disease in natural primate hosts may provide insight into unexplored therapeutic avenues for the prevention of AIDS.
Prochlorococcus cyanobacteria are extremely abundant in the oceans, as are the viruses that infect them. How hosts and viruses coexist in nature remains unclear, although the presence of both susceptible and resistant cells may allow this coexistence. Combined whole-genome sequencing and PCR screening technology now enables us to investigate the effect of resistance on genome evolution and the genomic mechanisms behind the long-term coexistence of Prochlorococcus and their viruses. Here we present a genome analysis of 77 substrains selected for resistance to ten viruses, revealing mutations primarily in non-conserved, horizontally transferred genes that localize to a single hypervariable genomic island. Mutations affected viral attachment to the cell surface and imposed a fitness cost to the host, manifested by significantly lower growth rates or a previously unknown mechanism of more rapid infection by other viruses. The mutant genes are generally uncommon in nature yet some carry polymorphisms matching those found experimentally. These data are empirical evidence indicating that viral-attachment genes are preferentially located in genomic islands and that viruses are a selective pressure enhancing the diversity of both island genes and island gene content. This diversity emerges as a genomic mechanism that reduces the effective host population size for infection by a given virus, thus facilitating long-term coexistence between viruses and their hosts in nature.
Cultured cells derived from male patients with Burkitt's lymphoma and harboring herpes-type virus particles were lethally irradiated. These irradiated cells induced normal peripheral leukocytes of female infants to grow within 2 to 4 weeks after mixed cultivation. Cells of a line free of this agent failed to stimulate growth. If either type of cell was cultured separately, it did not survive under the experimental conditions. Herpes-type viral antigen and C-group chromosomal marker previously described in cultured Burkitt cells were found in all of the female cell cultures that were obtained.
Envelope glycoproteins of human and simian immunodeficiency virus (HIV and SIV) undergo a series of conformational changes when they interact with receptor (CD4) and co-receptor on the surface of a potential host cell, leading ultimately to fusion of viral and cellular membranes. Structures of fragments of gp120 and gp41 from the envelope protein are known, in conformations corresponding to their post-attachment and postfusion states, respectively. We report the crystal structure, at 4 A resolution, of a fully glycosylated SIV gp120 core, in a conformation representing its prefusion state, before interaction with CD4. Parts of the protein have a markedly different organization than they do in the CD4-bound state. Comparison of the unliganded and CD4-bound structures leads to a model for events that accompany receptor engagement of an envelope glycoprotein trimer. The two conformations of gp120 also present distinct antigenic surfaces. We identify the binding site for a compound that inhibits viral entry.
Intravenous injection into rabbits of endotoxin or killed cells of Escherichia coli induced, in 1 hour, a viral inhibitor detectable in serum. The inhibitor disappeared from the serum in 7 to 24 hours, and was only active after incubation with rabbit cell cultures. Like interferon, it did not preferentially inactivate virus directly, was ineffective in chick cells, was inactivated by trypsin, and was not sedimentable. Unlike interferon, the inhibitor was heat labile. Nucleic acid or nucleotides apparently play no role in its induction.
Inoculation of suckling hamsters with 2 x 10(8) live cells of Escherichia coli K12 strain chi1776, carrying the complete genome of polyoma virus in a recombinant plasmid, failed to induce tumors in any of 32 recipients. Also, lambda phage DNA and particles with a monomeric insert of polyoma DNA did not induce tumors. Purified recombinant plasmid DNA, as well as phage particles and DNA containing a head-to-tail dimer of polyoma DNA, showed a low degree of oncogenicity, comparable to that of polyoma DNA prepared from mouse cells. These findings support the previous conclusions, based on infectivity assays in mice, that propagation of polyoma virus DNA as a component of recombinant DNA molecules in E. coli K12 reduces its biologic activity many orders of magnitude relative to the virus itself.
The His274-->Tyr274 (H274Y) mutation confers oseltamivir resistance on N1 influenza neuraminidase but had long been thought to compromise viral fitness. However, beginning in 2007-2008, viruses containing H274Y rapidly became predominant among human seasonal H1N1 isolates. We show that H274Y decreases the amount of neuraminidase that reaches the cell surface and that this defect can be counteracted by secondary mutations that also restore viral fitness. Two such mutations occurred in seasonal H1N1 shortly before the widespread appearance of H274Y. The evolution of oseltamivir resistance was therefore enabled by "permissive" mutations that allowed the virus to tolerate subsequent occurrences of H274Y. An understanding of this process may provide a basis for predicting the evolution of oseltamivir resistance in other influenza strains.
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) is an inherited disorder of leukocyte function caused by derangements in CD18 expression. The genetic and functional abnormalities in a lymphocyte cell line from a patient with LAD have been corrected by retrovirus-mediated transduction of a functional CD18 gene. Lymphocytes from patients with LAD were exposed to CD18-expressing retrovirus and enriched for cells that express CD11a and CD18 (LFA-1) on the cell surface. Molecular and functional analyses of these cells revealed (i) one copy of proviral sequence per cell, (ii) viral-directed CD18 RNA that exceeded normal endogenous levels, (iii) normal quantities of CD11a and CD18 protein on the cell surface, and (iv) reconstitution of LFA-1-dependent adhesive function.
The papillomavirus E2 protein regulates viral transcription and DNA replication through interactions with cellular and viral proteins. The amino-terminal activation domain, which represents a protein class whose structural themes are poorly understood, contains key residues that mediate these functional contacts. The crystal structure of a protease-resistant core of the human papillomavirus type 18 E2 activation domain reveals a novel fold creating a cashew-shaped form with a glutamine-rich alpha helix packed against a beta-sheet framework. The protein surface shows extensive overlap of determinants for replication and transcription. The structure broadens the concept of activators to include proteins with potentially malleable, but certainly ordered, structures.
CD43 is a cell-surface sialoglycoprotein expressed by a variety of haematopoietically derived cells, including T lymphocytes. Earlier observations of defective CD43 expression by T lymphocytes from boys with the X-chromosome-linked Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome suggested the importance of CD43 in lymphocyte function. Subsequent studies have suggested that CD43 facilitates leukocyte adhesion and has a co-stimulatory role during T-cell activation. To define the physiologically relevant function(s) of CD43, we have generated CD43-knockout mice. We report here that CD43-deficient T cells from such mice show a marked increase in their in vitro proliferative response to concanavalin A, anti-CD3, the superantigen SEB and allostimulation. Additionally, CD43-deficient T cells show a substantial enhancement in homotypic adhesion and in their ability to bind different ligands, including fibronectin and the intercellular adhesion molecule ICAM-1. Vaccinia-virus-infected CD43-knockout mice mounted an augmented anti-vaccinia cytotoxic T-cell response compared with their wild-type littermates, yet developed an increased virus load. We conclude that CD43 negatively regulates T-cell activation and adhesion and is important for viral clearance.
Ribozymes enhance chemical reaction rates using many of the same catalytic strategies as protein enzymes. In the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) ribozyme, site-specific self-cleavage of the viral RNA phosphodiester backbone requires both divalent cations and a cytidine nucleotide. General acid-base catalysis, substrate destabilization and global and local conformational changes have all been proposed to contribute to the ribozyme catalytic mechanism. Here we report ten crystal structures of the HDV ribozyme in its pre-cleaved state, showing that cytidine is positioned to activate the 2'-OH nucleophile in the precursor structure. This observation supports its proposed role as a general base in the reaction mechanism. Comparison of crystal structures of the ribozyme in the pre- and post-cleavage states reveals a significant conformational change in the RNA after cleavage and that a catalytically critical divalent metal ion from the active site is ejected. The HDV ribozyme has remarkable chemical similarity to protein ribonucleases and to zymogens for which conformational dynamics are integral to biological activity. This finding implies that RNA structural rearrangements control the reactivity of ribozymes and ribonucleoprotein enzymes.
The worldwide importance of human hepatitis B virus infection and the toll it takes in chronic liver disease, cirrhosis and hepatocarcinoma, make it imperative that a vaccine be developed for worldwide application. Human hepatitis B vaccines are presently prepared using hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) that is purified from the plasma of human carriers of hepatitis B virus infection. The preparation of hepatitis B vaccine from a human source is restricted by the available supply of infected human plasma and by the need to apply stringent processes that purify the antigen and render it free of infectious hepatitis B virus and other possible living agents that might be present in the plasma. Joint efforts between our laboratories and those of Drs W. Rutter and B. Hall led to the preparation of vectors carrying the DNA sequence for HBsAg and antigen expression in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here we describe the development of hepatitis B vaccine of yeast cell origin. HBsAg of subtype adw was produced in recombinant yeast cell culture, and the purified antigen in alum formulation stimulated production of antibody in mice, grivet monkeys and chimpanzees. Vaccinated chimpanzees were totally protected when challenged intravenously with either homologous or heterologous subtype adr and ayw virus of human serum source. This is the first example of a vaccine produced from recombinant cells which is effective against a human viral infection.
The pattern of DNA methylation changes during development of eukaryotes, and hypomethylation frequently correlates with gene expression (for reviews see refs 1-4). A causal relationship between hypermethylation and gene inactivity has been established for retroviral genomes which are methylated de novo when inserted into the germ line of mice (ref. 5; for review, see ref. 6). The mutual interaction of the provirus with the host genome can influence virus expression and can result in inactivation of the host gene by insertional mutagenesis. We report here that the insertion of a provirus can change the methylation pattern of the host DNA. Sequences flanking the provirus become methylated de novo within 1 kilobase (kb) of the integration site. In Mov-13 mice, which carry a lethal mutation of the alpha 1(I) collagen gene, de novo methylation of host DNA is associated with a change in chromatin conformation. This suggests that virus-induced DNA methylation can alter DNA-protein interactions and thereby interfere with correct gene activation during embryonic development.
Several recent discoveries have pointed to nucleic acid secondary structure as an additional dimension in gene expression. Further evidence for the formation of hairpins in RNA is the fact that cruciforms exist in negatively supercoiled DNAs. As potential binding sites for proteins, these structures have been proposed to play a part in the regulation of various crucial reactions, such as replication, transcription, or RNA processing. As any random nucleotide sequence can self-anneal with an approximately 50% chance of forming some Watson-Crick-type base pairs, it is difficult to assess which, if any, of all possible hairpin-like secondary structures may be biologically relevant. We have computed the expected distribution of perfectly base-paired structures as a function of loop size and stem length and compared it with the distribution observed in the complete genome of eight DNA viruses from animals, plants and bacteria. We report here that hairpins having six or more consecutive base pairs in the stem are not distributed randomly long the genome, occur much more often than chance would predict, and are particularly over-represented in regions that appear to have regulatory significance. The average loop size was found to decrease with an increase in stem length. These results support our previous hypothesis that these structures are biologically relevant.
The three mRNAs that encode the capsid proteins of polyoma virus are produced by the excision of different sequences from continuous transcripts of the L strand of viral DNA. All three of the mRNAs have long half lives, and the larger species are not converted to the smaller ones to any measurable extent within the cytoplasm. Therefore the cytoplasmic proportions of late polyoma mRNAs are predetermined by splicing that is confined to the nucleus of the infected cell and which is complete by the time that mRNA is transported to the cytoplasm.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection can bring about total collapse of the immune system by infecting helper T lymphocytes which express CD4, the molecule which mediates interaction between the cell surface and viral envelope glycoprotein gp120 (refs 3-10). HIV apparently escapes the effects of neutralizing antibodies in vivo by generating new variants which must still interact with CD4 to maintain a cycle of infection. One route to block HIV infection, therefore, could use solubilized CD4 protein to inhibit attachment of the virus to its target cell. We have used recombinant DNA techniques to generate soluble forms of CD4, and show here that these are potent inhibitors of HIV infection in vitro.
The single-stranded-DNA-binding proteins (SSBs) are essential for DNA function in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, mitochondria, phages and viruses. The structures of four SSBs have been solved, but the molecular details of the interaction of SSBs with DNA remain speculative. We report here the crystal structure at 2.4 A resolution of the single-stranded-DNA-binding domain of human replication protein A (RPA) bound to DNA. Replication protein A is a heterotrimeric SSB that is highly conserved in eukaryotes. The largest subunit, RPA70, binds to single-stranded (ss)DNA and mediates interactions with many cellular and viral proteins. The DNA-binding domain, which lies in the middle of RPA70, comprises two structurally homologous subdomains oriented in tandem. The ssDNA lies in a channel that extends from one subdomain to the other. The structure of each RPA70 subdomain is similar to those of the bacteriophage SSBs, indicating that the mechanism of ssDNA-binding is conserved.
A Robosome-scanning model has been proposed to explain the initiation of eukaryotic messenger RNAs in which binding of the 43S ternary ribosomal subunit near or at the 5' end of the mRNA is facilitated by an interaction between the methylated cap-structure at the end of the mRNA and the cap-binding protein complex eIF-4F. But picornaviral mRNAs do not have a 5' terminal cap structure and are translated by internal ribosome binding. A cellular mRNA, encoding the immunoglobulin heavy-chain binding protein, can be translated in poliovirus-infected cells at a time when cap-dependent translation of host cell mRNAs is inhibited. We report here that the 5' leader of the binding protein mRNA can directly confer internal ribosome binding to an mRNA in mammalian cells, indicating that translation initiation by an internal ribosome-binding mechanism is used by eukaryotic mRNAs.
Polyoma middle-T antigen is required for viral transformation of cultured cells and for tumorigenesis in animals. Like many other transforming gene products, middle-T is bound to the membrane and has an associated tyrosine kinase activity in vitro. This activity seems to result from the interaction of middle-T with pp60c-src, the cellular homologue of the transforming gene product of the Rous sarcoma virus, pp60v-src (refs 3-5). Both pp60v-src (ref. 6) and another retrovirus transforming gene product, pp68v-ros (ref. 7) were shown recently to have an associated phosphatidylinositol (PI) kinase activity in vitro and to increase PI turnover in vivo. These results suggest that viral transformation may be directly connected to a complex network of second messengers generated from PI turnover. Here, we assayed for PI kinase activity in immunoprecipitates made with middle-T- or pp60c-src-specific antisera of cells infected with polyoma virus. A PI kinase activity was detected in those immunoprecipitates which contained middle-T. Studies of mutants of middle-T defective in transformation indicate a close correlation between PI kinase activity and transformation.
Cell activation by phytohaemagglutinin, phorbol ester and by the supernatant of phytohaemagglutinin-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells induces the expression and cytopathic effects of latent human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) in vitro. The lymphocyte surface protein CD4 has been identified as a receptor for HIV-1 and binds the viral envelope glycoprotein (gp120). In the light of evidence indicating that one natural function of CD4 is as a growth factor receptor, we examined the ability of native gp120 to activate resting CD4-bearing lymphocytes. Our results indicate that gp120 has innate biological activity as a result of a specific interaction with CD4, inducing increases in intracellular levels of inositol trisphosphate and of calcium, and in interleukin-2 receptor expression and cell motility.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) can superinfect persistently infected hosts despite CMV-specific humoral and cellular immunity; however, how it does so remains undefined. We have demonstrated that superinfection of rhesus CMV-infected rhesus macaques (RM) requires evasion of CD8+ T cell immunity by virally encoded inhibitors of major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) antigen presentation, particularly the homologs of human CMV US2, 3, 6, and 11. In contrast, MHC-I interference was dispensable for primary infection of RM, or for the establishment of a persistent secondary infection in CMV-infected RM transiently depleted of CD8+ lymphocytes. These findings demonstrate that US2-11 glycoproteins promote evasion of CD8+ T cells in vivo, thus supporting viral replication and dissemination during superinfection, a process that complicates the development of preventive CMV vaccines but that can be exploited for CMV-based vector development.
Persistent infections with hepatitis C virus (HCV) are likely to depend on viral inhibition of host defenses. We show that the HCV NS3/4A serine protease blocks the phosphorylation and effector action of interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3), a key cellular antiviral signaling molecule. Disruption of NS3/4A protease function by mutation or a ketoamide peptidomimetic inhibitor relieved this blockade and restored IRF-3 phosphorylation after cellular challenge with an unrelated virus. Furthermore, dominant-negative or constitutively active IRF-3 mutants, respectively, enhanced or suppressed HCV RNA replication in hepatoma cells. Thus, the NS3/4A protease represents a dual therapeutic target, the inhibition of which may both block viral replication and restore IRF-3 control of HCV infection.
H5N1 avian influenza virus (AIV) has emerged as a pathogenic entity for a variety of species, including humans, in recent years. Here we report an outbreak among migratory birds on Lake Qinghaihu, China, in May and June 2005, in which more than a thousand birds were affected. Pancreatic necrosis and abnormal neurological symptoms were the major clinical features. Sequencing of the complete genomes of four H5N1 AIV strains revealed them to be reassortants related to a peregrine falcon isolate from Hong Kong and to have known highly pathogenic characteristics. Experimental animal infections reproduced typical highly pathogenic AIV infection symptoms and pathology.
Recombinant retroviral genomes encoding a chromosomal human beta-globin gene have been used to transduce murine haematopoietic stem cells in vitro. After permanent engraftment of lethally irradiated recipients with the transduced cells, the human beta-globin gene is expressed at significant levels only within the erythroid lineage. These results indicate that it is possible to obtain stable expression of exogenous chromosomal DNA sequences introduced into mature haematopoietic cells in vivo via stem cell infection, and that human disorders of haemoglobin production may be more feasible candidates for somatic cell gene therapy than previously suspected.
Functional impairment of antigen-specific T cells is a defining characteristic of many chronic infections, but the underlying mechanisms of T-cell dysfunction are not well understood. To address this question, we analysed genes expressed in functionally impaired virus-specific CD8 T cells present in mice chronically infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), and compared these with the gene profile of functional memory CD8 T cells. Here we report that PD-1 (programmed death 1; also known as Pdcd1) was selectively upregulated by the exhausted T cells, and that in vivo administration of antibodies that blocked the interaction of this inhibitory receptor with its ligand, PD-L1 (also known as B7-H1), enhanced T-cell responses. Notably, we found that even in persistently infected mice that were lacking CD4 T-cell help, blockade of the PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitory pathway had a beneficial effect on the 'helpless' CD8 T cells, restoring their ability to undergo proliferation, secrete cytokines, kill infected cells and decrease viral load. Blockade of the CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4) inhibitory pathway had no effect on either T-cell function or viral control. These studies identify a specific mechanism of T-cell exhaustion and define a potentially effective immunological strategy for the treatment of chronic viral infections.
Innate immunity against bacterial and fungal pathogens is mediated by Toll and immune deficiency (Imd) pathways, but little is known about the antiviral response in Drosophila. Here, we demonstrate that an RNA interference pathway protects adult flies from infection by two evolutionarily diverse viruses. Our work also describes a molecular framework for the viral immunity, in which viral double-stranded RNA produced during infection acts as the pathogen trigger whereas Drosophila Dicer-2 and Argonaute-2 act as host sensor and effector, respectively. These findings establish a Drosophila model for studying the innate immunity against viruses in animals.
The rational design of drugs that can inhibit the action of viral proteases depends on obtaining accurate structures of these enzymes. The crystal structure of chemically synthesized HIV-1 protease has been determined at 2.8 angstrom resolution (R factor of 0.184) with the use of a model based on the Rous sarcoma virus protease structure. In this enzymatically active protein, the cysteines were replaced by alpha-amino-n-butyric acid, a nongenetically coded amino acid. This structure, in which all 99 amino acids were located, differs in several important details from that reported previously by others. The interface between the identical subunits forming the active protease dimer is composed of four well-ordered beta strands from both the amino and carboxyl termini and residues 86 to 94 have a helical conformation. The observed arrangement of the dimer interface suggests possible designs for dimerization inhibitors.
Rheumatoid factor, a human immunoglobulin of the IgM class, failed to attach to herpes simplex virus but did attach to infectious complexes composed of herpes simplex virus and antibody to herpes simplex virus. These newly formed complexes of infectious virus, antiviral antibody, and rheumatoid factor could be neutralized by complement or by antibody to human IgM. The ability of rheumatoid factor to enhance virus neutralization in the presence of complement represents a hitherto unrecognized biological role for rheumatoid factor.
Fusion of biological membranes is mediated by specific lipid-interacting proteins that induce the formation and expansion of an initial fusion pore. Here we report the crystal structure of the ectodomain of the Semliki Forest virus fusion glycoprotein E1 in its low-pH-induced trimeric form. E1 adopts a folded-back conformation that, in the final post-fusion form of the full-length protein, would bring the fusion peptide loop and the transmembrane anchor to the same end of a stable protein rod. The observed conformation of the fusion peptide loop is compatible with interactions only with the outer leaflet of the lipid bilayer. Crystal contacts between fusion peptide loops of adjacent E1 trimers, together with electron microscopy observations, suggest that in an early step of membrane fusion, an intermediate assembly of five trimers creates two opposing nipple-like deformations in the viral and target membranes, leading to formation of the fusion pore.
The T-cell receptor (TCR) repertoire is selected in the thymus after rearrangement of genes encoding TCR alpha and beta chains. Selection is based on the recognition by newly emergent T cells of self-ligands associated with molecules of the major histocompatibility complex: some combinations result in positive selection, others in negative selection. Negative selection, or clonal deletion, is an important mechanism for eliminating autoreactive T cells. A group of self-ligands involved in clonal deletion was identified because they, like exogenous superantigens, were recognized by almost all T cells expressing particular TCR V beta genes. V beta 17a T cells are deleted by a tissue-specific ligand; V beta 6, V beta 7, V beta 8.1 and V beta 9 T cells are deleted by the minor lymphocyte-stimulating (Mls) determinant Mls-1a; V beta 3 T cells by Mls-2a and Mls-3a; V beta 11 T cells by ligands encoded by independently segregating genes; and V beta 5 T cells by ligands encoded by two genes. Chromosome mapping using recombinant inbred strains of mice and classic backcrosses show that Mls-1a in DBA/2 mice is encoded on chromosome 1, that one of the two ligand genes for deletion of V beta 5 T cells maps to chromosome 12 and that a ligand gene for V beta 11 deletion is linked to the CD8 locus on chromosome 6. Here we present evidence from three sets of backcross mice for concordance between V beta 11 deletion ligand genes on chromosomes 6, 12 and 14 and endogenous mouse mammary tumour virus integrant (Mtv) genomes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Retinoblastoma, a malignancy of the eye occurring in young children, has been widely studied as a model for genetic predisposition to cancer. This disease is caused by mutations in both alleles of an anti-oncogene (the retinoblastoma gene, Rb) that inactivate or eliminate the Rb encoded protein, p105Rb (refs 1 and 2). Here we report that expression of a viral oncogene, the simian virus 40 T antigen, in the retina of transgenic mice produces heritable ocular tumours with histological, ultrastructural and immunohistochemical features identical to those of human retinoblastoma. Furthermore, we demonstrate a specific association between p105Rb and T antigen in mouse retinoblastoma tumour cells. Thus, the occurrence of these tumours is in vivo evidence for oncogenesis due to the ocular-specific expression of an Rb-binding oncoprotein that can functionally inactivate the Rb protein. As an animal model for heritable retinoblastoma, these mice should allow the study of the ontogeny, pathogenesis and treatment of this malignant disease.
Antibodies from the serum of patients with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) or with the AIDS-related complex and from the serum of seropositive healthy homosexuals, recognize two major glycoproteins in cells infected with human T-cell lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV III). These glycoproteins, gp160 and gp120, are encoded by the 2.5-kilobase open reading frame located in the 3' end of the HTLV-III genome, as determined by amino terminus sequence analysis of the radiolabeled forms of these proteins. It is hypothesized that gp160 and gp120 represent the major species of virus-encoded envelope gene products for HTLV-III.
One of the common neurological complications in patients with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a subacute encephalopathy with progressive dementia. By using the techniques of cocultivation for virus isolation, in situ hybridization, immunocytochemistry, and transmission electron microscopy, the identity of an important cell type that supports replication of the AIDS retrovirus in brain tissue was determined in two affected individuals. These cells were mononucleated and multinucleated macrophages that actively synthesized viral RNA and produced progeny virions in the brains of the patients. Infected brain macrophages may serve as a reservoir for virus and as a vehicle for viral dissemination in the infected host.
A blood donor infected with human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) and a cohort of six blood or blood product recipients infected from this donor remain free of HIV-1-related disease with stable and normal CD4 lymphocyte counts 10 to 14 years after infection. HIV-1 sequences from either virus isolates or patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells had similar deletions in the nef gene and in the region of overlap of nef and the U3 region of the long terminal repeat (LTR). Full-length sequencing of one isolate genome and amplification of selected HIV-1 genome regions from other cohort members revealed no other abnormalities of obvious functional significance. These data show that survival after HIV infection can be determined by the HIV genome and support the importance of nef or the U3 region of the LTR in determining the pathogenicity of HIV-1.
A murine model in which neurotropic retroviral infection can be studied over short periods of time was developed. Microinjection of Cas-Br-E virus into midgestation mouse embryos caused paralysis and death within 25 days after birth, in contrast to virus-infected neonates which develop disease only after 4 months. To evaluate whether antiviral drugs could cross the placental barrier and influence the course of the disease, the drug 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) was administered to infected embryos through the drinking water of pregnant females. AZT treatment markedly retarded the onset and course of virus-induced central nervous system disease, permitting animals to survive beyond 4 months of age. These results are evidence for effective antiviral treatment during gestation and in the perinatal period and are of potential significance for the management of maternal transmission of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) virus.
Longitudinal studies of patients infected with HIV-1 reveal a long and variable incubation period between infection and the development of AIDS. Data from a small number of infected patients show temporal changes in the number of genetically distinct strains of the virus throughout the incubation period, with a slow but steady rise in diversity during the progression to disease. A mathematical model of the dynamic interaction between viral diversity and the human immune system suggests the existence of an antigen diversity threshold, below which the immune system is able to regulate viral population growth but above which the virus population induces the collapse of the CD4+ lymphocyte population. The model suggests that antigenic diversity is the cause, not a consequence, of immunodeficiency disease. The model is compared with available data, and is used to assess how the timing of the application of chemotherapy or immunotherapy influences the rate of progress to disease.
Spontaneous resolution of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in humans usually affords long-term immunity to persistent viremia and associated liver diseases. Here, we report that memory CD4+ Tcells are essential for this protection. Antibody-mediated depletion of CD4+ Tcells before reinfection of two immune chimpanzees resulted in persistent, low-level viremia despite functional intra-hepatic memory CD8+ Tcell responses. Incomplete control of HCV replication by memory CD8+ Tcells in the absence of adequate CD4+ Tcell help was associated with emergence of viral escape mutations in class I major histocompatibility complex-restricted epitopes and failure to resolve HCV infection.
Hepatitis derived from hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is endemic throughout the world, but it is particularly prevalent in Asia and Africa. In these areas, demographic studies show a strong coincidence between HBV infection (assayed by HBV antigenic markers) and the incidence of primary liver cancer. On these grounds, a causal link between HBV infection and primary hepatocellular cancer has been proposed. Recently, a human hepatoma cell line (PLC/PRF/5; Alexander cells) has been shown to produce hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). We show here that the Alexander cell line contains at least six (four complete and two partial) hepatitis B viral genomes integrated into high molecular weight host DNA. An analysis using specific probes to fragments of the HBV genome suggests that integration of the virus in most cases occurs at the nicked cohesive end region of the virus. Expression of viral sequences using Northern blots demonstrates the presence of RNA transcripts specific for the surface antigen sequences of HBV DNA and the absence of detectable transcripts corresponding to the hepatitis B core antigen.
In plants and fungi, the introduction of transgenes can lead to post-transcriptional gene silencing. This phenomenon, in which expression of the transgene and of endogenous genes containing sequences homologous to the transgene can be blocked, is involved in virus resistance and genome maintenance. Transgene-induced gene silencing has been termed quelling in Neurospora crassa and co-suppression in plants. Quelling-defective (qde) mutants of N. crassa, in which transgene-induced gene silencing is impaired, have been isolated. Here we report the cloning of qde-1, the first cellular component of the gene-silencing mechanism to be isolated, which defines a new gene family conserved among different species including plants, animals and fungi. The qde-1 gene product is similar to an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase found in the tomato. The identification of qde-1 strongly supports models that implicate an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in the post-transcriptional gene-silencing mechanism. The presence of qde-1 homologues in a variety of species of plants and fungi indicates that a conserved gene-silencing mechanism may exist, which could have evolved to preserve genome integrity and to protect the genome against naturally occurring transposons and viruses.
JHDM1B is an evolutionarily conserved and ubiquitously expressed member of the JHDM (JmjC-domain-containing histone demethylase) family. Because it contains an F-box motif, this protein is also known as FBXL10 (ref. 4). With the use of a genome-wide RNAi screen, the JHDM1B worm orthologue (T26A5.5) was identified as a gene that regulates growth. In the mouse, four independent screens have identified JHDM1B as a putative tumour suppressor by retroviral insertion analysis. Here we identify human JHDM1B as a nucleolar protein and show that JHDM1B preferentially binds the transcribed region of ribosomal DNA to repress the transcription of ribosomal RNA genes. We also show that repression of ribosomal RNA genes by JHDM1B is dependent on its JmjC domain, which is necessary for the specific demethylation of trimethylated lysine 4 on histone H3 in the nucleolus. In agreement with the notion that ribosomal RNA synthesis and cell growth are coupled processes, we show a JmjC-domain-dependent negative effect of JHDM1B on cell size and cell proliferation. Because aberrant ribosome biogenesis and the disruption of epigenetic control mechanisms contribute to cellular transformation, these results, together with the low levels of JHDM1B expression found in aggressive brain tumours, suggest a role for JHDM1B in cancer development.
Cross-presentation of cell-associated antigens plays an important role in regulating CD8+ T cell responses to proteins that are not expressed by antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Dendritic cells are the principal cross-presenting APCs in vivo and much progress has been made in elucidating the pathways that allow dendritic cells to capture and process cellular material. However, little is known about the signals that determine whether such presentation ultimately results in a cytotoxic T cell (CTL) response (cross-priming) or in CD8+ T cell inactivation (cross-tolerance). Here we describe a mechanism that promotes cross-priming during viral infections. We show that murine CD8alpha+ dendritic cells are activated by double-stranded (ds)RNA present in virally infected cells but absent from uninfected cells. Dendritic cell activation requires phagocytosis of infected material, followed by signalling through the dsRNA receptor, toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3). Immunization with virus-infected cells or cells containing synthetic dsRNA leads to a striking increase in CTL cross-priming against cell-associated antigens, which is largely dependent on TLR3 expression by antigen-presenting cells. Thus, TLR3 may have evolved to permit cross-priming of CTLs against viruses that do not directly infect dendritic cells.
X-ray diffraction shows that complete virus particles and empty capsids crystallize isomorphously. The surface morphology of the protein coat, as revealed by electron microscopy, is the dominant structural feature determining the intensity of x-ray reflections to a resolution of approximately 30 angstroms. The structure and variability of the viral chromatin core can now be analyzed by comparison of electron density maps.
Crystalline aggregates of strain MM virus occur in polymorphonuclear leukocytes in association with osmiophilic granular structures which are occasionally membrane-bound. This suggests either a phagocytosis and segregation of virus by leukocytes, analogous to the disposition of bacteria by leukocytes, or a utilization of the leukocyte by the virus as a host cell for virus replication.
Vertebrate evolution has taken place against a background of constant retrovirus infection, and much of the mammalian genome consists of endogenous retrovirus-like elements. Several host genes have evolved to control retrovirus replication, including Friend-virus-susceptibility-1, Fv1, on mouse chromosome 4 (refs 3, 4). The Fv1 gene acts on murine leukaemia virus at a stage after entry into the target cell but before integration and formation of the provirus. Although restriction is not absolute, Fv1 prevents or delays spontaneous or experimentally induced viral tumours. In vitro, Fv1 restriction leads to an apparent 50-1,000 fold reduction in viral titre. Genetic evidence implicates a direct interaction between the Fv1 gene product and a component of the viral preintegration complex, the capsid protein CA (refs 7-9). We have now cloned Fv1: the gene appears to be derived from the gag region of an endogenous retrovirus unrelated to murine leukaemia virus, implying that the Fv1 protein and its target may share functional similarities despite the absence of nucleotide-sequence homology.
SCID-hu mice with human fetal thymic or lymph node implants were inoculated with the cloned human immunodeficiency virus-1 isolate, HIV-1JR-CSF. In a time- and dose-dependent fashion, viral replication spread within the human lymphoid organs. Combination immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization revealed only viral RNA transcripts in most infected cells, but some cells had both detectable viral transcripts and viral protein. Infected cells were always more apparent in the medulla than in the cortex of the thymus. These studies demonstrate that an acute infection of human lymphoid organs with HIV-1 can be followed in the SCID-hu mouse.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) production from latently infected T lymphocytes can be induced with compounds that activate the cells to secrete lymphokines. The elements in the HIV genome which control activation are not known but expression might be regulated through a variety of DNA elements. The cis-acting control elements of the viral genome are enhancer and promoter regions. The virus also encodes trans-acting factors specified by the tat-III and art genes. We have examined whether products specific to activated T cells might stimulate viral transcription by binding to regions on viral DNA. Activation of T cells, which increases HIV expression up to 50-fold, correlated with induction of a DNA binding protein indistinguishable from a recognized transcription factor, called NF-kappa B, with binding sites in the viral enhancer. Mutation of these binding sites abolished inducibility. That NF-kappa B acts in synergy with the viral tat-III gene product to enhance HIV expression in T cells may have implications for the pathogenesis of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).
In 2001, dengue virus type 1 (DENV-1) populations in humans and mosquitoes from Myanmar acquired a stop-codon mutation in the surface envelope (E) protein gene. Within a year, this stop-codon strain had spread to all individuals sampled. The presence of truncated E protein species within individual viral populations, along with a general relaxation in selective constraint, indicated that the stop-codon strain represents a defective lineage of DENV-1. We propose that such long-term transmission of defective RNA viruses in nature was achieved through complementation by coinfection of host cells with functional viruses.
We recently reported the isolation of a novel retrovirus, the human immune deficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2, previously named LAV-2), from patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) originating from West Africa. This virus is related to HIV-1, the causative agent of the AIDS epidemic now spreading in Central and East Africa, as well as the USA and Europe (see ref. 3 for review) both by its morphology and by its tropism and in vitro cytopathic effect on CD4 (T4) positive cell lines and lymphocytes. But preliminary hybridization experiments indicated that there are substantiated differences between the sequences of the two genomes. Furthermore, the proteins of HIV-1 and HIV-2 have different sizes and their serological cross-reactivity is restricted to the major core protein, as the envelope glycoproteins of HIV-2 are not immunoprecipitated by HIV-1-positive sera. We now report the molecular cloning of the complete 9.5-kilobase (kb) genome of HIV-2, the observation of restriction site polymorphism between different isolates, and a preliminary analysis of the relationship of HIV-2 with other human and simian retroviruses.
Antiviral innate immunity is initiated in response to RNA molecules that are produced in virus-infected cells. These RNAs activate signalling cascades that activate the genes that encode alpha- and beta-interferon (IFN). Signalling occurs through the interaction of the RNAs with either of two pathogen recognition receptors, retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I, also known as DDX58) and melanoma differentiation associated gene-5 (MDA5, also known as IFIH1), which contain amino-terminal caspase activation and recruitment domains (CARD) and carboxy-terminal DExD/H Box RNA helicase motifs. RIG-I and MDA5 interact with another CARD protein, interferon-beta promotor stimulator protein-1 (IPS-1, also known as MAVS, VISA and Cardif), in the mitochondrial membrane, which relays the signal through the transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB to the IFN-beta gene. Although the signalling pathway is well understood, the origin of the RNA molecules that initiate these processes is not. Here we show that activation of the antiviral endoribonuclease, RNase L, by 2',5'-linked oligoadenylate (2-5A) produces small RNA cleavage products from self-RNA that initiate IFN production. Accordingly, mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking RNase L were resistant to the induction of IFN-beta expression in response to 2-5A, dsRNA or viral infection. Single-stranded regions of RNA are cleaved 3' of UpUp and UpAp sequences by RNase L during viral infections, resulting in small, often duplex, RNAs. We show that small self-RNAs produced by the action of RNase L on cellular RNA induce IFN-beta expression and that the signalling involves RIG-I, MDA5 and IPS-1. Mice lacking RNase L produce significantly less IFN-beta during viral infections than infected wild-type mice. Furthermore, activation of RNase L with 2-5A in vivo induced the expression of IFN-beta in wild-type but not RNase L-deficient mice. Our results indicate that RNase L has an essential role in the innate antiviral immune response that relieves the requirement for direct sensing of non-self RNA.
The spike glycoproteins of the lipid-enveloped orthomyxoviruses and paramyxoviruses have three functions: to recognize the receptor on the cell surface, to mediate viral fusion with the cell membrane, and to destroy the receptor. In influenza C virus, a single glycoprotein, the haemagglutinin-esterase-fusion (HEF) protein, possesses all three functions. In influenza A and B, the first two activities are mediated by haemagglutinin and the third by a second glycoprotein, neuraminidase. Here we report the crystal structure of the HEF envelope glycoprotein of influenza C virus. We have identified the receptor-binding site and the receptor-destroying enzyme (9-O-acetylesterase) sites, by using receptor analogues. The receptor-binding domain is structurally similar to the sialic acid-binding domain of influenza A haemagglutinin, but binds 9-O-acetylsialic acid. The esterase domain has a structure similar to the esterase from Streptomyces scabies and a brain acetylhydrolase. The receptor domain is inserted into a surface loop of the esterase domain and the esterase domain is inserted into a surface loop of the stem. The stem domain is similar to that of influenza A haemagglutinin, except that the triple-stranded, alpha-helical bundle diverges at both of its ends, and the amino terminus of HEF2, the fusion peptide, is partially exposed. The segregation of HEF's three functions into structurally distinct domains suggests that the entire stem region, including sequences at the amino and carboxy termini of HEF1 which precede the post-translational cleavage site between HEF1 and HEF2, forms an independent fusion domain which is probably derived from an ancestral membrane fusion protein.
As a step toward developing poliovirus as a vaccine vector, poliovirus recombinants were constructed by fusing exogenous peptides (up to 400 amino acids) and an artificial cleavage site for viral protease 3Cpro to the amino terminus of the viral polyprotein. Viral replication proceeded normally. An extended polyprotein was produced in infected cells and proteolytically processed into the complete array of viral proteins plus the foreign peptide, which was excluded from mature virions. The recombinants retained exogenous sequences through successive rounds of replication in culture and in vivo. Infection of animals with recombinants elicited a humoral immune response to the foreign peptides.
The human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I), the first human retrovirus to be characterized, is associated with adult T-cell leukaemia and a chronic progressive disease of the central nervous system termed tropical spastic paraparesis, or HTLV-I-associated myelopathy. Only 1% of individuals infected with HTLV-I develop clinical disease however. The various manifestations of an HTLV-I infection may be related to differences in the genetic backgrounds of individuals, infection with variant strains of HTLV-I, differences in viral tropism or host immune response to the virus. Whereas the humoral response to HTLV-I is well characterized, little is known about the human cellular immune response, such as the production of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Here we report the presence of high levels of circulating HTLV-I-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in patients with HTLV-I associated neurological disease but not in HTLV-I seropositive individuals without neurological involvement. These cytotoxic T lymphocytes are CD8+, HLA class I- restricted and predominantly recognize the HTLV-I gene products encoded in the regulatory region pX. These findings suggest that HTLV-I-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes may contribute to the pathogenesis of associated neurological disorders associated with HTLV-I.
Primary infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is generally followed by a burst of viraemia with or without clinical symptoms. This in turn is followed by a prolonged period of clinical latency. During this period there is little, if any, detectable viraemia, the numbers of infected cells in the blood are very low, and it is extremely difficult to demonstrate virus expression in these cells. We have analysed viral burden and levels of virus replication simultaneously in the blood and lymphoid organs of the same individuals at various stages of HIV disease. Here we report that in early-stage disease there is a dichotomy between the levels of viral burden and virus replication in peripheral blood versus lymphoid organs. HIV disease is active in the lymphoid tissue throughout the period of clinical latency, even at times when minimal viral activity is demonstrated in blood.
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is an epidemic immunosuppressive disease characteristically associated with a depletion of T lymphocytes of the helper/inducer phenotype. Numerous converging lines of research have implicated a human T-cell lymphotropic retrovirus, HTLV-III, in the pathogenesis of AIDS. Recently, several distinct forms of the HTLV-III genome were molecularly cloned in phage and extensively characterized. In the present study, a clone containing full-length HTLV-III proviral DNA was inserted into a plasmid and used to transfect cord blood T cells from normal newborn humans. We demonstrate that this molecular clone is infectious in vitro and causes marked cytopathic effects on T-cell cultures. This is the first direct evidence that the HTLV-III genome, rather than a minor component of the virus complex, is cytopathic for T cells. Using this biologically competent clone and mutants derived from it, it should now be possible to localize the subgenomic regions that contribute to the biological effects of HTLV-III.
Visna is a slow degenerative disease of the central nervous system (CNS) of sheep caused by a nontumorigenic retrovirus. During the course of this disease, visna virus establishes a persistent infection of the CNS, lung and haematopoietic system, despite a specific humoral and cellular immune response. We have studied visna virus life cycle at the single-cell level in choroid plexus of experimentally infected animals, using a very sensitive and quantitative in situ hybridization assay. We report here that although proviral DNA is synthesized in significant amounts, its expression is blocked at the transcriptional level. This restriction of proviral DNA transcription offers an explanation for the slowness of the disease and the persistence of the infection.
Leukemia, lymphoma, and osteogenic and anaplastic sarcomas develop in Syrian golden hamsters inoculated intravenously at 3 weeks of age with simian virus 40, which is a popova virus. Previously, only RNA and herpes DNA viruses have been recognized as capable of inducing leukemia and lymphoma in mammals. The significance of these findings is emphasized in relation to the nature of viral agents that may be involved in analogous diseases of man.
Contrary to previous predictions, relatively short synthetic peptides that mimic part of a protein sequence are routinely capable of eliciting an antiserum that reacts with the partially mimicked protein. Peptides capable of eliciting protein-reactive serums are frequently represented in the primary sequence of a protein, can be characterized by a set of simple chemical rules, and are confined neither to immunodominant regions of intact proteins nor to the amino or carboxyl terminals. As such, synthetic peptide immunogens are valuable for eliciting reagents with predetermined specificity that can be used for basic research. In addition, some synthetic peptides are capable of mimicking regions of virus proteins and eliciting immune responses in animals that are protective against the viral agents. Such peptides may thus serve as the basis for safe, chemically defined synthetic vaccines.
Vitamin K occurs in the natural world in several forms, including a plant form, phylloquinone (PK), and a bacterial form, menaquinones (MKs). In many species, including humans, PK is a minor constituent of hepatic vitamin K content, with most hepatic vitamin K content comprising long-chain MKs. Menaquinone-4 (MK-4) is ubiquitously present in extrahepatic tissues, with particularly high concentrations in the brain, kidney and pancreas of humans and rats. It has consistently been shown that PK is endogenously converted to MK-4 (refs 4-8). This occurs either directly within certain tissues or by interconversion to menadione (K(3)), followed by prenylation to MK-4 (refs 9-12). No previous study has sought to identify the human enzyme responsible for MK-4 biosynthesis. Previously we provided evidence for the conversion of PK and K(3) into MK-4 in mouse cerebra. However, the molecular mechanisms for these conversion reactions are unclear. Here we identify a human MK-4 biosynthetic enzyme. We screened the human genome database for prenylation enzymes and found UbiA prenyltransferase containing 1 (UBIAD1), a human homologue of Escherichia coli prenyltransferase menA. We found that short interfering RNA against the UBIAD1 gene inhibited the conversion of deuterium-labelled vitamin K derivatives into deuterium-labelled-MK-4 (MK-4-d(7)) in human cells. We confirmed that the UBIAD1 gene encodes an MK-4 biosynthetic enzyme through its expression and conversion of deuterium-labelled vitamin K derivatives into MK-4-d(7) in insect cells infected with UBIAD1 baculovirus. Converted MK-4-d(7) was chemically identified by (2)H-NMR analysis. MK-4 biosynthesis by UBIAD1 was not affected by the vitamin K antagonist warfarin. UBIAD1 was localized in endoplasmic reticulum and ubiquitously expressed in several tissues of mice. Our results show that UBIAD1 is a human MK-4 biosynthetic enzyme; this identification will permit more effective decisions to be made about vitamin K intake and bone health.
The mouse-adapted strain of poliovirus type 2 (Lansing) induces fatal poliomyelitis in mice after intracerebral inoculation, whereas mice inoculated with poliovirus type 1 (Mahoney) show no signs of disease. Previous work indicated that the adaptation to mouse virulence is associated with the viral capsid proteins and that mutations in neutralization antigenic site I of poliovirus reduce neurovirulence of the Lansing strain in mice. The role of antigenic site I in mouse neurovirulence was further explored by constructing an antigenic hybrid virus. Six amino acids in antigenic site I of the Mahoney strain were replaced with a sequence specific for the Lansing strain by using a mutagenesis cartridge. The hybrid virus was neutralized by polyclonal antisera elicited by the type 1 and type 2 strains of poliovirus and by neutralizing monoclonal antibodies directed against antigenic site I of type 2 virus. The hybrid virus induced paralytic disease in mice, an observation demonstrating that a short sequence of amino acids in antigenic site I is an important determinant of poliovirus host range. Antigenic site I may be involved in attachment of poliovirus to cells of the mouse central nervous system.
Developing a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) vaccine is critical to end the global acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic, but many question whether this goal is achievable. Natural immunity is not protective, and despite immunogenicity of HIV vaccine candidates, human trials have exclusively yielded disappointing results. Nevertheless, there is an indication that success may be possible, but this will be dependent on understanding the antiviral immune response in unprecedented depth to identify and engineer the types of immunity required. Here we outline fundamental immunological questions that need to be answered to develop a protective HIV vaccine, and the immediate need to harness a much broader scientific community to achieve this goal.
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulates phosphorylation of its own receptor at a tyrosine residue. Similarly, the viral gene product pp60src, which is responsible for cellular transformation by avian sarcoma virus (ASV), phosphorylates itself and immunoglobulin directed against pp60src at tyrosine residues. This unusual site of phosphorylation catalysed by two membrane-associated protein kinases involved in growth control prompted us to study the immunological relatedness of the EGF-stimulated protein kinase and the pp60src. Using anti-pp60src antisera, we attempted to immunoprecipitate the EGF-stimulated protein kinase solubilized from plasma membranes. We report here that neither the EGF-stimulated kinase nor the EGF receptor were immunoprecipitable by anti-pp60src sera. However, anti-pp60src IgG served as a specific substrate for the EGF-stimulated kinase, suggesting a close similarity between the EGF-stimulated kinase and pp60src.
Octamer transcription factor-1 (OTF-1) and nuclear factor III (NF-III) are sequence-specific DNA binding proteins that activate transcription and DNA replication, respectively. It is shown here that OTF-1 is physically and biologically indistinguishable from NF-III. This conclusion is based on the following observations. First, the two proteins have identical mobilities by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Second, OTF-1 binds to the adenovirus origin of DNA replication at the same site and with the same affinity as NF-III. Third, OTF-1 can substitute for NF-III in activating the initiation of adenovirus DNA replication in vitro. Fourth, the ability of OTF-1 to stimulate viral DNA replication is dependent on the presence of an intact NF-III binding site within the origin of replication. Fifth, NF-III can substitute for OTF-1 in activating in vitro transcription from the human histone H2b promoter. These data suggest the possibility that NF-III/OTF-1 is a protein that functions in both cellular DNA replication and transcription.
Hepatitis delta (delta) virus (HDV), a satellite virus of the hepatitis B virus (HBV), causes a severe form of viral hepatitis in humans. Here we present evidence based on electron microscopy and electrophoretic behaviour that HDV contains a single stranded circular RNA molecule. This is the first animal virus identified with a circular RNA genome. Circular RNAs have only been found in plant viruses. We have obtained a partial complementary DNA clone representing approximately 25% of the total genome of HDV. Analysis of this cDNA revealed similarity to two plant viruses that may explain the origin of the virus.
Treatment of normal chick embryo fibroblasts with phorbol myristate acetate causes those cells to express many of the phenotypic properties of virally transformed cells and also enhances the expression of transformed properties in Rous sarcoma virus-transformed chick embryo fibroblasts. We report here that phorbol myristate acetate has little or no effect on the level of protein kinases encoded by the viral src or endogenous sarc genes.
Viral diversity and life cycles are poorly understood in the human gut and other body habitats. Phages and their encoded functions may provide informative signatures of a human microbiota and of microbial community responses to various disturbances, and may indicate whether community health or dysfunction is manifest after apparent recovery from a disease or therapeutic intervention. Here we report sequencing of the viromes (metagenomes) of virus-like particles isolated from faecal samples collected from healthy adult female monozygotic twins and their mothers at three time points over a one-year period. We compared these data sets with data sets of sequenced bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA genes and total-faecal-community DNA. Co-twins and their mothers share a significantly greater degree of similarity in their faecal bacterial communities than do unrelated individuals. In contrast, viromes are unique to individuals regardless of their degree of genetic relatedness. Despite remarkable interpersonal variations in viromes and their encoded functions, intrapersonal diversity is very low, with >95% of virotypes retained over the period surveyed, and with viromes dominated by a few temperate phages that exhibit remarkable genetic stability. These results indicate that a predatory viral-microbial dynamic, manifest in a number of other characterized environmental ecosystems, is notably absent in the very distal intestine.
The Perigord black truffle (Tuber melanosporum Vittad.) and the Piedmont white truffle dominate today's truffle market. The hypogeous fruiting body of T. melanosporum is a gastronomic delicacy produced by an ectomycorrhizal symbiont endemic to calcareous soils in southern Europe. The worldwide demand for this truffle has fuelled intense efforts at cultivation. Identification of processes that condition and trigger fruit body and symbiosis formation, ultimately leading to efficient crop production, will be facilitated by a thorough analysis of truffle genomic traits. In the ectomycorrhizal Laccaria bicolor, the expansion of gene families may have acted as a 'symbiosis toolbox'. This feature may however reflect evolution of this particular taxon and not a general trait shared by all ectomycorrhizal species. To get a better understanding of the biology and evolution of the ectomycorrhizal symbiosis, we report here the sequence of the haploid genome of T. melanosporum, which at approximately 125 megabases is the largest and most complex fungal genome sequenced so far. This expansion results from a proliferation of transposable elements accounting for approximately 58% of the genome. In contrast, this genome only contains approximately 7,500 protein-coding genes with very rare multigene families. It lacks large sets of carbohydrate cleaving enzymes, but a few of them involved in degradation of plant cell walls are induced in symbiotic tissues. The latter feature and the upregulation of genes encoding for lipases and multicopper oxidases suggest that T. melanosporum degrades its host cell walls during colonization. Symbiosis induces an increased expression of carbohydrate and amino acid transporters in both L. bicolor and T. melanosporum, but the comparison of genomic traits in the two ectomycorrhizal fungi showed that genetic predispositions for symbiosis-'the symbiosis toolbox'-evolved along different ways in ascomycetes and basidiomycetes.
Variation in influenza A viruses was examined by comparison of nucleotide sequences of the NS gene (890 bases) of 15 human viruses isolated over 53 years (1933 to 1985). Changes in the genes accumulate with time, and an evolutionary tree based on the maximum parsimony method can be constructed. The evolutionary rate is approximately 2 X 10(-3) substitution per site per year in the NS genes, which is about 10(6) times the evolutionary rate of germline genes in mammals. This uniform and rapid rate of evolution in the NS gene is a good molecular clock and is compatible with the hypothesis that positive selection is operating on the hemagglutinin (or perhaps some other viral genes) to preserve random mutations in the NS gene.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is the cause of infectious mononucleosis and is associated with three human malignancies. Acyclovir [9-(2-hydroxyethoxymethyl)guanine], the first clinically useful drug effective against replication of EBV, is without effect against latent or persistent EBV infection. Three nucleoside analogs, E-5-(2-bromovinyl)-2'-deoxyuridine, 1-(2-deoxy-2-fluoro-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl)-5-iodocytosine, and 1-(2-deoxy-2-fluoro-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl)-5-methyluracil are potent inhibitors of EBV replication in vitro. Moreover, in contrast to the reversibility of viral inhibition by Acyclovir, these three drugs have prolonged effects in suppressing viral replication even after the drugs are removed from persistently infected cell cultures.
Information on the extent of genetic variability among non-human primate lentiviruses related to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is sorely lacking. Here we describe the isolation of two molecular clones from the simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) and their use to derive restriction endonuclease maps of five SIV isolates from rhesus macaques and one from a cynomolgus macaque. Although similar, all six viral isolates are readily distinguishable; the single isolate from a cynomolgus macaque is the most different. The restriction endonuclease map of one macaque isolate (SIVMAC-251) is identical to that published by others for STLV-IIIAGM of African green monkeys and for HTLV-IV of humans. Nucleotide sequences from the envelope region of cloned SIVMAC-251 have more than 99% identify to previously published sequences for STLV-IIIAGM (refs 2, 4) and HTLV-IV (ref. 4). These results and other observations provide strong evidence that isolates previously referred to as STLV-IIIAGM and HTLV-IV by others are not authentic, but were derived from cell cultures infected with SIVMAC-251.
Natural killer (NK) cells are a functionally defined subset of non-T, non-B lymphocytes of bone marrow origin, which induce lysis of selected target cells, including neoplastic and virus-infected cells. The NK cell function provides an important mechanism of primary defence against viruses in vivo, as demonstrated by the occurrence of multiple herpesvirus infections in patients congenitally lacking NK cells. Here we show that functionally competent CD3- NK clones can be productively infected by human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), a T-lymphotropic DNA virus that may play a role in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and in the chronic fatigue syndrome, two disorders associated with a defective NK cell activity. The infection is cytopathic and induces de novo expression of CD4, an antigen not expressed within the NK lineage, thereby predisposing NK cells to infection by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). These results provide evidence that a herpesvirus can directly target and kill NK cells, a potential strategy to suppress the natural anti-viral immunity of the host.
Recombinant virus vaccines that express a limited number of epitopes are currently being developed to prevent disease by changing the relative balance between viral spread and the immune response. Some circumstances, however, were found in infections with a noncytopathic virus in which vaccination caused disease; sensitive parameters included the genetic background of the host, the time or dose of infection, and the constituents of the vaccine. Thus, immunopathologic damage by T cells may be an unwanted consequence of vaccination with the new types of peptide or recombinant vaccines that are being investigated for the human immunodeficiency viruses and other pathogens.
Nucleotide sequencing has revealed a common genetic organization for three papillomaviruses: BPV-1 (bovine papillomavirus type 1), HPV-1 (human papillomavirus type 1a) and HPV-6 (human papillomavirus type 6b). Several open reading frames, corresponding to as yet uncharacterized proteins, were observed in these genomes in the region that is required for oncogenic transformation by BPV-1 and for plasmidial maintenance of its genome. The longest of these frames, E1, is also the most conserved between the three viruses; we have compared the amino acid sequence of its putative product ('E1 protein') with those of the large-T proteins of three polyoma viruses and report here significant homologies in their carboxy-terminal halves, extending for over 200 amino acids. Moreover, similar secondary structures were predicted in this region, especially in two blocks of homologous residues, which correspond in the large-T proteins of polyoma and simian virus 40 (SV40) viruses to sites involved in the ATPase and nucleotide-binding activities. These observations suggest that the papillomavirus E1 proteins might have a function in common with the polyoma virus large-T proteins (which are required for the initiation of viral DNA replication). As it was suggested recently that the E1 gene product is involved in maintaining the BPV-1 genome as a plasmid in transformed cells, we speculate that the structural features conserved in these otherwise very different viruses are general characteristics of eukaryotic proteins involved in the control of DNA replication.
The human homologues of several independent viral oncogenes, each of which encodes tyrosine-specific protein kinases, have been identified. Of these, three (v-src, v-yes and v-fes/fps) are known to exhibit considerable sequence homology, particularly in the regions of their phosphorylation acceptor sites. In the present study, sequences encoding the tyrosine phosphorylation acceptor sites of the Abelson murine leukaemia virus oncogene, v-abl, and its human cellular homologue, c-abl, have been identified and their nucleic acid sequences determined. Our results establish extensive homology between this region of c-abl and acceptor domains of the v-src, v-yes and v-fes/fps family of viral oncogenes, as well as more distant relatedness to the catalytic chain of the mammalian cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. These findings suggest that, of the homologues of retroviral oncogenes with tyrosine protein kinase activity examined to date, all were probably derived from a common progenitor and may represent members of a diverse family of cellular protein kinases.
The ability of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) to persist and cause AIDS is dependent on its avoidance of antibody-mediated neutralization. The virus elicits abundant, envelope-directed antibodies that have little neutralization capacity. This lack of neutralization is paradoxical, given the functional conservation and exposure of receptor-binding sites on the gp120 envelope glycoprotein, which are larger than the typical antibody footprint and should therefore be accessible for antibody binding. Because gp120-receptor interactions involve conformational reorganization, we measured the entropies of binding for 20 gp120-reactive antibodies. Here we show that recognition by receptor-binding-site antibodies induces conformational change. Correlation with neutralization potency and analysis of receptor-antibody thermodynamic cycles suggested a receptor-binding-site 'conformational masking' mechanism of neutralization escape. To understand how such an escape mechanism would be compatible with virus-receptor interactions, we tested a soluble dodecameric receptor molecule and found that it neutralized primary HIV-1 isolates with great potency, showing that simultaneous binding of viral envelope glycoproteins by multiple receptors creates sufficient avidity to compensate for such masking. Because this solution is available for cell-surface receptors but not for most antibodies, conformational masking enables HIV-1 to maintain receptor binding and simultaneously to resist neutralization.
Simian virus 40 (SV40) utilizes endocytosis through caveolae for infectious entry into host cells. We found that after binding to caveolae, virus particles induced transient breakdown of actin stress fibers. Actin was then recruited to virus-loaded caveolae as actin patches that served as sites for actin "tail" formation. Dynamin II was also transiently recruited. These events depended on the presence of cholesterol and on the activation of tyrosine kinases that phosphorylated proteins in caveolae. They were necessary for formation of caveolae-derived endocytic vesicles and for infection of the cell. Thus, caveolar endocytosis is ligand-triggered and involves extensive rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton.
Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is associated with alterations in receptor activity, cellular proliferation and modulation of the cell cycle. Inappropriate tyrosine phosphorylation can lead to unrestrained cell growth and oncogenesis. Enzymes important in tyrosine dephosphorylation have also been described. Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) consist of two families. There is a receptor-like family of PTPases with an extracellular domain, transmembrane-spanning region and typically two repeated phosphatase domains. Proteins of the non-receptor-like family have a single catalytic phosphatase domain, show a substrate specificity for Tyr phosphate and will not hydrolyse Ser or Thr phosphate. Here we report that the vaccinia virus genome contains an open reading frame which shares amino-acid sequence identity with the PTPases. The purified protein encoded by the vaccinia virus H1 open reading frame expressed in bacteria hydrolyses substrates containing phosphotyrosine and phosphoserine. Mutagenesis of an essential Cys in the vaccinia phosphatase abolishes catalytic activity directed towards both substrates, suggesting that hydrolysis proceeds by a common mechanism. Understanding the function of the H1-encoded protein will help to define the role of the phosphatase in viral replication and pathogenesis.
Major epidemic outbreaks of acute gastroenteritis result from infections with Norwalk or Norwalk-like viruses. Virus purified from stool specimens of volunteers experimentally infected with Norwalk virus was used to construct recombinant complementary DNA (cDNA) and derive clones representing most of the viral genome. The specificity of the clones was shown by their hybridization with post- (but not pre-) infection stool samples from volunteers infected with Norwalk virus and with purified Norwalk virus. A correlation was observed between the appearance of hybridization signals in stool samples and clinical symptoms of acute gastroenteritis in volunteers. Hybridization assays between overlapping clones, restriction enzyme analyses, and partial nucleotide sequence information of the clones indicated that Norwalk virus contains a single-stranded RNA genome of positive sense, with a polyadenylated tail at the 3' end and a size of at least 7.5 kilobases. A consensus amino acid sequence motif typical of viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerases was identified in one of the Norwalk virus clones. The availability of Norwalk-specific cDNA and the new sequence information of the viral genome should permit the development of sensitive diagnostic assays and studies of the molecular biology of the virus.
The major late adenovirus promoter is active early after infection, selectively producing messenger RNAs coding for polypeptides with molecular weights of 55,000, 52,000 and 14,000. This selective expression suggests that a differential splicing pattern occurs at the transition from early to late viral gene expression. Activation of the late promoter and splicing of the 55, 52K mRNAs does not require newly synthesized virus polypeptides.
Herpesvirus saimiri naturally infects squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus) without producing signs of disease; infection of other New World primates, however, results in a rapidly progressing, malignant, T-cell lymphoma. Results described in this report identify a region of the viral genome that is required for oncogenicity in owl monkeys (Aotus trivirgatus); this region is not required for replication of the virus. This is believed to be the first such genomic region identified in a herpesvirus system.
To enter cells, viruses must fuse their envelope with a host cell membrane. Fusion is mediated by specific, membrane-spanning fusion proteins, of which the influenza virus haemagglutinins (HA) are the best characterized. Several HAs have been sequenced, and the crystal structure of the major part of one HA is known. The conditions for fusion and some of the rearrangements in the HA that accompany fusion are well understood, but it remains unclear how HA causes bilayers to fuse. We have observed, in real time, unitary cell-fusion events caused by HA. Fibroblasts expressing HA were induced to fuse with red blood cells by a rapid drop in pH. Fusion was monitored by fluorescence microscopy, and by measuring the membrane conductance and capacitance of the fibroblast. The earliest event observed was the sudden opening of an aqueous pore connecting the cytoplasms of the fusing cells. Initially, the pore conductance often fluctuated between zero and approximately 600 pS, as if the pore were opening and closing repeatedly. Later, it increased over tens of seconds, as if the pore dilated. We suggest that, as in exocytosis, HA-mediated membrane fusion begins with the formation of a narrow pore. Based on the conductance, we estimate the initial diameter of the pore to be no more than twice that of a gap junction channel.
A recombinant adenovirus serotype 5 (rAd5) vector-based vaccine for HIV-1 has recently failed in a phase 2b efficacy study in humans. Consistent with these results, preclinical studies have demonstrated that rAd5 vectors expressing simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) Gag failed to reduce peak or setpoint viral loads after SIV challenge of rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) that lacked the protective MHC class I allele Mamu-A*01 (ref. 3). Here we show that an improved T-cell-based vaccine regimen using two serologically distinct adenovirus vectors afforded substantially improved protective efficacy in this challenge model. In particular, a heterologous rAd26 prime/rAd5 boost vaccine regimen expressing SIV Gag elicited cellular immune responses with augmented magnitude, breadth and polyfunctionality as compared with the homologous rAd5 regimen. After SIV(MAC251) challenge, monkeys vaccinated with the rAd26/rAd5 regimen showed a 1.4 log reduction of peak and a 2.4 log reduction of setpoint viral loads as well as decreased AIDS-related mortality as compared with control animals. These data demonstrate that durable partial immune control of a pathogenic SIV challenge for more than 500 days can be achieved by a T-cell-based vaccine in Mamu-A*01-negative rhesus monkeys in the absence of a homologous Env antigen. These findings have important implications for the development of next-generation T-cell-based vaccine candidates for HIV-1.
Simian virus 40 nucleoprotein complexes undergo an ionic strength-dependent structural transition. At moderate ionic strength they contain histone H1 as well as the nucleosomal histones and have a compact conformation with globular subunits 190 angstroms in diameter. At high ionic strength histone H1 is released, and the structure unfolds into chains with an average of 24 nucleosomes. The extended viral chromatin converts to the compact form by the addition of histone H1. Transcriptionally active simian virus 40 chromatin undergoes the same structural transitions. The higher order structure of viral chromatin may be analogous to the compact state of cellular chromatin fibers observed at physiological ionic strength.
Arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) have specific vector-vertebrate host cycles in nature. The molecular basis of restriction of virus replication to a very limited number of vector species is unknown, but the present study suggests that viral attachment proteins are important determinants of vector-virus interactions. The principal vector of La Crosse (LAC) virus is the mosquito Aedes triseriatus, and LAC virus efficiently infects the mosquito when ingested. However, a variant (V22) of LAC virus, which was selected by growing the virus in the presence of a monoclonal antibody, was markedly restricted in its ability to infect Ae. triseriatus when it was ingested. Only 15% of the mosquitoes that ingested V22 became infected and 5% of these developed disseminated infections. In contrast, 89% of the mosquitoes that ingested LAC became infected and 74% developed disseminated infections. When V22 was passed three times in mosquitoes by feeding, a revertant virus, V22M3, was obtained that infected 85% of Ae. triseriatus ingesting this virus. In addition, V22M3 regained the antigenic phenotype and fusion capability of the parent LAC virus. These results suggest that the specificity of LAC virus-vector interactions is markedly influenced by the efficiency of the fusion function of the G1 envelope glycoprotein operating at the midgut level in the arthropod vector.
Numerous oncogenes have been isolated from acutely transforming retroviruses. To date, the products of these viral oncogenes have been protein kinases, nuclear proteins, growth factors, or GTP-binding proteins. We have cloned the previously uncharacterized avian sarcoma virus CT10 and sequenced its genome. This virus encodes a protein, p47gag-crk, that has blocks of sequence similarity to the amino-terminal, non-catalytic region of the non-receptor class of tyrosine kinases. In addition, the structure of p47gag-crk has striking similarity to a 180-amino acid region of bovine brain phospholipase C. Biochemical data suggest that p47gag-crk activates one or several endogenous tyrosine kinases.
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules are the major receptors for viral peptides and serve as targets for specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) specifically decreased activity of an MHC class I gene promoter up to 12-fold. Repression was effected by the HIV-1 Tat protein derived from a spliced viral transcript (two-exon Tat). These studies define an activity for two-exon Tat distinct from that of one-exon Tat and suggest a mechanism whereby HIV-1-infected cells might be able to avoid immune surveillance, allowing the virus to persist in the infected host.
Natural killer (NK) cells express inhibitory receptors for major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigens, preventing attack against healthy cells. Mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV) encodes an MHC-like protein (m157) that binds to an inhibitory NK cell receptor in certain MCMV-susceptible mice. In MCMV-resistant mice, this viral protein engages a related activating receptor (Ly49H) and confers host protection. These activating and inhibitory receptors are highly homologous, suggesting the possibility that one evolved from the other in response to selective pressure imposed by the pathogen.
Polyoma middle-T antigen is required for tumorigenesis in animals and for viral transformation of a variety of cells in culture (reviewed in ref. 1). Middle-T associates with and thereby activates p60c-src, a cellular tyrosine kinase homologous to the oncogene product of Rous sarcoma virus. Activation of p60c-src by middle-T is accompanied both by dephosphorylation of tyrosine 527, a site which negatively regulates src kinase src kinase activity (reviewed in refs 4-6) and by autophosphorylation on tyrosine 416 (refs 7-10). Phosphoprotein p60c-src is subject to cell cycle-specific regulation. It is most active during mitosis and repressed in interphase. Here we report that mitotic p60c-src is dephosphorylated at tyrosine 527. We also show that in cells expressing middle-T, src kinase activity is high both in mitosis and during interphase. An oncogenic mutant src protein, p60c-src(527F), where tyrosine 527 is substituted by phenylalanine, is also highly active in all phases of the cell cycle.
MicroRNAs are small RNA molecules that regulate messenger RNA (mRNA) expression. MicroRNA 122 (miR-122) is specifically expressed and highly abundant in the human liver. We show that the sequestration of miR-122 in liver cells results in marked loss of autonomously replicating hepatitis C viral RNAs. A genetic interaction between miR-122 and the 5' noncoding region of the viral genome was revealed by mutational analyses of the predicted microRNA binding site and ectopic expression of miR-122 molecules containing compensatory mutations. Studies with replication-defective RNAs suggested that miR-122 did not detectably affect mRNA translation or RNA stability. Therefore, miR-122 is likely to facilitate replication of the viral RNA, suggesting that miR-122 may present a target for antiviral intervention.
The development of a vaccine to provide protective immunity to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), the virus causing AIDS, would be the most practical method to control its spread. Subunit vaccines consisting of virus envelope glycoproteins, produced by recombinant DNA technology, are effective in preventing viral infections. We have now used this approach in the development of a candidate AIDS vaccine. Chimpanzees were immunized with recombinant forms of the HIV-1 glycoproteins gp120 and gp160 produced in Chinese hamster ovary cells, and then challenged with HIV-1. The control and the two animals immunized with the gp160 variant became infected within 7 weeks of challenge. The two animals immunized with the gp120 variant have shown no signs of infection after more than 6 months. These studies demonstrate that recombinant gp120, formulated in an adjuvant approved for human use, can elicit protective immunity against a homologous strain of HIV-1.
Most, though not all, of the messenger RNAs of higher cells are composed of transcripts from two or more non-contiguous DNA segments that are 'spliced' together by mechanisms which are poorly understood. There has been recent speculation that small RNA molecules may play a part in the splicing reaction, acting as templates or adaptors to stabilize the appropriate conformation of a precursor RNA. Adenovirus-2 codes for two low molecular weight RNAs, the virus-associate (VA) RNAs I and II, major and minor species, respectively. These RNAs are about 160 nucleotides long and have both been sequenced. They originate from closely spaced genes which are transcribed by RNA polymerase III, but have not been definitively associated with any function. We have shown previously that a fraction of the VA RNA of infected cells is complexed with high molecular weight RNA in a denaturation-sensitive fashion. Results presented here show that the VA RNAs bind to unfractionated late virus mRNA and to a cloned copy of a single mRNA species, but not to corresponding cloned segments of viral genomic DNA. It is suggested that VA RNA may act as a template in the splicing reaction.
The quiescent nature of most peripheral T cells poses an effective limitation to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) replication and, in particular, to viral integration into the host chromatin. Two HIV proteins, Nef and Tat, increase T cell activity, but a requirement of integration for viral gene expression would preclude a role for these proteins in resting cells. Here, we report that HIV infection leads to selective transcription of the nef and tat genes before integration. This preintegration transcription in quiescent cells leads to increased T cell activation and viral replication.
A human cytomegalovirus gene array was used to identify a previously unidentified class of viral transcripts. These transcripts, termed virion RNAs, were packaged within infectious virions and were delivered to the host cell on infection. This mechanism of herpesvirus gene expression allows for viral genes to be expressed within an infected cell immediately after virus entry and in the absence of transcription from the viral genome.
NS3, an essential helicase for replication of hepatitis C virus, is a model enzyme for investigating helicase function. Using single-molecule fluorescence analysis, we showed that NS3 unwinds DNA in discrete steps of about three base pairs (bp). Dwell time analysis indicated that about three hidden steps are required before a 3-bp step is taken. Taking into account the available structural data, we propose a spring-loaded mechanism in which several steps of one nucleotide per adenosine triphosphate molecule accumulate tension on the protein-DNA complex, which is relieved periodically via a burst of 3-bp unwinding. NS3 appears to shelter the displaced strand during unwinding, and, upon encountering a barrier or after unwinding >18 bp, it snaps or slips backward rapidly and repeats unwinding many times in succession. Such repetitive unwinding behavior over a short stretch of duplex may help to keep secondary structures resolved during viral genome replication.
Functional impairment of T cells is characteristic of many chronic mouse and human viral infections. The inhibitory receptor programmed death 1 (PD-1; also known as PDCD1), a negative regulator of activated T cells, is markedly upregulated on the surface of exhausted virus-specific CD8 T cells in mice. Blockade of this pathway using antibodies against the PD ligand 1 (PD-L1, also known as CD274) restores CD8 T-cell function and reduces viral load. To investigate the role of PD-1 in a chronic human viral infection, we examined PD-1 expression on human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-specific CD8 T cells in 71 clade-C-infected people who were naive to anti-HIV treatments, using ten major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I tetramers specific for frequently targeted epitopes. Here we report that PD-1 is significantly upregulated on these cells, and expression correlates with impaired HIV-specific CD8 T-cell function as well as predictors of disease progression: positively with plasma viral load and inversely with CD4 T-cell count. PD-1 expression on CD4 T cells likewise showed a positive correlation with viral load and an inverse correlation with CD4 T-cell count, and blockade of the pathway augmented HIV-specific CD4 and CD8 T-cell function. These data indicate that the immunoregulatory PD-1/PD-L1 pathway is operative during a persistent viral infection in humans, and define a reversible defect in HIV-specific T-cell function. Moreover, this pathway of reversible T-cell impairment provides a potential target for enhancing the function of exhausted T cells in chronic HIV infection.
Patients with certain genetic disorders can be cured by bone marrow transplantation. However, as prospective donors do not exist for most patients with potentially curable genetic abnormalities, an alternative treatment for such patients involves the transfer of cloned genes into the patient's haematopoietic stem cells followed by re-infusion of the treated cells. Retroviral vectors provide an efficient means for transferring genes into mammalian cells and have been used to transfer genes into mouse haematopoietic cells. We have now produced amphotropic retroviral vectors containing either the bacterial gene for neomycin resistance or a mutant dihydrofolate reductase gene that confers resistance to methotrexate and have used these vectors to infect and confer drug resistance to human haematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro. Transfer could be demonstrated in the absence of helper virus by using an amphotropic retrovirus packaging cell line, PA12 (ref. 9). These studies are an important step towards the eventual application of retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to human gene therapy and for molecular approaches to the study of human haematopoiesis.
Four distinct viruses with double-stranded DNA are known to replicate in Chlorella-like algae symbiotic with hydras and paramecia. An attempt was made to infect a number of cultured Chlorella strains derived from invertebrate hosts with these viruses. One of the viruses, PBCV-1, replicated in two of the algal strains. Restriction endonuclease analysis of the viral DNA showed that the infectious progeny virus was identical to the input virus; thus, Koch's postulates were fulfilled. Viral infection of the two Chlorella strains has allowed the large-scale production of a eukaryotic algal virus and the development of a plaque assay for the virus.
Cellular proteins associated with immunodeficiency viruses were identified by determination of the amino acid sequence of the proteins and peptides present in sucrose density gradient-purified human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1, HIV-2, and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). beta 2 microglobulin (beta 2m) and the alpha and beta chains of human lymphocyte antigen (HLA) DR were present in virus preparations at one-fifth the concentration of Gag on a molar basis. Antisera to HLA DR, beta 2 m, as well as HLA class I precipitated intact viral particles, suggesting that these cellular proteins were physically associated with the surface of the virus. Antisera to class I, beta 2m, and HLA DR also inhibited infection of cultured cells by both HIV-1 and SIV. The specific, selective association of these cellular proteins in a physiologically relevant manner has major implications for our understanding of the infection process and the pathogenesis of immunodeficiency viruses and should be considered in the design of vaccines.
Evolution of receptor specificity by viruses has several implications for viral pathogenesis, host range, virus-mediated gene targeting, and viral adaptation after organ transplantation and xenotransplantation, as well as for the emergence of viral diseases. Recent evidence suggests that minimal changes in viral genomes may trigger a shift in receptor usage for virus entry, even into the same cell type. A capacity to exploit alternative entry pathways may reflect the ancient evolutionary origins of viruses and a possible role as agents of horizontal gene transfers among cells.
Inoculation of the cornea, lip, or footpad of mice with herpes simplex virus type 1 resulted in a latent infection of the local sensory ganglia. Inoculation of the vagina and cervix with herpes simplex virus type 2, as well as type 1, also induced a latent ganglionic infection. With the use of sciatic nerve section as a stimulus, a reproducible model of viral reactivation in vivo was established.
In the pathogenesis of AIDS it is not yet understood whether the small fraction of CD4+ T cells (approximately 1%) infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are randomly targeted or not. Here we present evidence that human CD4 T-cell lines expressing selected T-cell antigen receptor V beta gene products can all be infected in vitro with HIV-1, but give markedly different titres of HIV-1 virion production. For example, V beta 12 T-cell lines from several unrelated donors reproducibly yielded up to 100-fold more gag gene product (p24gag antigen) than V beta 6.7a lines. This is consistent with a superantigen effect, because the V beta selectivity was observed with several divergent HIV-1 isolates, was dependent on antigen-presenting cells and on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II but was not MHC class II-restricted. The in vivo significance of these findings is supported by the preferential stimulation of V beta 12+ T cells by freshly obtained irradiated antigen-presenting cells from some HIV-1-seropositive but not HIV-1-negative donors. Moreover, cells from patients positive for viral antigen (gp120) were enriched in the V beta 12 subpopulation. V beta 12+ T cells were not deleted in AIDS patients, however, raising the possibility that a variety of mechanisms contribute to T-cell depletion. Our results indicate that a superantigen targets a subpopulation of CD4+ cells for viral replication.
Cyclophilins are a family of proteins that bind the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A, possess peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity, and assist in the folding of proteins. Human cyclophilins A and B are host cell proteins that bind specifically to the HIV-1 Gag polyprotein p55gag in vitro. Here we report that viral particles formed by p55gag, in contrast to particles formed by the Gag polyproteins of other retroviruses, contain significant amounts of cyclophilin A. Sequences in the capsid domain of p55gag are both required and sufficient for the virion-association of cyclophilin A. The association of cyclophilin A with HIV-1 virions was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by cyclosporin A as well as by SDZ NIM811 ([Melle-4]cyclosporin), a non-immunosuppressive analogue of cyclosporin A. Drug-induced reductions in virion-associated cyclophilin A levels were accompanied by reductions in virion infectivity, indicating that the association is functionally relevant. Moreover, SDZ NIM811 inhibited the replication of HIV-1 but was inactive against SIVMAC, a primate immunodeficiency virus closely related to HIV-1, which does not incorporate cyclophilin A.
A type C retrovirus was isolated from a continuous cell line established from a spontaneous esophageal carcinoma of a rhesus monkey (Macaca mulata) by prolonged cocultivation with canine cells. A DNA transcript of the viral RNA hybridized to a high level and kinetic analysis indicated the presence of multiple copies of the viral genome in rhesus monkey DNA, showing that the virus is endogenous in this species. The rhesus monkey virus closely resembles, in several respects, an endogenous type C virus previously isolated from stumptailed macques (Macaca arctoides), aa species closely related to rhesus monkeys.
During replication, hepatitis delta virus (HDV) switches from production of small to large delta antigen. Both antigen isoforms have an HDV genome binding domain and are packaged into hepatitis B virus (HBV)-derived envelopes but differ at their carboxy termini. The large antigen was shown to contain a terminal CXXX box and undergo prenylation. The large, but not the small, antigen formed secreted particles when expressed singly with HBV surface antigen. Mutation of Cys211 in the CXXX box of the large antigen abolished both prenylation and particle formation, suggesting that this site is important for virion morphogenesis.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a major pathogen in immunosuppressed individuals, including patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The nucleoside analogue ganciclovir (9-(1,3-dihydroxy-2-propoxymethyl)-guanine) is one of the few drugs available to treat HCMV infections, but resistant virus is a growing problem in the clinic and there is a critical need for new drugs. The study of ganciclovir-resistant mutants has indicated that the selective action of ganciclovir depends largely on virus-controlled phosphorylation in HCMV-infected cells. The enzyme(s) responsible have not been identified. Here we report that the HCMV gene UL97, whose predicted product shares regions of homology with protein kinases, guanylyl cyclase and bacterial phosphotransferases, controls phosphorylation of ganciclovir in HCMV-infected cells. A four-amino-acid deletion of UL97 in a conserved region, which in cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase participates in substrate recognition, causes impaired ganciclovir phosphorylation. The implications of these results for antiviral drug development and drug resistance are discussed.
A number of DNA viruses carry apoptosis-inhibiting genes which enable the virus to escape from the host response. The adenovirus E1B 19K protein can inhibit apoptosis induced by E1A, tumour-necrosis factor-alpha, FAS antigen and nerve growth factor deprivation. The molecular basis of this inhibition remains poorly understood, but the fact that protection is seen in the absence of other viral proteins suggests that E1B 19K targets cellular proteins. We report here the identification of three cellular proteins that bind E1B 19K. One of these is a new member of the bcl-2 family, which we have called bak (for bcl-2 homologous antagonist/killer). This protein, which is expressed in a wide variety of cell types, binds to E1B 19K and to the Bcl-2 homologue Bcl-XL (ref. 17) in yeast. In addition, overexpression of bak in sympathetic neurons deprived of nerve growth factor accelerates apoptosis and blocks the protective effect of co-injected E1B 19K.
Transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is negatively regulated by the human factors DRB-sensitivity inducing factor (DSIF) and negative elongation factor (NELF). A 66-kilodalton subunit of NELF (NELF-A) shows limited sequence similarity to hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg), the viral protein required for replication of hepatitis delta virus (HDV). The host RNAPII has been implicated in HDV replication, but the detailed mechanism and the role of HDAg in this process are not understood. We show that HDAg binds RNAPII directly and stimulates transcription by displacing NELF and promoting RNAPII elongation. These results suggest that HDAg may regulate RNAPII elongation during both cellular messenger RNA synthesis and HDV RNA replication.
The expression of a previously unidentified gene product, encoded by the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome, has been achieved with a recombinant SV40 expression vector. Antibodies against synthetic peptides representing defined regions of this protein were used to screen cells infected with recombinant virus as well as tissues naturally infected with HBV. A 24,000-dalton protein (p24) was detected in cells infected with recombinant virus and a 28,000-dalton protein (p28) was detected in tissues infected with HBV. The peptides or recombinant-derived protein were used as antigens to screen sera from individuals infected with HBV. Specific antibodies were detected predominantly in sera from patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. The presence of p28 in tissues infected with HBV and the appearance of specific antibodies in infectious sera establish the existence of an additional marker for HBV infection.
Embryonic chick feather keratins are a family of homologous polypeptide chains. The mRNA coding for these has been obtained in a pure state and transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) using the reverse transcriptase from avian myeloblastosis virus. Studies on the kinetics of hybridisation and reannealing of cDNA indicate that there are 25-35 different keratin mRNA species in the embryonic chick feather, and a total of 100-240 keratin genes in the chick genome. Each keratin gene contains both a unique and a repetitive sequence. It is proposed that the repetitive sequences are the keratin coding sequences and that the unique sequences correspond to untranslated regions.
The envelope glycoproteins (Env) of human and simian immunodeficiency viruses (HIV and SIV, respectively) mediate virus binding to the cell surface receptor CD4 on target cells to initiate infection. Env is a heterodimer of a transmembrane glycoprotein (gp41) and a surface glycoprotein (gp120), and forms trimers on the surface of the viral membrane. Using cryo-electron tomography combined with three-dimensional image classification and averaging, we report the three-dimensional structures of trimeric Env displayed on native HIV-1 in the unliganded state, in complex with the broadly neutralizing antibody b12 and in a ternary complex with CD4 and the 17b antibody. By fitting the known crystal structures of the monomeric gp120 core in the b12- and CD4/17b-bound conformations into the density maps derived by electron tomography, we derive molecular models for the native HIV-1 gp120 trimer in unliganded and CD4-bound states. We demonstrate that CD4 binding results in a major reorganization of the Env trimer, causing an outward rotation and displacement of each gp120 monomer. This appears to be coupled with a rearrangement of the gp41 region along the central axis of the trimer, leading to closer contact between the viral and target cell membranes. Our findings elucidate the structure and conformational changes of trimeric HIV-1 gp120 relevant to antibody neutralization and attachment to target cells.
Most retroviruses require translational recoding of a viral messenger RNA stop codon to maintain a precise ratio of structural (Gag) and enzymatic (Pol) proteins during virus assembly. Pol is expressed exclusively as a Gag-Pol fusion either by ribosomal frameshifting or by read-through of the gag stop codon. Both of these mechanisms occur infrequently and only affect 5-10% of translating ribosomes, allowing the virus to maintain the critical Gag to Gag-Pol ratio. Although it is understood that the frequency of the recoding event is regulated by cis RNA motifs, no mechanistic explanation is currently available for how the critical protein ratio is maintained. Here we present the NMR structure of the murine leukaemia virus recoding signal and show that a protonation-dependent switch occurs to induce the active conformation. The equilibrium is such that at physiological pH the active, read-through permissive conformation is populated at approximately 6%: a level that correlates with in vivo protein quantities. The RNA functions by a highly sensitive, chemo-mechanical coupling tuned to ensure an optimal read-through frequency. Similar observations for a frameshifting signal indicate that this novel equilibrium-based mechanism may have a general role in translational recoding.
Bacteria and archaea acquire resistance to viruses and plasmids by integrating short fragments of foreign DNA into clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPRs). These repetitive loci maintain a genetic record of all prior encounters with foreign transgressors. CRISPRs are transcribed and the long primary transcript is processed into a library of short CRISPR-derived RNAs (crRNAs) that contain a unique sequence complementary to a foreign nucleic-acid challenger. In Escherichia coli, crRNAs are incorporated into a multisubunit surveillance complex called Cascade (CRISPR-associated complex for antiviral defence), which is required for protection against bacteriophages. Here we use cryo-electron microscopy to determine the subnanometre structures of Cascade before and after binding to a target sequence. These structures reveal a sea-horse-shaped architecture in which the crRNA is displayed along a helical arrangement of protein subunits that protect the crRNA from degradation while maintaining its availability for base pairing. Cascade engages invading nucleic acids through high-affinity base-pairing interactions near the 5' end of the crRNA. Base pairing extends along the crRNA, resulting in a series of short helical segments that trigger a concerted conformational change. This conformational rearrangement may serve as a signal that recruits a trans-acting nuclease (Cas3) for destruction of invading nucleic-acid sequences.
The human immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1) nuclear protein Tat is a potent activator of viral gene transcription. Activation by Tat requires a cis-acting element, the transactivation response (TAR) site, located immediately downstream of the transcription start site. Several observations suggest that TAR functions as the nascent RNA product of the HIV long-terminal-repeat promoter (for a review, see ref. 6). Indeed, Tat protein and several cellular proteins bind directly to nascent TAR RNA in vitro. The significance of these in vitro interactions remains to be established. Here we report that Tat can activate transcription when bound to nascent RNA through the RNA-binding domain of another HIV-1 protein, Rev. Rev is a sequence-specific RNA-binding protein, which interacts with the viral RNA element RRE (refs 11-15). A Tat-Rev fusion protein efficiently activates transcription from an HIV-1 promoter derivative, in which TAR has been replaced by the RRE. We conclude that activation of transcription by Tat can occur by direct binding to nascent RNA, and that the sole function of TAR may be to provide a Tat-binding site. Our results further suggest that cellular proteins that bind specifically to TAR RNA or TAR DNA may not be essential for Tat-responsiveness.
A novel, quasicircular scheme is proposed for the replication of parvovirus DNA. Daughter strands are initiated after the copying and rearrangement of a terminal palindromic sequence, a process termed 'hairpin transfer'. Such a process may be involved in the replication of other viruses and host cell DNA.
A novel coronavirus has been identified as the causative agent of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). The viral main proteinase (Mpro, also called 3CLpro), which controls the activities of the coronavirus replication complex, is an attractive target for therapy. We determined crystal structures for human coronavirus (strain 229E) Mpro and for an inhibitor complex of porcine coronavirus [transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV)] Mpro, and we constructed a homology model for SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) Mpro. The structures reveal a remarkable degree of conservation of the substrate-binding sites, which is further supported by recombinant SARS-CoV Mpro-mediated cleavage of a TGEV Mpro substrate. Molecular modeling suggests that available rhinovirus 3Cpro inhibitors may be modified to make them useful for treating SARS.
Associations between bacteria and their accessory elements (viruses, plasmids and transposons) range from antagonistic to mutualistic. A number of previous studies have demonstrated that plasmid carriage reduces bacterial fitness in the absence of selection for specific functions such as antibiotic resistance. Many studies have demonstrated increased fitness of evolving microbial populations in laboratory environments, but we are aware of only one study in which fitness gains were partitioned between a plasmid and its host. Here, we examine the evolution of an association between a plasmid and its bacterial host. Carriage of the non-conjugative plasmid pACYC184 initially reduced the fitness of Escherichia coli B in the absence of antibiotic. We then cultured plasmid-bearing bacteria for 500 generations in the presence of antibiotic. The fitness of each combination of host and plasmid, with and without the culture history, was determined by competing it against a baseline strain. The results indicate adaptation by the host genome, but no plasmid adaptation. We also competed the evolved host, transformed with the baseline plasmid, against its isogenic plasmid-free counterpart. The plasmid now increased the fitness of its host.
The reliable construction of evolutionary trees from nucleotide sequences often depends on randomization tests such as the bootstrap and PTP (cladistic permutation tail probability) tests. The genomes of bacteria, viruses, animals and plants, however, vary widely in their nucleotide frequencies. Where genomes have independently acquired similar G+C base compositions, signals in the data arise that cause methods of evolutionary tree reconstruction to estimate the wrong tree by grouping together sequences with similar G+C content. Under these conditions randomization tests can lead to both the rejection of the correct evolutionary hypothesis and acceptance of an incorrect hypothesis (such as with the contradictory inferences from the photosynthetic rbcS and rbcL sequences). We have proposed one approach to testing for G+C content problem. Here we present a formalization of this method, a frequency-dependent significance test, which has general application.
Cellular genes containing nucleotide sequences homologous to retroviral oncogenes (v-onc) have been identified in the genomes of a variety of species of both the vertebrate and invertebrate phyla. Expression of such genes, termed c-onc genes, has been shown to be tissue-specific in chickens and mice and to be modulated during murine development and differentiation of human haematopoietic cells. We report here that the level of the c-fos gene transcripts is 100-fold greater in human term fetal membranes than in other normal human tissues and cells. These levels of c-fos expression in human amniotic and chorionic cells are close to the level of v-fos expression that results in the induction of osteosarcomas in mice and transformation of fibroblasts in vitro. This observation suggests that the induction of neoplastic transformation by the FBJ murine osteosarcoma virus may require the expression of the fos gene product at high levels in an inappropriate cell type. In contrast, the human c-fms gene is expressed at high levels specifically in term placenta and trophoblastic cells. The tissue and cell type-specific patterns of c-fos and c-fms expression suggest that the physiological function of the c-fos and c-fms encoded proteins may be associated with those embryo-derived cells whose primary functions are protection and nourishment of the human fetus.
The adenovirus E1A gene product trans-activates a number of viral and cellular promoters. The mechanism for this transcriptional induction was investigated with an in vivo exoIII mapping technique to assay for proteins that interact with an E1A-inducible promoter. A protein bound to the early E2 promoter was detected in wild-type infected cells. In the absence of E1A induction, specific interactions at the promoter could not be detected, as indicated by the absence of an exoIII-protected fragment. However, if conditions were established that allowed transcription of the E2 gene in the absence of E1A, the same exoIII protection was observed as was found in the presence of E1A. These results suggest a model in which the efficient utilization of the E2 promoter is mediated by a cellular transcription factor. In the absence of E1A, the interaction can take place, but slowly and inefficiently in comparison with the interaction in the presence of E1A.
The passage of large-sized herpesviral capsids through the nuclear lamina and the inner nuclear membrane to leave the nucleus requires a dissolution of the nuclear lamina. Here, we report on the functions of M50/p35, a beta-herpesviral protein of murine cytomegalovirus. M50/p35 inserts into the inner nuclear membrane and is aggregated by a second viral protein, M53/p38, to form the capsid docking site. M50/p35 recruits the cellular protein kinase C for phosphorylation and dissolution of the nuclear lamina, suggesting that herpesviruses target a critical element of nuclear architecture.
Gene silencing mediated by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is a sequence-specific, highly conserved mechanism in eukaryotes. In plants, it serves as an antiviral defence mechanism. Animal cells also possess this machinery but its specific function is unclear. Here we demonstrate that dsRNA can effectively protect human cells against infection by a rapidly replicating and highly cytolytic RNA virus. Pre-treatment of human and mouse cells with double-stranded, short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to the poliovirus genome markedly reduces the titre of virus progeny and promotes clearance of the virus from most of the infected cells. The antiviral effect is sequence-specific and is not attributable to either classical antisense mechanisms or to interferon and the interferon response effectors protein kinase R (PKR) and RNaseL. Protection is the result of direct targeting of the viral genome by siRNA, as sequence analysis of escape virus (resistant to siRNAs) reveals one nucleotide substitution in the middle of the targeted sequence. Thus, siRNAs elicit specific intracellular antiviral resistance that may provide a therapeutic strategy against human viruses.
The sequence of the envelope glycoprotein gene of type II human T lymphotropic virus (HTLV) is presented. The predicted amino acid sequence is similar to that of the corresponding protein of HTLV type I, in that the proteins share the same amino acids at 336 of 488 residues, and 68 of the 152 differences are of a conservative nature. The overall structural similarity of these proteins provides an explanation for the antigenic cross-reactivity observed among diverse members of the HTLV retrovirus family by procedures that assay for the viral envelope glycoprotein, for example, membrane immunofluorescence.
Specific DNA sequences from human papillomavirus have recently been detected in carcinomas from epidermodysplasia verruciformis patients, and in vulvar and cervical carcinomas but the role of papilloma viruses in the aetiology of these tumours is unclear. Indeed, little is known about the mechanisms that convert benign papillomas into malignant tumours and it is not even possible in tumour induction. Here, we describe an animal system that permits an analysis of the interaction of papilloma virus genomes with carcinogenic agents at the molecular level. In our colony of Mastomys natalensis (a close relative of the rat family), we have found extrachromosomal papilloma virus genomes persisting in a variety of tissues such as skin, muscle, liver and colon. With the ageing of the animals, the average copy number of viral DNA in skin cells increases and virus-producing tumours begin to appear in Mastomys at about 1 year old. This process is drastically enhanced by chronic treatment with a tumour promoter and transcription of the viral genomes has been found to be correlated with tumour formation.
The carboxyl-terminal domain, residues 146 to 231, of the human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) capsid protein [CA(146-231)] is required for capsid dimerization and viral assembly. This domain contains a stretch of 20 residues, called the major homology region (MHR), which is conserved across retroviruses and is essential for viral assembly, maturation, and infectivity. The crystal structures of CA(146-231) and CA(151-231) reveal that the globular domain is composed of four helices and an extended amino-terminal strand. CA(146-231) dimerizes through parallel packing of helix 2 across a dyad. The MHR is distinct from the dimer interface and instead forms an intricate hydrogen-bonding network that interconnects strand 1 and helices 1 and 2. Alignment of the CA(146-231) dimer with the crystal structure of the capsid amino-terminal domain provides a model for the intact protein and extends models for assembly of the central conical core of HIV-1.
The red clover necrotic mosaic virus genome is composed of two single-stranded RNA components, RNA-1 and RNA-2. The viral capsid protein is translated from a subgenomic RNA (sgRNA) that is transcribed from genomic RNA-1. Here, a 34-nucleotide sequence in RNA-2 is shown to be required for transcription of sgRNA. Mutations that prevent base-pairing between the RNA-1 subgenomic promoter and the 34-nucleotide trans-activator prevent expression of a reporter gene. A model is proposed in which direct binding of RNA-2 to RNA-1 trans-activates sgRNA synthesis. This RNA-mediated regulation of transcription is unusual among RNA viruses, which typically rely on protein regulators.
The type 1 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) contains a conical capsid comprising approximately 1,500 CA protein subunits, which organizes the viral RNA genome for uncoating and replication in a new host cell. In vitro, CA spontaneously assembles into helical tubes and cones that resemble authentic viral capsids. Here we describe electron cryo-microscopy and image reconstructions of CA tubes from six different helical families. In spite of their polymorphism, all tubes are composed of hexameric rings of CA arranged with approximate local p6 lattice symmetry. Crystal structures of the two CA domains were 'docked' into the reconstructed density, which showed that the amino-terminal domains form the hexameric rings and the carboxy-terminal dimerization domains connect each ring to six neighbours. We propose a molecular model for the HIV-1 capsid that follows the principles of a fullerene cone, in which the body of the cone is composed of curved hexagonal arrays of CA rings and the ends are closed by inclusion of 12 pentagonal 'defects'.
Animal donors such as pigs could provide an alternative source of organs for transplantation. However, the promise of xenotransplantation is offset by the possible public health risk of a cross-species infection. All pigs contain several copies of porcine endogenous retroviruses (PERV), and at least three variants of PERV can infect human cell lines in vitro in co-culture, infectivity and pseudotyping experiments. Thus, if xenotransplantation of pig tissues results in PERV viral replication, there is a risk of spreading and adaptation of this retrovirus to the human host. C-type retroviruses related to PERV are associated with malignancies of haematopoietic lineage cells in their natural hosts. Here we show that pig pancreatic islets produce PERV and can infect human cells in culture. After transplantation into NOD/SCID (non-obese diabetic, severe combined immunodeficiency) mice, we detect ongoing viral expression and several tissue compartments become infected. This is the first evidence that PERV is transcriptionally active and infectious cross-species in vivo after transplantation of pig tissues. These results show that a concern for PERV infection risk associated with pig islet xenotransplantation in immunosuppressed human patients may be justified.
Fusions between the mouse mammary tumour virus long terminal repeat and a mouse dihydrofolate reductase cDNA have been constructed in a SV40 vector. When these plasmids are transferred into recipient cells, the production of dihydrofolate reductase is regulated by glucocorticoid hormones. These results define a hormonally responsive region of the viral genome.
Mobile group II intron RNAs insert directly into DNA target sites and are then reverse-transcribed into genomic DNA by the associated intron-encoded protein. Target site recognition involves modifiable base-pairing interactions between the intron RNA and a >14-nucleotide region of the DNA target site, as well as fixed interactions between the protein and flanking regions. Here, we developed a highly efficient Escherichia coli genetic assay to determine detailed target site recognition rules for the Lactococcus lactis group II intron Ll.LtrB and to select introns that insert into desired target sites. Using human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) proviral DNA and the human CCR5 gene as examples, we show that group II introns can be retargeted to insert efficiently into virtually any target DNA and that the retargeted introns retain activity in human cells. This work provides the practical basis for potential applications of targeted group II introns in genetic engineering, functional genomics, and gene therapy.
Simian immunodeficiency viruses have been isolated from four species of monkey, the 'captive' macaque and mangabey and the 'feral' African green monkey and mandrill. While none of these viruses is a replica of HIV-1, the macaque and mangabey viruses represent correct genetic models for HIV-2, possessing exactly the same complement of genes. Recently a lentivirus has been identified in two wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes troglodytes) in Gabon, west equatorial Africa, and isolated from one of them. This virus is referred to as SIVCPZ. Sera from these animals cross reacted with all the HIV-1 proteins including the envelope glycoproteins. Here, we describe the molecular cloning and sequencing of an infectious proviral clone of SIVCPZ. The overall genetic organization was the same as that of HIV-1, but phylogenetic analysis revealed that the sequence was more divergent than any HIV-1 sequence reported so far. The vpu gene product, found only in the type 1 viruses, was particularly different (64% divergent to HIV-1BRU) suggesting that the SIVCPZ represents a distinct subtype. These findings indicate that there is a larger pool of simian lentiviruses than previously suspected and revives debate as to the origins of HIV-1.
The M2 protein from influenza A virus is a pH-activated proton channel that mediates acidification of the interior of viral particles entrapped in endosomes. M2 is the target of the anti-influenza drugs amantadine and rimantadine; recently, resistance to these drugs in humans, birds and pigs has reached more than 90% (ref. 1). Here we describe the crystal structure of the transmembrane-spanning region of the homotetrameric protein in the presence and absence of the channel-blocking drug amantadine. pH-dependent structural changes occur near a set of conserved His and Trp residues that are involved in proton gating. The drug-binding site is lined by residues that are mutated in amantadine-resistant viruses. Binding of amantadine physically occludes the pore, and might also perturb the pK(a) of the critical His residue. The structure provides a starting point for solving the problem of resistance to M2-channel blockers.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a leading cause of cirrhosis and liver cancer worldwide. A better understanding of the viral life cycle, including the mechanisms of entry into host cells, is needed to identify novel therapeutic targets. Although HCV entry requires the CD81 co-receptor, and other host molecules have been implicated, at least one factor critical to this process remains unknown (reviewed in refs 1-3). Using an iterative expression cloning approach we identified claudin-1 (CLDN1), a tight junction component that is highly expressed in the liver, as essential for HCV entry. CLDN1 is required for HCV infection of human hepatoma cell lines and is the first factor to confer susceptibility to HCV when ectopically expressed in non-hepatic cells. Discrete residues within the first extracellular loop (EL1) of CLDN1, but not protein interaction motifs in intracellular domains, are critical for HCV entry. Moreover, antibodies directed against an epitope inserted in the CLDN1 EL1 block HCV infection. The kinetics of this inhibition indicate that CLDN1 acts late in the entry process, after virus binding and interaction with the HCV co-receptor CD81. With CLDN1 we have identified a novel key factor for HCV entry and a new target for antiviral drug development.
Analysis of the nucleotide sequence of the human retrovirus associated with AIDS in West Africa, HIV-2, shows that it is evolutionarily distant from the previously characterized HIV-1. We suggest that these viruses existed long before the current AIDS epidemics. Their biological properties are conserved in spite of limited sequence homology; this may help the determination of the structure-function relationships of the different viral elements.
Bacteria and Archaea have developed several defence strategies against foreign nucleic acids such as viral genomes and plasmids. Among them, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) loci together with cas (CRISPR-associated) genes form the CRISPR/Cas immune system, which involves partially palindromic repeats separated by short stretches of DNA called spacers, acquired from extrachromosomal elements. It was recently demonstrated that these variable loci can incorporate spacers from infecting bacteriophages and then provide immunity against subsequent bacteriophage infections in a sequence-specific manner. Here we show that the Streptococcus thermophilus CRISPR1/Cas system can also naturally acquire spacers from a self-replicating plasmid containing an antibiotic-resistance gene, leading to plasmid loss. Acquired spacers that match antibiotic-resistance genes provide a novel means to naturally select bacteria that cannot uptake and disseminate such genes. We also provide in vivo evidence that the CRISPR1/Cas system specifically cleaves plasmid and bacteriophage double-stranded DNA within the proto-spacer, at specific sites. Our data show that the CRISPR/Cas immune system is remarkably adapted to cleave invading DNA rapidly and has the potential for exploitation to generate safer microbial strains.
The structural basis for the distinction of viral RNA from abundant self RNA in the cytoplasm of virally infected cells is largely unknown. We demonstrated that the 5'-triphosphate end of RNA generated by viral polymerases is responsible for retinoic acid-inducible protein I (RIG-I)-mediated detection of RNA molecules. Detection of 5'-triphosphate RNA is abrogated by capping of the 5'-triphosphate end or by nucleoside modification of RNA, both occurring during posttranscriptional RNA processing in eukaryotes. Genomic RNA prepared from a negative-strand RNA virus and RNA prepared from virus-infected cells (but not from noninfected cells) triggered a potent interferon-alpha response in a phosphatase-sensitive manner. 5'-triphosphate RNA directly binds to RIG-I. Thus, uncapped 5'-triphosphate RNA (now termed 3pRNA) present in viruses known to be recognized by RIG-I, but absent in viruses known to be detected by MDA-5 such as the picornaviruses, serves as the molecular signature for the detection of viral infection by RIG-I.
The viral Tax protein, which is encoded by human T-cell leukaemia virus HTLV-I, activates nuclear translocation of the NF-kappa B/Rel transcription factors and relieves cytoplasmic sequestration of RelA and Rel by heterodimerization with NF-kappa B1/p1O5 (refs 1,2). Proteolytic maturation of this precursor protein is performed by the proteasome complex. Here we show that Tax binds specifically to two subunits of the 20S proteasome, HsN3 and HC9. This interaction is weakened with HsN3 and lost for HC9 when a mutant of Tax is substituted that is selectively defective for NF-kappa B activation. Immunoprecipitation shows that p1O5 binds weakly to HC9 and that this interaction is reinforced by Tax. No bridging function of Tax between p1O5 and HsN3 was observed. From these results, we propose that Tax accelerates the proteolytic maturation of P105 by favouring its anchorage to the proteasome.
High mutation frequency during reverse transcription has a principal role in the genetic variation of primate lentiviral populations. It is the main driving force for the generation of drug resistance and the escape from immune surveillance. G to A hypermutation is one of the characteristics of primate lentiviruses, as well as other retroviruses, during replication in vivo and in cell culture. The molecular mechanisms of this process, however, remain to be clarified. Here, we demonstrate that CEM15 (also known as apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G; APOBEC3G), an endogenous inhibitor of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) replication, is a cytidine deaminase and is able to induce G to A hypermutation in newly synthesized viral DNA. This effect can be counteracted by the HIV-1 virion infectivity factor (Vif). It seems that this viral DNA mutator is a viral defence mechanism in host cells that may induce either lethal hypermutation or instability of the incoming nascent viral reverse transcripts, which could account for the Vif-defective phenotype. Importantly, the accumulation of CEM15-mediated non-lethal hypermutation in the replicating viral genome could potently contribute to the genetic variation of primate lentiviral populations.
Studies of the genomic structure of human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III) and related viruses, implicated as the causal agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), have identified a sixth open reading frame in addition to the five previously known within the genome (gag, pol, sor, env and 3'orf). This gene, called tat-III, lies between the sor and env genes and is able to mediate activation, in a trans configuration, of the genes linked to HTLV-III long terminal repeat (LTR) sequences. We now present evidence that the product of tat-III is an absolute requirement for virus expression. We show that derivatives of a biologically competent molecular clone of HTLV-III, in which the tat-III gene is deleted or the normal splicing abrogated, failed to produce or expressed unusually low levels of virus, respectively, when transfected into T-cell cultures. The capacity of these tat-III-defective genomes was transiently restored by co-transfection of a plasmid clone containing a functional tat-III gene or by introducing the TAT-III protein itself. As HTLV-III and related viruses are the presumed causal agents of AIDS and associated conditions, the observation that tat-III is critical for HTLV-III replication has important clinical implications, and suggests that specific inhibition of the activity of tat-III could be a novel and effective therapeutic approach to the treatment of AIDS.
A number of proto-oncogenes have recently been localized to the chromosomal segments that are the breakpoints in the specific rearrangements noted in human malignant diseases. Moreover, rearranged forms of several proto-oncogenes have been identified in malignant cells; in several instances, the proto-oncogene has undergone an alteration as a result of a nonrandom chromosomal rearrangement. One proto-oncogene that has yet to be associated with human neoplastic disease is c-src, the cellular homologue of the transforming sequence of Rous sarcoma virus (RSV). By somatic cell hybridization, c-src has been mapped to chromosome 20, but its precise location was not determined. We have now mapped this gene by using in situ hybridization of the cloned human c-src probe to human mitotic chromosomes. We report here that the human genome contains two loci with strong homology to the coding regions of this oncogene, at 1p34-p36 and 20q12-q13. It is noteworthy that these chromosomal regions are frequently involved in the structural rearrangements observed in haematological malignant diseases.
The application of recombinant DNA technologies has allowed the detection of at least three families of moderately repetitive DNA segments in the human genome that are homologous to retroviruses previously isolated from mice and primates. One of these DNA segments has been shown by nucleotide sequence comparisons to be distantly related to both Moloney murine leukaemia virus (MoMuLV) and the endogenous baboon retrovirus and to have the sequence organization characteristic of an integrated retrovirus. Isolation of the homologous locus from chimpanzee DNA indicated that the integration event preceded the evolutionary divergence of chimpanzees and man. Here we have used a panel of rodent x human somatic cell hybrids to assign the chromosomal localization of this segment, called ERV1 (endogenous retrovirus-1), to human chromosome 18 (HSA 18).
Influenza A virus, being responsible for seasonal epidemics and reoccurring pandemics, represents a worldwide threat to public health. High mutation rates facilitate the generation of viral escape mutants, rendering vaccines and drugs directed against virus-encoded targets potentially ineffective. In contrast, targeting host cell determinants temporarily dispensable for the host but crucial for virus replication could prevent viral escape. Here we report the discovery of 287 human host cell genes influencing influenza A virus replication in a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen. Using an independent assay we confirmed 168 hits (59%) inhibiting either the endemic H1N1 (119 hits) or the current pandemic swine-origin (121 hits) influenza A virus strains, with an overlap of 60%. Notably, a subset of these common hits was also essential for replication of a highly pathogenic avian H5N1 strain. In-depth analyses of several factors provided insights into their infection stage relevance. Notably, SON DNA binding protein (SON) was found to be important for normal trafficking of influenza virions to late endosomes early in infection. We also show that a small molecule inhibitor of CDC-like kinase 1 (CLK1) reduces influenza virus replication by more than two orders of magnitude, an effect connected with impaired splicing of the viral M2 messenger RNA. Furthermore, influenza-virus-infected p27(-/-) (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B; Cdkn1b) mice accumulated significantly lower viral titres in the lung, providing in vivo evidence for the importance of this gene. Thus, our results highlight the potency of genome-wide RNAi screening for the dissection of virus-host interactions and the identification of drug targets for a broad range of influenza viruses.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) replication requires the expression of two classes of viral mRNA. The early class of HIV-1 transcripts is fully spliced and encodes viral regulatory gene products. The functional expression of one of these nuclear regulatory proteins, termed Rev (formerly Art or Trs), induces the cytoplasmic expression of the incompletely spliced, late class of HIV-1 mRNAs that encode the viral structural proteins, including Gag and Env. Here, we provide evidence that this induction reflects the export from the cell nucleus to the cytoplasm of a pool of unspliced viral RNA constitutively expressed in the nucleus. The hypothesis that Rev acts on RNA transport, rather than splicing, is further supported by the observation that the cytoplasmic expression of a non-spliceable HIV-1 env gene sequence is also subject to Rev regulation. Here we show that this Rev response requires a specific target sequence which coincides with a complex RNA secondary structure present in the env gene. The response to Rev is fully maintained when this sequence is relocated to other exonic or intronic locations within env but is ablated by inversion. These results indicate that the HIV-1 rev gene product induces HIV-1 structural gene expression by activating the sequence-specific nuclear export of incompletely spliced HIV-1 RNA species.
Dengue virus co-circulates as four serotypes, and sequential infections with more than one serotype are common. One hypothesis for the increased severity seen in secondary infections is antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) leading to increased replication in Fc receptor-bearing cells. In this study, we have generated a panel of human monoclonal antibodies to dengue virus. Antibodies to the structural precursor-membrane protein (prM) form a major component of the response. These antibodies are highly cross-reactive among the dengue virus serotypes and, even at high concentrations, do not neutralize infection but potently promote ADE. We propose that the partial cleavage of prM from the viral surface reduces the density of antigen available for viral neutralization, leaving dengue viruses susceptible to ADE by antibody to prM, a finding that has implications for future vaccine design.
The triplet-based genetic code requires that translating ribosomes maintain the reading frame of a messenger RNA faithfully to ensure correct protein synthesis. However, in programmed -1 ribosomal frameshifting, a specific subversion of frame maintenance takes place, wherein the ribosome is forced to shift one nucleotide backwards into an overlapping reading frame and to translate an entirely new sequence of amino acids. This process is indispensable in the replication of numerous viral pathogens, including HIV and the coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome, and is also exploited in the expression of several cellular genes. Frameshifting is promoted by an mRNA signal composed of two essential elements: a heptanucleotide 'slippery' sequence and an adjacent mRNA secondary structure, most often an mRNA pseudoknot. How these components operate together to manipulate the ribosome is unknown. Here we describe the observation of a ribosome-mRNA pseudoknot complex that is stalled in the process of -1 frameshifting. Cryoelectron microscopic imaging of purified mammalian 80S ribosomes from rabbit reticulocytes paused at a coronavirus pseudoknot reveals an intermediate of the frameshifting process. From this it can be seen how the pseudoknot interacts with the ribosome to block the mRNA entrance channel, compromising the translocation process and leading to a spring-like deformation of the P-site transfer RNA. In addition, we identify movements of the likely eukaryotic ribosomal helicase and confirm a direct interaction between the translocase eEF2 and the P-site tRNA. Together, the structural changes provide a mechanical explanation of how the pseudoknot manipulates the ribosome into a different reading frame.
Natural killer (NK) cells provide a central defense against viral infection by using inhibitory and activation receptors for major histocompatibility complex class I molecules as a means of controlling their activity. We show that genes encoding the inhibitory NK cell receptor KIR2DL3 and its human leukocyte antigen C group 1 (HLA-C1) ligand directly influence resolution of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. This effect was observed in Caucasians and African Americans with expected low infectious doses of HCV but not in those with high-dose exposure, in whom the innate immune response is likely overwhelmed. The data strongly suggest that inhibitory NK cell interactions are important in determining antiviral immunity and that diminished inhibitory responses confer protection against HCV.
A new mathematical model was used to analyze a detailed set of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) viral load data collected from five infected individuals after the administration of a potent inhibitor of HIV-1 protease. Productively infected cells were estimated to have, on average, a life-span of 2.2 days (half-life t 1/2 = 1.6 days), and plasma virions were estimated to have a mean life-span of 0.3 days (t 1/2 = 0.24 days). The estimated average total HIV-1 production was 10.3 x 10(9) virions per day, which is substantially greater than previous minimum estimates. The results also suggest that the minimum duration of the HIV-1 life cycle in vivo is 1.2 days on average, and that the average HIV-1 generation time--defined as the time from release of a virion until it infects another cell and causes the release of a new generation of viral particles--is 2.6 days. These findings on viral dynamics provide not only a kinetic picture of HIV-1 pathogenesis, but also theoretical principles to guide the development of treatment strategies.
In the search for compounds active against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), we have found that members of a novel series of tetrahydro-imidazo[4,5,1-jk][1,4]-benzodiazepine-2(1H)-one and -thione (TIBO) derivatives inhibit the replication of HIV-1, the main aetiological agent of AIDS, but not of HIV-2, or of any other DNA or RNA viruses. In five cell systems, HIV-1 is inhibited by TIBO derivatives in nanomolar amounts, which are 10(4)-10(5) times lower than the cytotoxic concentration. The unprecedented specificity of these compounds may be due to an interaction with a reverse transcriptase-associated process. By contrast, AZT (3'-azido-2',3'-dideoxythymidine), which is used for the treatment of AIDS, and DDC (2',3'-dideoxycytidine) and DDI (2',3'-dideoxyinosine), whose clinical application is being assessed, inhibit both HIV-1 and HIV-2 at concentrations that, depending on the cell systems, are 2 to 4 orders of magnitude below their cytotoxic concentration. TIBO-derivatives are new chemicals unrelated to any other antiviral agents. We believe that they are the most specific and potent inhibitors of HIV-1 replication studied so far.
Permissiveness of the host cell to productive infection by oncoretroviruses is cell-cycle dependent, and nuclear localization of viral nucleoprotein preintegration complexes will occur only after cells have passed through mitosis. In contrast, establishment of an integrated provirus after infection by the lentivirus HIV-1 is independent of host cell proliferation. The ability of HIV-1 to replicate in non-dividing cells is partly accounted for by the karyophilic properties of the viral preintegration complex which, after virus infection, is actively transported to the host cell nucleus. Here we report that the gag matrix protein of HIV-1 contains a nuclear localization sequence which, when conjugated to a heterologous protein, directs its nuclear import. In addition, HIV-1 mutants containing amino-acid substitutions in this nuclear localization signal integrate and replicate within dividing but not growth-arrested cells, and thus display a phenotype more representative of an oncoretrovirus.
Recent reports of mild to severe influenza-like illness in humans caused by a novel swine-origin 2009 A(H1N1) influenza virus underscore the need to better understand the pathogenesis and transmission of these viruses in mammals. In this study, selected 2009 A(H1N1) influenza isolates were assessed for their ability to cause disease in mice and ferrets and compared with a contemporary seasonal H1N1 virus for their ability to transmit to naive ferrets through respiratory droplets. In contrast to seasonal influenza H1N1 virus, 2009 A(H1N1) influenza viruses caused increased morbidity, replicated to higher titers in lung tissue, and were recovered from the intestinal tract of intranasally inoculated ferrets. The 2009 A(H1N1) influenza viruses exhibited less efficient respiratory droplet transmission in ferrets in comparison with the highly transmissible phenotype of a seasonal H1N1 virus. Transmission of the 2009 A(H1N1) influenza viruses was further corroborated by characterizing the binding specificity of the viral hemagglutinin to the sialylated glycan receptors (in the human host) by use of dose-dependent direct receptor-binding and human lung tissue-binding assays.
Human DNA contains multiple copies of a novel class of endogenous retroviral genomes. Analysis of a human recombinant DNA clone (HLM-2) containing one such proviral genome revealed that it is a mosaic of retroviral-related sequences with the organization and length of known endogenous retroviral genomes. The HLM-2 long terminal repeat hybridized with the long terminal repeat of the squirrel monkey virus, a type D retrovirus. The HLM-2 gag and pol genes share extensive nucleotide sequence homology with those of the M432 retrovirus (a type A-related retrovirus), mouse mammary tumor virus (a type B retrovirus), and the avian Rous sarcoma virus (a type C retrovirus). Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed regions in the HLM-2 pol gene that were as much as 70 percent identical to the mouse mammary tumor virus pol gene. A portion of the putative HLM-2 env gene hybridized with the corresponding region of the M432 viral genome.
Prostaglandins of the A series strongly inhibit the production of Sendai virus in African green monkey kidney cells and are able to prevent the establishment of persistent infection ("carrier" state). This action is specific for prostaglandin A and is not due to alteration in the host cell metabolism or in the virus infectivity. The possibility that this effect is mediated by interferon is discussed.
Cypoviruses and baculoviruses are notoriously difficult to eradicate because the virus particles are embedded in micrometre-sized protein crystals called polyhedra. The remarkable stability of polyhedra means that, like bacterial spores, these insect viruses remain infectious for years in soil. The environmental persistence of polyhedra is the cause of significant losses in silkworm cocoon harvests but has also been exploited against pests in biological alternatives to chemical insecticides. Although polyhedra have been extensively characterized since the early 1900s, their atomic organization remains elusive. Here we describe the 2 A crystal structure of both recombinant and infectious silkworm cypovirus polyhedra determined using crystals 5-12 micrometres in diameter purified from insect cells. These are the smallest crystals yet used for de novo X-ray protein structure determination. We found that polyhedra are made of trimers of the viral polyhedrin protein and contain nucleotides. Although the shape of these building blocks is reminiscent of some capsid trimers, polyhedrin has a new fold and has evolved to assemble in vivo into three-dimensional cubic crystals rather than icosahedral shells. The polyhedrin trimers are extensively cross-linked in polyhedra by non-covalent interactions and pack with an exquisite molecular complementarity similar to that of antigen-antibody complexes. The resulting ultrastable and sealed crystals shield the virus particles from environmental damage. The structure suggests that polyhedra can serve as the basis for the development of robust and versatile nanoparticles for biotechnological applications such as microarrays and biopesticides.
Herpesvirus saimiri (HVS) is a T-lymphotropic gammaherpesvirus which establishes asymptomatic infections in its natural host the squirrel monkey (Saimiri sciureus), but which causes fatal lymphoproliferative diseases in other New World primates. Sequencing studies show HVS is closely related to the human B-lymphotropic gammaherpesvirus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). However, despite the general colinearity between the genomes of HVS and EBV, HVS contains genes not found in EBV or in the genomes of any of the other sequenced herpesviruses. We have identified two genes, occurring in a region of divergence between HVS and EBV, that have cellular homologues. One of these, ECRF3, is homologous to the genes encoding the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and cellular G protein-coupled receptor family of proteins. The other HVS gene, ECLF2, is homologous to the genes encoding cellular cyclins and to our knowledge is the first reported example of a viral cyclin. The presence of G protein-coupled receptor and cyclin homologues in HVS suggests that these genes may be important in the regulation of viral and cellular processes during productive and/or latent infection of host cells, and in particular may be of relevance in the transformation and rapid proliferation of T cells during HVS infections of hosts susceptible to HVS-induced lymphoproliferative diseases.
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), or human herpesvirus 8, has been implicated in the development of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) and several B-cell lymphoproliferative diseases. Most cells in lesions derived from these malignancies are latently infected, and different viral gene products have been identified in association with lytic or latent infection by KSHV. The latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA), encoded by open reading frame 73 of the KSHV genome, is a highly immunogenic protein that is expressed predominantly during viral latency, in most KS spindle cells and in cell lines established from body-cavity-based lymphomas. Antibodies to LANA can be detected in a high percentage of HIV-infected individuals who subsequently develop KS, although its role in disease pathogenesis is not completely understood. p53 is a potent transcriptional regulator of cell growth whose induction leads either to cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis. Loss of p53 function correlates with cell transformation and oncogenesis, and several viral oncoproteins interact with p53 and modulate its biological activity. Here we show that LANA interacts with the tumour suppressor protein p53 and represses its transcriptional activity. This viral gene product further inhibits the ability of p53 to induce cell death. We propose that LANA contributes to viral persistence and oncogenesis in KS through its ability to promote cell survival by altering p53 function.
After rapid multiple extractions of mouse plasma virus with ether, the aqueous solution contained viral nucleoids that were infectious when inoculated intracranially into newborn BALB/c mice. The infectivity associated with the ether extract was not neutralized by the specific antibody prepared against the whole virus. No intact virus has been seen in these preparations. Treatment with ether completely removed the virus envelope from the particle and produced an apparently homogeneous preparation of viral nucleoids. After the extractions with ether, leukemogenic activity was inactivated by exposure to ribonuclease. The leukemogenic activity of the many-passaged Rauscher virus that has been propagated in tissue culture and that has low infectivity was also retained, and, in two experiments in which material was inoculated intracranially into mice, this activity appeared to have been enhanced by multiple extractions with ether.
Mov13 mice carry a single Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV) proviral copy in the first intron of the alpha 1(I) collagen gene. Virus insertion interferes with the synthesis of stable alpha 1(I) collagen messenger RNA and causes a recessive lethal mutation. The virus insertion has induced changes of the methylation pattern as well as the chromatin conformation in the mutated gene. Specifically, a DNase-hypersensitive site which is associated with active transcription of the wild-type collagen gene is not present in the mutant allele. The block of collagen expression could be caused by virus-induced instability of collagen mRNA or by impaired initiation of transcription. To distinguish between these possibilities, we have compared the activity of the alpha 1(I) collagen gene promoter in cell lines derived from wild-type and Mov13 embryos by nuclear run-on transcription experiments and S1 mapping of nuclear RNA. We show here that initiation of transcription of the mutant gene is reduced 20-100-fold. This indicates that the virus-induced change of chromatin structure in the promoter region of the mutant gene prevents RNA polymerase from binding to its DNA template. Our results are consistent with the notion that the promoter-associated DNase-hypersensitive site is a prerequisite for rather than a consequence of gene activity.
In eukaryotic cells, secretory proteins and glycoproteins migrate from the rough endoplasmic reticulum, their site of synthesis, through Golgi vesicles before being released from the cell. Cellular and viral integral plasma membrane glycoproteins are co-translationally inserted into the rough endoplasmic reticulum membrane and follow a similar pathway to the cell surface. Previous studies using endoglycosidase H (Endo H) suggested that in rat hepatoma cells the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) G protein, albumin and transferrin migrate from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus at different rates. Here we show directly that in human hepatoma HepG2 cells, five secreted proteins mature from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi vesicles at characteristic rates which differ at least threefold. The results are incompatible with bulk-phase movement of the luminal contents of the endoplasmic reticulum, and suggest that there is a membrane-bound receptor that selectively mediates the transport of secretory proteins from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi.
Retroviruses can capture cellular sequences and express them as oncogenes. Capture has been proposed to be a consequence of the inefficiency of polyadenylation of the viral genome that allows the packaging of cellular sequences flanking the integrated provirus in virions; after transfer into virions, these sequences could be incorporated into the viral genome by illegitimate recombination during reverse transcription. As a test for this hypothesis, a tissue culture system was developed that mimics the transduction process and allows the analysis and quantitation of capture events in a single step. In this model, transduction of sequences adjacent to a provirus depends on the formation of readthrough transcripts and their transmission in virions and leads to various recombinant structures whose formation is independent of sequence similarity at the crossover site. Thus, all events in the transduction process can be attributed to the action of reverse transcriptase on readthrough transcripts without involving deletions of cellular DNA.
Genome-wide demethylation has been suggested to be a step in carcinogenesis. Evidence for this notion comes from the frequently observed global DNA hypomethylation in tumour cells, and from a recent study suggesting that defects in DNA methylation might contribute to the genomic instability of some colorectal tumour cell lines. DNA hypomethylation has also been associated with abnormal chromosomal structures, as observed in cells from patients with ICF (Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability and Facial abnormalities) syndrome and in cells treated with the demethylating agent 5-azadeoxycytidine. Here we report that murine embryonic stem cells nullizygous for the major DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt1) gene exhibited significantly elevated mutation rates at both the endogenous hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (Hprt) gene and an integrated viral thymidine kinase (tk) transgene. Gene deletions were the predominant mutations at both loci. The major cause of the observed tk deletions was either mitotic recombination or chromosomal loss accompanied by duplication of the remaining chromosome. Our results imply an important role for mammalian DNA methylation in maintaining genome stability.
Circulating interferon was detectable in mouse serum within 1 hour after the intravenous injection of various types of virus and it reached maximum levels in about 4 hours. Rapidly produced interferon may play a role in the pathogenesis of viral infection and in viral interference.
The ASCE (additional strand, conserved E) superfamily of proteins consists of structurally similar ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities involving metabolism and transport of proteins and nucleic acids in all forms of life. A subset of these enzymes consists of multimeric ringed pumps responsible for DNA transport in processes including genome packaging in adenoviruses, herpesviruses, poxviruses and tailed bacteriophages. Although their mechanism of mechanochemical conversion is beginning to be understood, little is known about how these motors engage their nucleic acid substrates. Questions remain as to whether the motors contact a single DNA element, such as a phosphate or a base, or whether contacts are distributed over several parts of the DNA. Furthermore, the role of these contacts in the mechanochemical cycle is unknown. Here we use the genome packaging motor of the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage varphi29 (ref. 4) to address these questions. The full mechanochemical cycle of the motor, in which the ATPase is a pentameric-ring of gene product 16 (gp16), involves two phases-an ATP-loading dwell followed by a translocation burst of four 2.5-base-pair (bp) steps triggered by hydrolysis product release. By challenging the motor with a variety of modified DNA substrates, we show that during the dwell phase important contacts are made with adjacent phosphates every 10-bp on the 5'-3' strand in the direction of packaging. As well as providing stable, long-lived contacts, these phosphate interactions also regulate the chemical cycle. In contrast, during the burst phase, we find that DNA translocation is driven against large forces by extensive contacts, some of which are not specific to the chemical moieties of DNA. Such promiscuous, nonspecific contacts may reflect common translocase-substrate interactions for both the nucleic acid and protein translocases of the ASCE superfamily.
Embryonic development entails a well defined temporal and spatial programme of gene expression, which may be influenced by active chromosomal domains. These chromosomal domains can be detected using transgenes which integrate randomly throughout the genome, as their expression can be affected by chromosomal position. Position effects are probably exerted most strongly on transgenes that do not contain strong promoters, enhancers or other modulating sequences. Here we have systematically explored position effects using a transgene with the weak herpes-simplex-virus thymidine-kinase promoter, linked to the readily visualized lacZ indicator gene (HSV-TK-lacZ). Each transgenic fetus with detectable expression displayed a unique lacZ staining pattern. Thus expression of this construct is apparently dictated entirely by its chromosomal position, without any construct specificity. Furthermore the transgene is faithfully transmitted to subsequent generations, allowing for systematic mapping of changes in expression during development and in adult life. These results demonstrate that transgenes can indeed be powerful tools to probe the genome for active chromosomal regions, with the potential for identifying endogenous genes involved in organogenesis and pattern formation.
Experiments to determine the mechanism of transformation of herpes simplex virus (HSV) have identified fragments of viral DNA which are able to initiate transformation. No set of viral genes seems to be consistently retained or expressed in the transformed cells or in human cervical tumours, suggesting that viral DNA is not needed to maintain the transformed phenotype. In fact there is no conclusive evidence that initiation of neoplasia is mediated by a viral protein. Here we revisit the 'hit-and-run' hypothesis and its implications for HSV-induced tumorigenicity.
Distinguishing self from non-self is a fundamental biological challenge. Many pathogens exploit the challenge of self discrimination by employing mimicry to subvert key cellular processes including the cell cycle, apoptosis and cytoskeletal dynamics. Other mimics interfere with immunity. Poxviruses encode K3L, a mimic of eIF2alpha, which is the substrate of protein kinase R (PKR), an important component of innate immunity in vertebrates. The PKR-K3L interaction exemplifies the conundrum imposed by viral mimicry. To be effective, PKR must recognize a conserved substrate (eIF2alpha) while avoiding rapidly evolving substrate mimics such as K3L. Using the PKR-K3L system and a combination of phylogenetic and functional analyses, we uncover evolutionary strategies by which host proteins can overcome mimicry. We find that PKR has evolved under intense episodes of positive selection in primates. The ability of PKR to evade viral mimics is partly due to positive selection at sites most intimately involved in eIF2alpha recognition. We also find that adaptive changes on multiple surfaces of PKR produce combinations of substitutions that increase the odds of defeating mimicry. Thus, although it can seem that pathogens gain insurmountable advantages by mimicking cellular components, host factors such as PKR can compete in molecular 'arms races' with mimics because of evolutionary flexibility at protein interaction interfaces challenged by mimicry.
Screening investigations in antiviral action of plant extracts have revealed that a component of Glycyrrhiza glabra roots, found to be glycyrrhizie acid, is active against viruses. We report here that this drug inhibits growth and cytopathology of several unrelated DNA and RNA viruses, while not affecting cell activity and ability to replicate. In addition, glycyrrhizic acid inactivates herpes simplex virus particles irreversibly.
Although specific viral genes are known which are sufficient to transform certain types of cells, viral transformation has been shown to be accompanied by a change in the level of expression of cellular genes. Assuming that this latter class of genes is involved in some way in the establishment of the transformed state, we and others have sought to characterize them. To this end, we constructed a complementary DNA library from a simian virus 40 (SV40)-transformed mouse cell line and screened this library for induced genes. Here we focus on the characterization of a specific cDNA clone called 10 lambda 5. We show that the clone 10 lambda 5 contains a B2 repeat, and that the levels of the small heterogeneously sized B2 cytoplasmic RNAs homologous to 10 lambda 5 are enhanced in transformed cells. Our studies show that these RNAs are a specific class of polymerase III transcripts containing a highly conserved 5' end. SV40 transformation results, therefore, in the activation of specific polymerase III transcripts as well as specific polymerase II transcripts.
Small spherical viruses are among the simplest replicating systems in biology, yet the factors affecting their assembly, stability and disassembly are still poorly understood. A molecular switch is required for the assembly of icosahedral virus particles containing more than 60 identical subunits because strict symmetry cannot be maintained in subunit packing. All previously reported viruses with this type of structure use a portion of the capsid protein to regulate interactions between chemically equivalent but structurally distinct interfaces. We have investigated the T = 3 quasiequivalent nodaviruses, which are small non-enveloped viruses with a single-stranded RNA genome that infect insects, mice and fish. They undergo a well-characterized series of steps in assembly and maturation, which in some respects are similar to the picornaviruses, despite their different capsid architecture. Here we report the X-ray structure of Flock House virus at 3.0 A resolution, which reveals an ordered RNA duplex of 20 nucleotides and a protein segment that control the subunit interactions in this animal virus. The RNA interacts with a helical protein domain of the subunit that lies inside the capsid shell. One of the helices that binds the RNA is part of a 44-amino-acid polypeptide which is autocatalytically cleaved from the initial subunit translation product after virion assembly. The structure indicates that RNA associated with the cleaved polypeptide may be important in the infection process.
The role of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) in the development of genital neoplasias has been well documented. The genomes of two HPV types, HPV16 and HPV18, have been found to be associated with about 70% of invasive carcinomas of the uterine cervix. As, under non-stringent hybridization conditions, HPV DNA sequences have been detected in about 90% of cervical carcinomas, it seems likely that additional HPV types are associated with these tumours. Here we report the molecular cloning and characterization of a novel HPV type, tentatively named HPV33, whose sequences have been detected in 4-8% of biopsies of genital intra-epithelial neoplasias and cervical invasive carcinomas, usually as free monomeric or oligomeric molecules. However, in one specimen of vulvar Bowen's disease, HPV33 DNA sequences were integrated in the host-cell genome. Thus, HPV33 probably represents an additional type of potentially oncogenic genital HPV.
Poliovirus RNA and proteins are synthesized in association with distinct membranous structures that were separated by means of Isopycnic centrifugation of cytoplasmic extracts in discontinuous sucrose-density gradients. Viral RNA is replicated in a structure that contains rapidly labeled replicative intermediate RNA and viral RNA polymerase associated with the smooth membrane fraction. In sucrose gradients this viral RNA replication complex is distributed at densities in the range of 1.12 to 1.18 grams per cubic centimeter. Viral proteins are synthesized on polyribosomes bound to membranes and sediment with polyribosomes at densities of less than 1.25 grams per cubic centimeter.
Embryonic stem cells isolated directly from mouse embryos can be cultured for long periods in vitro and subsequently repopulate the germ line in chimaeric mice. During the culture period these embryonic cells are accessible for experimental genetic manipulation. Here we report the use of retroviral vectors to introduce exogenous DNA sequences into a stem-cell line and show that these modified cells contribute extensively to the somatic and germ-cell lineages in chimaeric mice. Compared with current methods for manipulation of the mouse genome, this approach has the advantage that powerful somatic-cell genetic techniques can be used to modify and to select cells with germ-line potential, allowing the derivation of transgenic strains with pre-determined genetic changes. We have by this means inserted many proviral vector sequences that provide new chromosomal molecular markers for linkage studies in the mouse and that also may cause insertional mutations.
A novel human retrovirus (HTLV-II) was previously found associated with a T-cell variant of hairy-cell leukaemia. Molecular cloning demonstrates that the complete provirus genome is 8.8 kilobase pairs in size and is transmissible to uninfected cells. Two types of infectious deleted provirus were also characterized. The sequences of HTLV-II are distinct from those of HTLV-I.
Positive-strand RNA viruses such as poliovirus replicate their genomes on intracellular membranes of their eukaryotic hosts. Electron microscopy has revealed that purified poliovirus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase forms planar and tubular oligomeric arrays. The structural integrity of these arrays correlates with cooperative RNA binding and RNA elongation and is sensitive to mutations that disrupt intermolecular contacts predicted by the polymerase structure. Membranous vesicles isolated from poliovirus-infected cells contain structures consistent with the presence of two-dimensional polymerase arrays on their surfaces during infection. Therefore, host cytoplasmic membranes may function as physical foundations for two-dimensional polymerase arrays, conferring the advantages of surface catalysis to viral RNA replication.
Feline leukaemia viruses (FeLV) are exogenous retroviruses that can be detected in most cats with leukaemia, aplastic anaemia, myeloproliferative diseases and fatal immunosuppression. FeLV isolates have been divided into three subgroups, based on the viral envelope-determined properties of interference and host range in vitro. FeLV-A is present in all natural isolates and is generally minimally pathogenic. FeLV-B is found with FeLV-A in isolates from approximately 40% of natural infections and in a higher percentage of cats with lymphoma. Following the fundamental observations of genetic reassortment of avian retroviruses with endogenous viral genes and the origination of lymphomagenic viruses during the ontogeny of AKR mice, we show here that transfection of feline cells with FeLV-A DNA results in its recombination with endogenous FeLV-related sequences to produce viruses with the structural and host range properties of FeLV-B. Thus in vitro propagation of a retrovirus may result in the generation of variants with very different properties.
Influenza A virus is a major human and animal pathogen with the potential to cause catastrophic loss of life. The virus reproduces rapidly, mutates frequently and occasionally crosses species barriers. The recent emergence in Asia of avian influenza related to highly pathogenic forms of the human virus has highlighted the urgent need for new effective treatments. Here we demonstrate the importance to viral replication of a subunit interface in the viral RNA polymerase, thereby providing a new set of potential drug binding sites entirely independent of surface antigen type. No current medication targets this heterotrimeric polymerase complex. All three subunits, PB1, PB2 and PA, are required for both transcription and replication. PB1 carries the polymerase active site, PB2 includes the capped-RNA recognition domain, and PA is involved in assembly of the functional complex, but so far very little structural information has been reported for any of them. We describe the crystal structure of a large fragment of one subunit (PA) of influenza A RNA polymerase bound to a fragment of another subunit (PB1). The carboxy-terminal domain of PA forms a novel fold, and forms a deep, highly hydrophobic groove into which the amino-terminal residues of PB1 can fit by forming a 3(10) helix.
The complete DNA sequence of the A2 strain of polyoma virus has been determined. It consists of 5,292 base pairs. The sequence is analysed in terms of its coding potential and sites of possible functional significance or structural interest. The polyoma virus genome is compared with those of related tumour viruses, simian virus 40 and BK virus.
The feline oncornavirus-associated cell membrane antigen (FOCMA) is a target for naturally occurring immunity that protects the cat against development of fibrosarcoma and leukemia. Feline sarcoma virus-transformed "nonproducer" mink cells express high levels of FOCMA, but not the major viral structural proteins. Transformation of the same cells by murine sarcoma virus, or infection with feline leukemia virus, which is nontransforming for epithelial or fibroblastic cells, did not induce FOCMA. Thus, FOCMA expression in mind lung cells is specifically associated with transformation by feline sarcoma virus.
The hepatitis C virus (HCV) persists in the majority of infected individuals and is a significant cause of human illness and death globally. Recent studies have yielded important insights into immunity to HCV, in particular revealing the central role of T cells in viral control and clearance. Other key features of adaptive immune responses remain obscure, including mechanisms by which T cells control HCV replication, the role of antibodies in conferring protection and how cellular and humoral immunity are subverted in persistent infection.
Hepatitis C virus is a major global health problem affecting an estimated 170 million people worldwide. Chronic infection is common and can lead to cirrhosis and liver cancer. There is no vaccine available and current therapies have met with limited success. The viral RNA genome encodes a polyprotein that includes two proteases essential for virus replication. The NS2-3 protease mediates a single cleavage at the NS2/NS3 junction, whereas the NS3-4A protease cleaves at four downstream sites in the polyprotein. NS3-4A is characterized as a serine protease with a chymotrypsin-like fold, but the enzymatic mechanism of the NS2-3 protease remains unresolved. Here we report the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of the NS2-3 protease at 2.3 A resolution. The structure reveals a dimeric cysteine protease with two composite active sites. For each active site, the catalytic histidine and glutamate residues are contributed by one monomer, and the nucleophilic cysteine by the other. The carboxy-terminal residues remain coordinated in the two active sites, predicting an inactive post-cleavage form. Proteolysis through formation of a composite active site occurs in the context of the viral polyprotein expressed in mammalian cells. These features offer unexpected insights into polyprotein processing by hepatitis C virus and new opportunities for antiviral drug design.
Interferons, which induce several intracellular antiviral proteins, also induce an extracellular soluble protein that inhibits vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) infection. This 28-kilodalton soluble protein was purified to homogeneity and identified by protein sequencing as the ligand-binding domain of the human 160-kilodalton low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR). The existence of an antiviral soluble LDLR was confirmed by immunoaffinity chromatography with monoclonal antibody to LDLR. This soluble receptor mediates most of the interferon-triggered antiviral activity against VSV, apparently by interfering with virus assembly or budding, and not by inhibiting virus attachment to cells.
Incubated mixtures of PR8 influenza virus and Rauscher leukemia virus retained the egg infectivity and hemagglutinin of the influenza virus and the ability of the Rauscher virus to induce splenomegaly in mice. Density-gradient centrifugation on potassium citrate gradients revealed a new interviral product with an intermediate density as the principal constituent of such mixtures. Chicken erythrocytes adsorbed the Rauscher virus components as well as the influenza virus components of the interviral product from such mixtures at 4 degrees C, whereas the Rauscher virus alone was little adsorbed. The adsorbed interviral product was eluted from the erythrocyte complex after incubation at 37 degrees C.
The RNA genome of the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) appears to be made up of two parts: a small domain with a high degree of sequence conservation and structural features likely to promote replication; plus a second, larger domain that is less conserved and encodes the delta antigen. This report focuses on one of the several sets of data that have led to the proposal of this model: the existence of a novel structural element in HDV genomic RNA. This structural element lies within the highly conserved domain of HDV RNA and may be related to the local tertiary structure previously mapped to the central conserved region of the plant viroid genome. Both elements occur in regions with no apparent coding capacity and are distinctively responsive to ultraviolet (UV) light. Transcripts containing partial and full-length genomic sequences of HDV readily undergo a UV-induced crosslinking reaction, which establishes a covalent bond between two noncontiguous segments. By locking two segments of the overall structure into place, this crosslink has permitted the unbranched, rodlike model of HDV RNA to be examined and confirmed in the portion of the RNA analyzed. The clustering of the novel tertiary structure and the recently discovered self-cleavage sites into a highly conserved, but apparently noncoding, portion of the genome defines a viroid-like domain in HDV RNA and raises questions about the possible events leading up to the association of free-living RNAs with messenger RNAs and other RNA molecules.
In the presence of envelope antibody and complement, the AKR strain of mouse leukemia virus was lysed, with the result that (i) the viral nucleic acid became susceptible to ribonuclease digestion and (ii) the internal group-specific antigen of the virus was released. The internal localization of the group-specific antigen is confirmed, the evidence being based on the failure of group-specific antibody to lyse virus in the presence of complement.
A region of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome that is important in inducing cell proliferation includes a single long open reading frame. Part of this open reading frame has been fused to the lacZ gene and expressed in Escherichia coli. Antisera to the fusion protein identify a protein in the nuclei of latently infected growth-transformed lymphocytes and in Burkitt tumor cells grown in vitro. This nuclear protein is encoded by a different virus-gene than that which encodes the previously described EBV nuclear antigen, EBNA.
Techniques of gene amplification, molecular cloning, and sequence analysis were used to test for the presence of sequences related to human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of six patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and 20 normal individuals. HTLV-I sequences were detected in all six MS patients and in one individual from the control group by DNA blot analysis and molecular cloning of amplified DNAs. The viral sequence in MS patients were associated with adherent cell populations consisting predominantly of monocytes and macrophages. Molecular cloning and nucleotide sequence analysis indicated that these amplified viral sequences were related to the HTLV-I proviral genome.
Recent studies of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection in humans and of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) in rhesus monkeys have shown that resolution of the acute viral infection and control of the subsequent persistent infection are mediated by the antiviral cellular immune response. We comparatively assessed several vaccine vector delivery systems-three formulations of a plasmid DNA vector, the modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA) virus, and a replication incompetent adenovirus type 5 (Ad5) vector-expressing the SIV gag protein for their ability to elicit such immune responses in monkeys. The vaccines were tested either as a single modality or in combined modality regimens. Here we show that the most effective responses were elicited by a replication-incompetent Ad5 vector, used either alone or as a booster inoculation after priming with a DNA vector. After challenge with a pathogenic HIV-SIV hybrid virus (SHIV), the animals immunized with Ad5 vector exhibited the most pronounced attenuation of the virus infection. The replication-defective adenovirus is a promising vaccine vector for development of an HIV-1 vaccine.
Macrophages and dendritic cells have key roles in viral infections, providing virus reservoirs that frequently resist antiviral therapies and linking innate virus detection to antiviral adaptive immune responses. Human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) fails to transduce dendritic cells and has a reduced ability to transduce macrophages, due to an as yet uncharacterized mechanism that inhibits infection by interfering with efficient synthesis of viral complementary DNA. In contrast, HIV-2 and related simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIVsm/mac) transduce myeloid cells efficiently owing to their virion-associated Vpx accessory proteins, which counteract the restrictive mechanism. Here we show that the inhibition of HIV-1 infection in macrophages involves the cellular SAM domain HD domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1). Vpx relieves the inhibition of lentivirus infection in macrophages by loading SAMHD1 onto the CRL4(DCAF1) E3 ubiquitin ligase, leading to highly efficient proteasome-dependent degradation of the protein. Mutations in SAMHD1 cause Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, a disease that produces a phenotype that mimics the effects of a congenital viral infection. Failure to dispose of endogenous nucleic acid debris in Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome results in inappropriate triggering of innate immune responses via cytosolic nucleic acids sensors. Thus, our findings show that macrophages are defended from HIV-1 infection by a mechanism that prevents an unwanted interferon response triggered by self nucleic acids, and uncover an intricate relationship between innate immune mechanisms that control response to self and to retroviral pathogens.
A number of problems still surround infection by the human immunodeficiency virus and the pathogenesis of AIDS. Solutions to the problems would provide valuable information for the development of antiviral therapy and a vaccine.
T-lymphocyte-mediated responses to the cellular components of blood vessels are important in rejection of allografts. The induction of cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs) depends on recognition of foreign class II major histocompatibility complex antigens (human HLA-DR, DC/DS, SB and others, collectively referred to as Ia) on the target cells whereas killing by CTLs usually depends on recognition of foreign class I antigens (HLA-A, B), although some alloreactive CTLs recognize foreign Ia instead of HLA-A, B (refs 5-8). The expression of Ia antigens has traditionally been regarded as restricted to immunological cell types, and the presence of class II antigen-bearing 'passenger' leukocytes in rodent organ grafts appears necessary for graft rejection. Recently, Ia antigens have been observed by immunofluorescence microscopy on human renal and dermal capillary endothelium. We have previously shown that human umbilical vein endothelial (HUVE) cells in standard culture conditions do not bear Ia antigens, but may be induced to do so by products of lectin- or alloantigen-activated T lymphocytes. Furthermore, we found that recombinant immune interferon (IFN-gamma), free of other lymphokines, is a potent inducer of Ia expression in HUVE cells. Here we report that IFN-gamma also induces Ia expression on human foreskin capillary endothelial (HFCE) cells, HUVE cells transformed by Simian virus 40 viral DNA (SV-HUVE cells) and human dermal fibroblast (HDF) cells in culture. Further, we present evidence that Ia present on HUVE cells and HDF cells can be functionally recognized by human T cells, resulting in a two-way interaction between T cells and mesenchymal cells that may be important in allograft rejection.
Type I interferon (IFN) production is a critical component of the innate defence against viral infections. Viral products induce strong type I IFN responses through the activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and intracellular cytoplasmic receptors such as protein kinase R (PKR). Here we demonstrate that cells lacking TRAF3, a member of the TNF receptor-associated factor family, are defective in type I IFN responses activated by several different TLRs. Furthermore, we show that TRAF3 associates with the TLR adaptors TRIF and IRAK1, as well as downstream IRF3/7 kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon, suggesting that TRAF3 serves as a critical link between TLR adaptors and downstream regulatory kinases important for IRF activation. In addition to TLR stimulation, we also show that TRAF3-deficient fibroblasts are defective in their type I IFN response to direct infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that TRAF3 is also an important component of TLR-independent viral recognition pathways. Our data demonstrate that TRAF3 is a major regulator of type I IFN production and the innate antiviral response.
Crystals have been obtained from purified preparations of SE polyoma virus. Specific infectivity measurements of the mother liquor, wash fractions, and the dissolved crystals indicate the viral nature of the crystals.
The threat posed by the highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza virus requires public health authorities to prepare for a human pandemic. Although pre-pandemic vaccines and antiviral drugs might significantly reduce illness rates, their stockpiling is too expensive to be practical for many countries. Consequently, alternative control strategies, based on non-pharmaceutical interventions, are a potentially attractive policy option. School closure is the measure most often considered. The high social and economic costs of closing schools for months make it an expensive and therefore controversial policy, and the current absence of quantitative data on the role of schools during influenza epidemics means there is little consensus on the probable effectiveness of school closure in reducing the impact of a pandemic. Here, from the joint analysis of surveillance data and holiday timing in France, we quantify the role of schools in influenza epidemics and predict the effect of school closure during a pandemic. We show that holidays lead to a 20-29% reduction in the rate at which influenza is transmitted to children, but that they have no detectable effect on the contact patterns of adults. Holidays prevent 16-18% of seasonal influenza cases (18-21% in children). By extrapolation, we find that prolonged school closure during a pandemic might reduce the cumulative number of cases by 13-17% (18-23% in children) and peak attack rates by up to 39-45% (47-52% in children). The impact of school closure would be reduced if it proved difficult to maintain low contact rates among children for a prolonged period.
By means of an approach that combined the techniques of somatic cell genetics and Mendelian breeding studies, the inducibility locus, designated Cv, for ecotropic murine leukemia virus in BALB/c mice, was mapped to chromosome 5, 23 units from the locus for phosphoglucomutase-1, with gene order Cv-Pgm-1-Gus. This low-efficiency inducibility locus is therefore not allelic with the chromosome 7 loci previously described for two other mouse strains with high virus inducibility. These studies provide further evidence that endogenous ecotropic viruses represent viral genomes inserted at different chromosomal sites in the various mouse strains.
Early region IA of human adenoviruses encodes a function required for normal induction of early viral genes and virus-induced cell transformation. The region is expressed at early times as two overlapping spliced mRNAs, 12S and 13S, which encode closely related proteins. To distinguish between the functions of these proteins, a single T leads to G transversion was constructed which prevents splicing of the 12S mRNA. This transversion, in the second base of the 12S mRNA intron, does not alter the protein encoded by the 13S mRNA due to degeneracy in the genetic code. Studies with this mutant demonstrated that only the 13S mRNA encodes the regulatory protein required for normal early gene expression.
Ribonucleotide reductase is an essential enzyme for DNA synthesis in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells; it catalyses the reductive conversion of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides. Several herpesviruses including herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), HSV-2, pseudorabies virus (PRV), equine herpesvirus type 1 (EHV-1) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) have been found to induce novel ribonucleotide reductase activities. There is evidence that the HSV-1 ribonucleotide reductase activity is virus-encoded and essential for virus replication. This makes herpesvirus ribonucleotide reductases potential targets for antiviral chemotherapy. The HSV-1-encoded enzyme consists of two subunits: V136, the large subunit of relative molecular mass (Mr) 136,000 (136K) (RR1), which has been shown to be essential for enzyme activity, and V38, the small subunit (RR2) which forms a complex with the large subunit and is also likely to be essential for enzyme activity. Two particular features of the enzyme make it an attractive antiviral target. First, there is evidence for a common, highly conserved herpesvirus ribonucleotide reductase and second, the interaction between the large and small subunits may itself be exploitable. Here we identify a synthetic peptide which specifically inhibits the activity of virus-induced enzyme. We deduce that the mechanism of inhibition involves interference with the normal interaction between the two types of subunit.
Of a series of nucleoside analogues synthesised, 9-(2-hydroxyethoxymethyl) guanine was found to have marked antiviral activity in animal models of herpes virus infections, associated with very low toxicity.
The many examples of overlap in the genes of various viruses and bacteria illustrate that the parsimonious utilization of the coding capacity of DNA is relatively common amongst prokaryotes. The recent discovery of a pupal cuticle gene within an intron of the completely unrelated Gart locus in Drosophila shows that overlapping transcription units also exist in higher organisms. However, the prevalence of such phenomena in unknown. We report here a quite different situation of overlap between the 3' termini of a pair of convergent transcription units in another region of the Drosophila genome. This 88-base-pair (bp) genomic region encodes the 3' terminus of the messenger RNA for the enzyme dopa decarboxylase (Ddc) and, in opposite orientation, the 3' terminus of the adjacent gene whose function is unknown. An analysis of the temporal and spatial distribution of the two transcripts within the organism shows that high levels of both transcripts are never concordant. However, within the testes, where the 3' transcript is maximally expressed, low levels of Ddc transcript were detected. This result raises the possibility that a hybrid molecule involving the two transcripts forms in vivo or that transcription interference occurs, with concomitant regulatory implications.
The immunopathogenic mechanisms underlying human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease are extremely complex; the disease process is multifactorial with multiple overlapping phases. Viral burden is substantial and viral replication occurs throughout the entire course of HIV infection. Inappropriate immune activation and elevated secretion of certain cytokines compound the pathogenic process. Profound immunosuppression ultimately occurs together with a disruption of the microenvironment of the immune system, which is probably unable to regenerate spontaneously. Thus, therapeutic strategies in HIV disease must not be unidimensional, but rather must be linked to the complex pathogenic components of the disease and must address where feasible each of the recognized pathogenic processes for the possibility of therapeutic intervention.
Intranuclear and intracytoplasmic aggregates of filaments with tubular structures and transverse striations occurred in muscle tissues biopsied from a patient with chronic polymyositis. The filamentous tubules bear a close resemblance to the incomplete form of myxovirus in which the envelope is missing. Three biopsies from the same patient, taken during a period of 1(1/2) years, all revealed these structures. This finding provides presumptive evidence that a chronic persistent viral infection may be involved in the pathogenesis of chronic polymyositis.
Combinations of antiretroviral drugs that prevent or delay the appearance of drug-resistant human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) mutants are urgently required. Mutants resistant to 3'-azidothymidine (AZT, zidovudine) became phenotypically sensitive in vitro by mutation of residue 184 of viral reverse transcriptase to valine, which also induced resistance to (-)2'-deoxy-3'-thiacytidine (3TC). Furthermore, AZT-3TC coresistance was not observed during extensive in vitro selection with both drugs. In vivo AZT-3TC combination therapy resulted in a markedly greater decreased in serum HIV-1 RNA concentrations than treatment with AZT alone, even though valine-184 mutants rapidly emerged. Most samples assessed from the combination group remained AZT sensitive at 24 weeks of therapy, consistent with in vitro mutation studies.
Double-stranded DNA copies of the single-stranded genomic RNA of foot and mouth disease virus have been cloned into the Escherichia coli plasmid pBR322. A restriction map of the viral genome was established and aligned with the biochemical map of foot and mouth disease virus. The coding sequence for structural protein VP1, the major antigen of the virus, was identified and inserted into a plasmid vector where the expression of this sequence is under control of the phage lambda PL promoter. In an appropriate host the synthesis of antigenic polypeptide can be demonstrated by radioimmunoassay.
The ability to introduce foreign DNA into the genome of mice offers unique opportunities to produce new models of disease process. Recent experiments have shown that integration and expression of simian virus 40 (SV40) T antigen genes and the murine mammary tumour virus (MMTV)-myc genes in transgenic mice can lead to the development of neoplasia in a remarkably tissue-specific manner. In the case of SV40-bearing mice, tumours consistently develop in the choroid plexus. In the accompanying paper, we show that the 72-base pair (bp) enhancer in the SV40 genome is instrumental in directing tumorigenesis to the choroid plexus. However, when the enhancer is deleted from a construction also containing the metallothionein-human growth hormone fusion gene (SV delta e-MGH), an entirely new pattern of pathology results. The present report focuses on transgenic mice carrying this construct; they develop demyelinating peripheral neuropathies, hepatocellular carcinomas and islet cell adenomas.
Binding of glycoprotein gp120 to the T cell-surface receptor CD4 is a crucial step in CD4-dependent infection of a target cell by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Blocking some or all gp120 molecules on the viral surface should therefore inhibit infection. Consequently, competitive receptor inhibitors, such as soluble synthetic CD4 (sCD4), synthetic CD4 peptides and immunoglobulins, have been investigated in vitro and in vivo, but little is known about the molecular mechanisms of these inhibitors. We have now quantitatively examined blocking by soluble CD4 in the hope of gaining insight into the complex process of viral binding, adsorption and penetration. At low sCD4 concentrations, the inhibition in three HIV strains is proportional to the binding of gp120. The biological association constant (gp120-sCD4 Kassoc) for HIV-2NIHZ is (8.5 +/- 0.5) x 10(7) M-1, whereas Kassoc for HIV-1HXB3 (1.4 +/- 0.2) and HIV-1MN (1.7 +/- 0.1) x 10(9) M-1 are 15-20-fold larger. For all three viral strains, the biological Kassoc from infectivity assays is comparable to the chemical Kassoc. The inhibitory action of sCD4 at high concentrations, however, is not fully explained by simple proportionality with the binding to gp120. Positive synergy in blocking of infection occurs after about half the viral gp120s molecules are occupied, and is identical for all three viral strains, despite the large differences in Kassoc. Our method of measuring the viral-cell receptor Kassoc directly from infectivity assays is applicable to immunoglobulins, to other viruses and to assays using primary or transformed cell lines.
Human T-lymphotropic virus type III (LAV, HTLV-III) is aetiologically linked to acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and persistent general lymphadenopathy (PGL). Specific radioimmunoassays (RIA), enzyme-linked assays, immunofluorescence assays (IFA) and immunoblotting techniques are being used widely to detect serum antibodies to HTLV-III in infected patients and in those at risk of infection. However, these assays do not functionally identify those antibodies that neutralize the infectivity of the virus. We have used three methods of titrating serum neutralizing factors: inhibition of syncytium induction, neutralization of envelope pseudotypes of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and reduction of infectivity of HTLV-III for a cell line permissive to virus replication. We report here that sera from subjects in various disease categories possess only low-level neutralizing activity, even when antibodies to viral membrane antigens are present in high titre. Envelope pseudotypes prepared from four HTLV-III isolates made in three different countries are equally sensitive to neutralization by positive sera, including sera from patients yielding two of the virus isolates.
Potent virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses elicited by candidate AIDS vaccines have recently been shown to control viral replication and prevent clinical disease progression after pathogenic viral challenges in rhesus monkeys. Here we show that viral escape from CTL recognition can result in the eventual failure of this partial immune protection. Viral mutations that escape from CTL recognition have been previously described in humans infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and monkeys infected with simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). In a cohort of rhesus monkeys that were vaccinated and subsequently infected with a pathogenic hybrid simian-human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV), the frequency of viral sequence mutations within CTL epitopes correlated with the level of viral replication. A single nucleotide mutation within an immunodominant Gag CTL epitope in an animal with undetectable plasma viral RNA resulted in viral escape from CTLs, a burst of viral replication, clinical disease progression, and death from AIDS-related complications. These data indicate that viral escape from CTL recognition may be a major limitation of the CTL-based AIDS vaccines that are likely to be administered to large human populations over the next several years.
This brief survey of bacteriophage infection has provided support for an obvious but important generalization: that the study of virus infection at the cellular level is a branch of cellular genetics. The interactions between viral and cellular functions show that infection with a virus is not just a disrupting intrusion; it is an addition to the cellular endowment of genetic specificity. The outcome of this addition depends on the nature of the instructions carried by the viral genome, on the ability of the cellular machinery to carry out these instructions, and on the availability of control mechanisms to regulate the functions of the added element.
The protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, at a concentration of 0.08 microgram per milliliter, induced flat morphology within 24 to 48 hours and low saturation density in human osteosarcoma cells transformed by Kirsten murine sarcoma virus (Ki-MSV) or N-methyl-N' nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. Removal of the protein synthesis inhibitor caused both transformed cells to revert to the transformed phenotype. The demonstration of cell-surface antigens, cross-reacted with antiserums induced by extracts of both types of transformed human cells, was dependent on the presence or absence of cycloheximide in the culture medium. The results show that protein synthesis is required to maintain the transformed state in virally or chemically transformed human cells.
Infection of normal peripheral blood T cells by the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)-associated retrovirus (ARV) was evaluated in long-term cultures of helper-inducer T cells (T4 cells). Cells that were inoculated with ARV and maintained in medium supplemented with interleukin-2 remained productively infected with this virus for more than 4 months in culture, although they showed no cytopathic effects characteristic of acute ARV infection. The presence of replicating virus was demonstrated by reverse transcriptase activity of culture fluids and by viral antigens and budding particles detected on cells by immunofluorescence and electron microscopy. Virus produced in these cultures remained infectious and could induce cytopathic effects and viral antigens in uninfected lymphoid cells. The finding that normal lymphocytes may be productively infected by an AIDS retrovirus in the absence of cell death suggests that a range of biologic effects may occur after infection in vivo.
Avocado sunblotch viroid (ASBV) is a 247-nucleotide, single-stranded, circular RNA. It is considered to replicate via a rolling-circle mechanism in which circular, monomeric plus and minus RNAs act as templates for the synthesis of longer-than-unit-length precursor RNAs. Processing of these RNAs in vivo may occur by a self-cleavage reaction, as indicated by ability of dimeric, linear plus and minus ASBV RNAs to specifically self-cleave in vitro with the excision of a monomeric RNA with 5'-hydroxyl and 2',3'-cyclic phosphodiester termini. A similar self-cleavage reaction has also been reported to occur in an RNA transcript containing a dimeric copy of a tandemly repeated, 330-base-pair sequence of the newt genome. Based on comparisons with self-cleaving plant viral satellite RNAs, hammerhead-shaped active structures, each containing one self-cleavage site, were proposed for the plus and minus ASBV RNAs and the newt RNA, but the stability of these hammerheads has been questioned. Here, more stable active structures that contain two self-cleavage sites are proposed and data supporting these models are presented.
In influenza the combined virus-bacterial pneumonia is approximately three times more common than primary viral pneumonia. The bacteria most commonly involved are Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. S. aureus co-infection is reported to have a fatality rate of up to 42% (ref. 2). It is thought that virus infection in the respiratory tract favours growth conditions for bacteria. In this letter data are presented which show that some S. aureus strains secrete a protease which exerts a decisive influence on the outcome of influenza virus infection in mice by cleavage activation of the virus haemagglutinin.
Papillomaviruses cause warts and proliferative lesions in skin and other epithelia. In a minority of papillomavirus types ('high risk, including human papillomaviruses 16, 18, 31, 33, 45 and 56), further transformation of the wart lesions can produce tumours. The papillomavirus E2 protein controls primary transcription and replication of the viral genome. Both activities are governed by a approximately 200 amino-acid amino-terminal module (E2NT) which is connected to a DNA-binding carboxy-terminal module by a flexible linker. Here we describe the crystal structure of the complete E2NT module from human papillomavirus 16. The E2NT module forms a dimer both in the crystal and in solution. Amino acids that are necessary for transactivation are located at the dimer interface, indicating that the dimer structure may be important in the interactions of E2NT with viral and cellular transcription factors. We propose that dimer formation may contribute to the stabilization of DNA loops which may serve to relocate distal DNA-binding transcription factors to the site of human papillomavirus transcription initiation.
Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), retrovirus-like elements with long terminal repeats, are widely dispersed in the euchromatic compartment in mammalian cells, comprising approximately 10% of the mouse genome. These parasitic elements are responsible for >10% of spontaneous mutations. Whereas DNA methylation has an important role in proviral silencing in somatic and germ-lineage cells, an additional DNA-methylation-independent pathway also functions in embryonal carcinoma and embryonic stem (ES) cells to inhibit transcription of the exogenous gammaretrovirus murine leukaemia virus (MLV). Notably, a recent genome-wide study revealed that ERVs are also marked by histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) and H4K20me3 in ES cells but not in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. However, the role that these marks have in proviral silencing remains unexplored. Here we show that the H3K9 methyltransferase ESET (also called SETDB1 or KMT1E) and the Kruppel-associated box (KRAB)-associated protein 1 (KAP1, also called TRIM28) are required for H3K9me3 and silencing of endogenous and introduced retroviruses specifically in mouse ES cells. Furthermore, whereas ESET enzymatic activity is crucial for HP1 binding and efficient proviral silencing, the H4K20 methyltransferases Suv420h1 and Suv420h2 are dispensable for silencing. Notably, in DNA methyltransferase triple knockout (Dnmt1(-/-)Dnmt3a(-/-)Dnmt3b(-/-)) mouse ES cells, ESET and KAP1 binding and ESET-mediated H3K9me3 are maintained and ERVs are minimally derepressed. We propose that a DNA-methylation-independent pathway involving KAP1 and ESET/ESET-mediated H3K9me3 is required for proviral silencing during the period early in embryogenesis when DNA methylation is dynamically reprogrammed.
The adeno-associated viruses (AAV) are defective parvoviruses which produce infective progeny only in cells co-infected with a 'helper' adenovirus (Ad). Both human and simian AAV have been recovered from human and simian primary cell cultures following their inoculation with 'AAV-free' Ad. Whereas some studies have suggested that AAV exists in a latent state in these cells, others have indicated that the AAV genome is capable of establishing and maintaining a latent state in defined laboratory conditions which mimic the situation proposed for the 'latent' AAV recovered from human and simian tissues. Here, avian adeno-associated virus (AAAV) was consistently recovered from limiting dilutions of purified and unpurified avian Ad stocks propagated in embryonating chicken eggs derived from two independently raised flocks of White Leghorn (WL) chickens but not when these Ad stocks were propagated in duck cells. These observations suggest that AAAV is a latent endogenous virus of at least some flocks of WL chickens.
Protein ubiquitination is a common form of post-translational modification that regulates a broad spectrum of protein substrates in diverse cellular pathways. Through a three-enzyme (E1-E2-E3) cascade, the attachment of ubiquitin to proteins is catalysed by the E3 ubiquitin ligase, which is best represented by the superfamily of the cullin-RING complexes. Conserved from yeast to human, the DDB1-CUL4-ROC1 complex is a recently identified cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase, which regulates DNA repair, DNA replication and transcription, and can also be subverted by pathogenic viruses to benefit viral infection. Lacking a canonical SKP1-like cullin adaptor and a defined substrate recruitment module, how the DDB1-CUL4-ROC1 E3 apparatus is assembled for ubiquitinating various substrates remains unclear. Here we present crystallographic analyses of the virally hijacked form of the human DDB1-CUL4A-ROC1 machinery, which show that DDB1 uses one beta-propeller domain for cullin scaffold binding and a variably attached separate double-beta-propeller fold for substrate presentation. Through tandem-affinity purification of human DDB1 and CUL4A complexes followed by mass spectrometry analysis, we then identify a novel family of WD40-repeat proteins, which directly bind to the double-propeller fold of DDB1 and serve as the substrate-recruiting module of the E3. Together, our structural and proteomic results reveal the structural mechanisms and molecular logic underlying the assembly and versatility of a new family of cullin-RING E3 complexes.
In March 2003, a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV) was discovered in association with cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). The sequence of the complete genome of SARS-CoV was determined, and the initial characterization of the viral genome is presented in this report. The genome of SARS-CoV is 29,727 nucleotides in length and has 11 open reading frames, and its genome organization is similar to that of other coronaviruses. Phylogenetic analyses and sequence comparisons showed that SARS-CoV is not closely related to any of the previously characterized coronaviruses.
The recent finding of c-myc activation by insertion of woodchuck hepatitis virus DNA in two independent hepatocellular carcinoma has given support to the hypothesis that integration of hepatitis B viruses into the host genome, observed in most human and woodchuck liver tumours, might contribute to oncogenesis. We report here high frequency of woodchuck hepatitis virus DNA integrations in two newly identified N-myc genes: N-myc1, the homologue of known mammalian N-myc genes, and N-myc2, an intronless 'complementary DNA gene' or 'retroposon' that has retained extensive coding and transforming homology with N-myc. N-myc2 is totally silent in normal liver, but is overexpressed without genetic rearrangements in most liver tumours. Moreover, viral integrations occur within either N-myc1 or N-myc2 in about 20% of the tumours, giving rise to chimaeric messenger RNAs in which the 3' untranslated region of N-myc was replaced by woodchuck hepatitis virus sequences encompassing the viral enhancer. Insertion sites were clustered in a short sequence of the third exon that coincides with a retroviral integration hotspot within the murine N-myc gene, recently described in T-cell lymphomas induced by murine leukaemia virus. Thus, comparable mechanisms, leading to deregulated expression of N-myc genes, may operate in the development of tumours induced either by hepatitis virus or by nonacute retroviruses in rodents. Activation of myc genes by insertion of hepadnavirus DNA now emerges as a common event in the genesis of woodchuck hepatocellular carcinoma.
Avian myeloblastosis virus is defective in reproductive capacity, requiring a helper virus to provide the viral proteins essential for synthesis of new infectious virus. This virus arose by recombination of the nondefective helper virus and host cellular sequences present within the normal avian genome. These latter sequences are essential for leukemogenic activity. The complete nucleotide sequence of this region is reported. Within the acquired cellular sequences there is an open reading frame of 795 nucleotides starting with the initiation codon ATG (adenine, thymine, guanine) and terminating with the triplet TAG. This open reading frame could code for the putative transforming protein of 265 amino acids with a molecular weight of approximately 30,000.
The nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse is an animal model of type I diabetes and develops a characteristic autoimmune lesion in the islets of Langerhans with lymphocytic infiltration and destruction of pancreatic beta cells. The result is hypoinsulinemia, hyperglycemia, ketoacidosis, and death. Diabetes usually begins by the sixth month of age but can occur earlier when young NOD mice are infused with lymphocytes from older NOD donors. When newborn or adult NOD mice were infected with a lymphotropic virus they did not become diabetic. The interaction between viruses and lymphocytes is pivotal in aborting diabetes, as established by experiments in which lymphocytes from virus-infected donors failed to transfer diabetes. In contrast, lymphocytes from age- and sex-matched uninfected donors caused disease. Therefore, viruses and, presumably, their products can be developed to be beneficial and may have potential as a component for treatment of human diseases. Further, these results point to the utility of viruses as probes for dissecting the pathogenesis of a nonviral disease.
To explore the potential use of retrovirus vectors for the transfer of genomic DNA sequences into mammalian cells, recombinant retroviral genomes were constructed that encode a functionally rearranged murine lambda 1 immunoglobulin gene. Several of these genomes could be transmitted intact to recipient cells by viral infection, although successful transmission depended both on the orientation of the lambda 1 sequences and on their specific placement within vector sequences. The lambda 1 gene transduced by viral infection was expressed in a cell lineage-specific manner, albeit at lower levels than endogenous lambda 1 gene expression in cells from the B-lymphocyte lineage. Vectors yielding integrated proviruses that lacked viral transcriptional enhancer sequences were used to show that neither viral transcription nor the viral transcriptional sequences themselves had any effect on the tissue specificity of lambda 1 gene expression or the absolute amount of lambda 1 transcription. Vector transcription did, however, dramatically decrease the amount of lambda 1 protein that could be detected in tranduced cells. These results suggest that retrovirus vectors may be useful reagents not only for the expression of complementary DNA sequences but also for studies of tissue-specific transcription in mammalian cells.
Vesicular stomatitis virus is a negative-stranded RNA virus. Its nucleoprotein (N) binds the viral genomic RNA and is involved in multiple functions including transcription, replication, and assembly. We have determined a 2.9 angstrom structure of a complex containing 10 molecules of the N protein and 90 bases of RNA. The RNA is tightly sequestered in a cavity at the interface between two lobes of the N protein. This serves to protect the RNA in the absence of polynucleotide synthesis. For the RNA to be accessed, some conformational change in the N protein should be necessary.
Genotypic variation among independent isolates of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) is well known, but its molecular basis and biological consequences are poorly understood. We examined the genesis of molecular variation in HIV-1 by sequential virus isolations from two chronically infected individuals and analysis of recombinant HIV-1 genomic clones. In three different virus isolates full-length HIV-1 clones were identified and found to consist, respectively, of 17, 9 and 13 distinguishable, but highly-related, viral genotypes. Thirty-five viral clones derived from two HIV-1 isolates obtained from the same individual but 16 months apart showed progressive change, yet were clearly related. Similar changes in the HIV-1 genome did not occur in vitro during virus isolation and amplification. The results indicate that HIV-1 variation in vivo is rapid, that a remarkably large number of related but distinguishable genotypic variants evolve in parallel and coexist during chronic infection, and that 'isolates' of HIV-1, unless molecularly or biologically cloned, generally consist of complex mixtures of genotypically distinguishable viruses.
The products of the adenovirus-2 (Ad2) immortalizing oncogene E1A repress the activity of the SV40, polyoma virus and E1A enhancers. Evidence is presented that Ad2 infection of MPC11 plasmocytoma cells results in an inhibition of transcription of both the gamma 2b heavy chain (IgH) and the kappa light chain immunoglobulin genes. This inhibition is caused by the Ad2 E1A products. Furthermore, the Ad2 E1A products repress transcription activated by the immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer in chimeric recombinants, which are either stably integrated in the genome of lymphoid cells or are present as episomes. The implications of negative regulation of cellular enhancers are discussed.
When cultures of cells derived from the entoderm of the chick embryo were infected with trachoma virus, cytoplasmic inclusion bodies composed of viral particles were easily demonstrated. The inclusions are similar to those found in stained smears from trachomatous eyes and they developed in a sequence characteristic for this group of viruses. This method of culture appears to offer a valuable additional tool for study of the trachoma agent.
The complete nucleotide sequence of both the 5' and 3' long terminal repeats (LTR's) has been determined for a human endogenous retroviral genome. These sequences are 593 and 590 nucleotides long and have diverged from one another by 8.8 percent. The LTR's resemble those of functional mammalian type C retroviruses in length and in the presence and location of eukaryotic promoter sequences. The 5' LTR is followed by a presumptive primer binding site unlike that of any known mammalian type C retrovirus, exhibiting 17 out of 18 nucleotides complementary to arginine transfer RNA rather than proline transfer RNA.
To better understand the basis for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) persistence and latency, the form in which viral DNA exists in the peripheral T lymphocyte reservoir of infected individuals was investigated. In asymptomatic individuals, HIV-1 was harbored predominantly as full-length, unintegrated complementary DNA. These extrachromosomal DNA forms retained the ability to integrate upon T cell activation in vitro. In patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), there was an increase in integrated relative to extrachromosomal DNA forms. By analysis of DNA from patient lymphocyte subpopulations depleted of human lymphocyte antigen-Dr receptor-positive cells, quiescent T cells were identified as the source of extrachromosomal HIV-1 DNA. Thus quiescent T lymphocytes may be a major and inducible HIV-1 reservoir in infected individuals.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a herpesvirus with a genome of 230 kilobases (Kb) encoding about 200 genes. Although infection is generally innocuous, HCMV causes serious congenital and neonatal disease, and is a dangerous opportunistic pathogen in immune-deficient individuals. We have identified a family of three HCMV genes which encode polypeptides containing seven putative membrane-spanning domains, and a series of well-defined motifs characteristic of the rhodopsin-like G protein-coupled receptors (GCRs). By these criteria all three of the HCMV sequences are homologous to cellular GCRs. Members of this receptor family function in visual signal transduction, regulation of homeostasis, and development, and include known and potential oncogenes. These receptors are activated by photons or small molecules such as neurotransmitters, and glycoprotein hormones. The finding of viral-encoded GCR homologues implies a further level of complexity in the interactions between HCMV and its host, and may provide a potential pathway for virally transformed cell proliferation. Their identification could permit the development of a novel class of antiviral drugs analogous to beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists.
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) can establish latent infections in peripheral nerve ganglia and the central nervous system (CNS) of experimentally infected mice. Latent infections of peripheral nervous tissue are characterized by the ability to recover infectious virus from explant cultures of most of the latently infected ganglia. In contrast, infectious virus is infrequently recovered from the CNS of latently infected mice following explant culture, although viral DNA can be detected in CNS tissue. The presence of incomplete or defective viral genomes during the latent CNS infections has been proposed to explain this difference between the two latent infections. To characterize the completeness and the physical state of the latent viral genome, we used Southern blot hybridization to analyse the viral DNA from latently infected mouse ganglia and brains. Our results, reported here, indicate that most, if not all, of the HSV-1 genome is present in latently infected CNS tissue and that the latent viral genome exists in a form other than linear, unit length DNA.
Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (H5N1) may cause severe lower respiratory tract (LRT) disease in humans. However, the LRT cells to which the virus attaches are unknown for both humans and other mammals. We show here that H5N1 virus attached predominantly to type II pneumocytes, alveolar macrophages, and nonciliated bronchiolar cells in the human LRT, and this pattern was most closely mirrored in cat and ferret tissues. These findings may explain, at least in part, the localization and severity of H5N1 viral pneumonia in humans. They also identify the cat and the ferret as suitable experimental animals based on this criterion.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a ubiquitous human herpesvirus and an aetiological agent of infectious mononucleosis, has a unique tropism for B lymphocytes. Clinical and laboratory features of chronic active EBV infections are chronic or persistent infectious mononucleosis-like symptoms and high antibody titre against early antigens (EA). Kawasaki disease (KD), aetiology unknown, is thought to be self-limited immunologically mediated vasculitis. Clinical features of KD are fever, rash, mucositis, lymphadenopathy and coronary artery damage. We report here a child with chronic active EBV infection accompanied by dilatation of coronary arteries. All the EBV-determined nuclear antigen (EBNA)-positive lymphocytes had exclusively CD4 antigen, as revealed by dual staining immunofluorescence analysis. Southern blot hybridization showed that the purified CD4+ cells harboured EBV genome.
A specific assay has been developed for a blood-borne non-A, non-B hepatitis (NANBH) virus in which a polypeptide synthesized in recombinant yeast clones of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is used to capture circulating viral antibodies. HCV antibodies were detected in six of seven human sera that were shown previously to transmit NANBH to chimpanzees. Assays of ten blood transfusions in the United States that resulted in chronic NANBH revealed that there was at least one positive blood donor in nine of these cases and that all ten recipients seroconverted during their illnesses. About 80 percent of chronic, post-transfusion NANBH (PT-NANBH) patients from Italy and Japan had circulating HCV antibody; a much lower frequency (15 percent) was observed in acute, resolving infections. In addition, 58 percent of NANBH patients from the United States with no identifiable source of parenteral exposure to the virus were also positive for HCV antibody. These data indicate that HCV is a major cause of NANBH throughout the world.
Human T-cell leukemia viruses type I and II (HTLV-I and -II) exhibit several features characteristic of this retroviral family: the presence of an x-lor gene encoding a nuclear protein, transformation properties suggesting the involvement of a virus-associated trans-acting factor, and transcriptional trans-activation of the long terminal repeat (LTR) in infected cells. In the study described here the HTL x-lor products, in the absence of other viral proteins, were able to activate gene expression in trans directed by HTLV LTR. The regulation of the expression of particular genes in trans by HTLV x-lor products suggests that they play a role in viral replication and possibly in transformation of T lymphocytes.
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have been generated from mouse and human somatic cells by introducing Oct3/4 and Sox2 with either Klf4 and c-Myc or Nanog and Lin28 using retroviruses or lentiviruses. Patient-specific iPS cells could be useful in drug discovery and regenerative medicine. However, viral integration into the host genome increases the risk of tumorigenicity. Here, we report the generation of mouse iPS cells without viral vectors. Repeated transfection of two expression plasmids, one containing the complementary DNAs (cDNAs) of Oct3/4, Sox2, and Klf4 and the other containing the c-Myc cDNA, into mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in iPS cells without evidence of plasmid integration, which produced teratomas when transplanted into mice and contributed to adult chimeras. The production of virus-free iPS cells, albeit from embryonic fibroblasts, addresses a critical safety concern for potential use of iPS cells in regenerative medicine.
A molecular clone of the AIDS-associated retrovirus (ARV-2) was transfected into human T lymphocyte and monocyte cell lines as well as mouse, mink, monkey, and human fibroblast lines. A replicating virus with cytopathic and biologic properties of ARV-2 was recovered from all the cell lines. The animal and human fibroblast cells are resistant to direct infection by ARV, and in these experiments virus production in the fibroblast lines, especially mouse, was reduced compared to human lymphocytes. However, human fibroblasts were more permissive to virus expression than mouse cells. These results show that, whereas the primary block to ARV infection in certain cells may occur at the cell surface, intracellular mechanisms can also participate in controlling virus replication. The results have relevance to vaccine development and encourage further work with modified molecular clones to examine regions of the ARV genome necessary for cytopathology and replication.
Lassa virus, the causative agent of Lassa fever, causes thousands of deaths annually and is a biological threat agent, for which there is no vaccine and limited therapy. The nucleoprotein (NP) of Lassa virus has essential roles in viral RNA synthesis and immune suppression, the molecular mechanisms of which are poorly understood. Here we report the crystal structure of Lassa virus NP at 1.80 A resolution, which reveals amino (N)- and carboxy (C)-terminal domains with structures unlike any of the reported viral NPs. The N domain folds into a novel structure with a deep cavity for binding the m7GpppN cap structure that is required for viral RNA transcription, whereas the C domain contains 3'-5' exoribonuclease activity involved in suppressing interferon induction. To our knowledge this is the first X-ray crystal structure solved for an arenaviral NP, which reveals its unexpected functions and indicates unique mechanisms in cap binding and immune evasion. These findings provide great potential for vaccine and drug development.
Many viruses have evolved mechanisms to avoid detection by the host immune system. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) expresses an immediate early protein, ICP47, which blocks presentation of viral peptides to MHC class I-restricted cells. The properties of the newly synthesized class I molecules in HSV-infected cells resemble those of cell lines deficient in the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) in that class I molecules are retained in the endoplasmic reticulum, and the heavy chain and beta 2-microglobulin subunits dissociate in detergent extracts but the complex can be stabilized by peptides. We show here that ICP47 binds to TAP and prevents peptide translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum.
Mathematical models of viral transmission and control are important tools for assessing the threat posed by deliberate release of the smallpox virus and the best means of containing an outbreak. Models must balance biological realism against limitations of knowledge, and uncertainties need to be accurately communicated to policy-makers. Smallpox poses the particular challenge that key biological, social and spatial factors affecting disease spread in contemporary populations must be elucidated largely from historical studies undertaken before disease eradication in 1979. We review the use of models in smallpox planning within the broader epidemiological context set by recent outbreaks of both novel and re-emerging pathogens.
Immunochemical investigations of the viral antigens and molecular characterization of the viral DNA have elucidated the nature of the hepatitis B virus infection underlying acute, chronic, and oncogenic disorders of the liver in man. Cloning and sequencing of viral DNA have made possible studies on the structure of the genome and on certain aspects of the biology of the virus, hitherto constrained for a lack of tissue culture systems and laboratory animal models useful in its propagation.
During HIV-1 infection, antibodies are generated against the region of the viral gp120 envelope glycoprotein that binds CD4, the primary receptor for HIV-1. Among these antibodies, VRC01 achieves broad neutralization of diverse viral strains. We determined the crystal structure of VRC01 in complex with a human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 gp120 core. VRC01 partially mimics CD4 interaction with gp120. A shift from the CD4-defined orientation, however, focuses VRC01 onto the vulnerable site of initial CD4 attachment, allowing it to overcome the glycan and conformational masking that diminishes the neutralization potency of most CD4-binding-site antibodies. To achieve this recognition, VRC01 contacts gp120 mainly through immunoglobulin V-gene regions substantially altered from their genomic precursors. Partial receptor mimicry and extensive affinity maturation thus facilitate neutralization of HIV-1 by natural human antibodies.
Cells infected with the papovavirus SV40 not only synthesize viral antigen but also synthesize the specific nonviral antigen found in SV40-induced tumors. In the presence of the DNA antagonist cytosine arabinoside, infected cells fail to make viral antigen but still synthesize the tumor antigen. Iododeoxyuridine does not inhibit the synthesis either of tumor or of virus antigen but does prevent the development of infectious virus.
Human DNA contains many copies of endogenous retroviral sequences. Characterization of molecular clones of these structures reveals the existence of two related families. One family consists of full-length (8.8 kilobases) proviral structures, with typical long terminal repeates (LTR's). The other family consists of structures, which contain only 4.1 kilobases of gag-pol sequences, bounded by a tandem array of imperfect repeats 72 to 76 base pairs in length. Typical LTR sequences that exist as solitary elements in the genome were cloned and characterized.
Encephalomyocarditis virus was isolated from the organs of swine dying during an outbreak of an acutely fatal disease occurring on a farm in Panama. The outstanding lesion was severe myocarditis. Pigs inoculated with the viral isolate developed a systemic infection with myocarditis.
With the advent of dense maps of human genetic variation, it is now possible to detect positive natural selection across the human genome. Here we report an analysis of over 3 million polymorphisms from the International HapMap Project Phase 2 (HapMap2). We used 'long-range haplotype' methods, which were developed to identify alleles segregating in a population that have undergone recent selection, and we also developed new methods that are based on cross-population comparisons to discover alleles that have swept to near-fixation within a population. The analysis reveals more than 300 strong candidate regions. Focusing on the strongest 22 regions, we develop a heuristic for scrutinizing these regions to identify candidate targets of selection. In a complementary analysis, we identify 26 non-synonymous, coding, single nucleotide polymorphisms showing regional evidence of positive selection. Examination of these candidates highlights three cases in which two genes in a common biological process have apparently undergone positive selection in the same population:LARGE and DMD, both related to infection by the Lassa virus, in West Africa;SLC24A5 and SLC45A2, both involved in skin pigmentation, in Europe; and EDAR and EDA2R, both involved in development of hair follicles, in Asia.
Activation of telomerase, a ribonucleoprotein complex that synthesizes telomere repeat sequences, is linked to cell immortalization and is characteristic of most cell lines and tumours. Here we show that expression of the human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) E6 protein activates telomerase in early-passage human keratinocytes and mammary epithelial cells. This activation was observed in cells pre-crisis, that is, before they became immortal, and occurred within one passage of retroviral infection with vectors expressing HPV-16 E6. Studies using HPV-16 E6 mutants showed that there was no correlation between the ability of the mutants to activate telomerase and their ability to target p53 for degradation, suggesting that telomerase activation by HPV-16 E6 is p53 independent. Keratinocytes expressing wild-type HPV-16 E6 have an extended lifespan, but do not become immortal, indicating that telomerase activation and E6-mediate degradation of p53 are insufficient for their immortalization. These results show that telomerase activation is an intrinsic, but insufficient, component of transformation by HPV.
Thin vitrified layers of unfixed, unstained and unsupported virus suspensions can be prepared for observation by cryo-electron microscopy in easily controlled conditions. The viral particles appear free from the kind of damage caused by dehydration, freezing or adsorption to a support that is encountered in preparing biological samples for conventional electron microscopy. Cryo-electron microscopy of vitrified specimens offers possibilities for high resolution observations that compare favourably with any other electron microscopical method.
Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), the prototype of the a-herpesvirus family, causes life-long infections in humans. Although generally associated with various mucocutaneous diseases, HSV-1 is also involved in lethal encephalitis. HSV-1 entry into host cells requires cellular receptors for both envelope glycoproteins B (gB) and D (gD). However, the gB receptors responsible for its broad host range in vitro and infection of critical targets in vivo remain unknown. Here we show that non-muscle myosin heavy chain IIA (NMHC-IIA), a subunit of non-muscle myosin IIA (NM-IIA), functions as an HSV-1 entry receptor by interacting with gB. A cell line that is relatively resistant to HSV-1 infection became highly susceptible to infection by this virus when NMHC-IIA was overexpressed. Antibody to NMHC-IIA blocked HSV-1 infection in naturally permissive target cells. Furthermore, knockdown of NMHC-IIA in the permissive cells inhibited HSV-1 infection as well as cell-cell fusion when gB, gD, gH and gL were coexpressed. Cell-surface expression of NMHC-IIA was markedly and rapidly induced during the initiation of HSV-1 entry. A specific inhibitor of myosin light chain kinase, which regulates NM-IIA by phosphorylation, reduced the redistribution of NMHC-IIA as well as HSV-1 infection in cell culture and in a murine model for herpes stromal keratitis. NMHC-IIA is ubiquitously expressed in various human tissues and cell types and, therefore, is implicated as a functional gB receptor that mediates broad HSV-1 infectivity both in vitro and in vivo. The identification of NMHC-IIA as an HSV-1 entry receptor and the involvement of NM-IIA regulation in HSV-1 infection provide an insight into HSV-1 entry and identify new targets for antiviral drug development.
Histocompatibility antigens expressed on tissue grafted between individuals are recognized by host T cells, which reject the graft. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens have been identified on the molecular level, whereas the molecules representing the remaining ones, the minor histocompatibility antigens, are unknown, apart from some exceptions. The cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response against minor histocompatibility antigens shares many aspects with that against virus-infected cells. Virus-specific CTL recognize peptides derived from viral proteins produced in the infected cell. These peptides are presented by MHC class I molecules, as indicated by functional and crystallographic data. By analogy, minor histocompatibility antigens have been postulated to be peptides derived from normal cellular proteins presented by MHC class I molecules. Here we report that peptides derived from normal cellular proteins can indeed be recognized by CTL raised in the classical minor histoincompatible mouse strain combination, C57BL/6 against BALB.B. Thus, we have proven the above postulate, and isolated one of the minor histocompatibility molecules elusive for several decades.
In a study of genetic variation in the AIDS virus, HTLV-III/LAV, sequential virus isolates from persistently infected individuals were examined by Southern blot genomic analysis, molecular cloning, and nucleotide sequencing. Four to six virus isolates were obtained from each of three individuals over a 1-year or 2-year period. Changes were detected throughout the viral genomes and consisted of isolated and clustered nucleotide point mutations as well as short deletions or insertions. Results from genomic restriction mapping and nucleotide sequence comparisons indicated that viruses isolated sequentially had evolved in parallel from a common progenitor virus. The rate of evolution of HTLV-III/LAV was estimated to be at least 10(-3) nucleotide substitutions per site per year for the env gene and 10(-4) for the gag gene, values a millionfold greater than for most DNA genomes. Despite this relatively rapid rate of sequence divergence, virus isolates from any one patient were all much more related to each other than to viruses from other individuals. In view of the substantial heterogeneity among most independent HTLV-III/LAV isolates, the repeated isolation from a given individual of only highly related viruses raises the possibility that some type of interference mechanism may prevent simultaneous infection by more than one major genotypic form of the virus.
The PBj14 isolate of simian immunodeficiency virus from sooty mangabey monkeys (SIVSMM-PBj14) is the most acutely pathogenic primate lentivirus so far described, always causing fatal disease in pig-tailed macaques (Macaca nemestrina) within 8 days of inoculation. As a first step in identifying viral genes and gene products that influence pathogenicity, the SIVSMM-PBj14 genome was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction as 5' and 3' genomic halves of 5.1 and 5.8 kilobases, respectively, and molecularly cloned. DNA sequence analysis revealed a high degree of conservation with other SIVs, except for a 22-base-pair duplication in the enhancer region of the viral long terminal repeat which included a second binding site for the transcription factor NF-kappa B. Of six genomic halves examined, four contributed to the formation of infectious virus that induced acute disease and death in pig-tailed macaques as early as 6 days post-inoculation, with pathology, disease syndromes and kinetics indistinguishable from those induced by the uncloned isolate. To our knowledge this is the first example of acute immunodeficiency disease induced by a molecularly defined lentivirus. Furthermore, the molecularly cloned SIVSMM-PBj14 viruses share with the uncloned virus cytopathicity for mangabey CD4+ cells, a property that may correlate with their observed pathogenicity in vivo.
Cytotoxic T cells recognize viral proteins as peptide fragments which are produced in the cytosol and transported on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I proteins to the cell surface. Viral peptides that meet the stringent binding characteristics of class I proteins are generated by the 20S proteasome. The interferon (IFN)-gamma-inducible activator of the 20S proteasome, PA28, strongly influences the proteasomal cleavage pattern in vitro. This led us to investigate whether changes in cellular levels of PA28 affect the efficiency of viral antigen processing. A mouse fibroblast line expressing the murine cytomegalovirus pp89 protein was transfected with either the human or murine gene encoding the PA28alpha subunit, which is sufficient to activate the peptide-hydrolysing activity of the 20S proteasome in vitro. Here we report that enhanced expression of PA28alpha at a level similar to that obtained after IFN-gamma induction resulted in a marked enhancement of recognition by pp89-specific cytotoxic T cells; the presentation of influenza nucleoprotein was also significantly improved. These results demonstrate a fundamental in vivo function for PA28alpha in antigen processing.
The rapid dissemination of the 2009 pandemic influenza virus underscores the need for universal influenza vaccines that elicit protective immunity to diverse viral strains. Here, we show that vaccination with plasmid DNA encoding H1N1 influenza hemagglutinin (HA) and boosting with seasonal vaccine or replication-defective adenovirus 5 vector encoding HA stimulated the production of broadly neutralizing influenza antibodies. This prime/boost combination increased the neutralization of diverse H1N1 strains dating from 1934 to 2007 as compared to either component alone and conferred protection against divergent H1N1 viruses in mice and ferrets. These antibodies were directed to the conserved stem region of HA and were also elicited in nonhuman primates. Cross-neutralization of H1N1 subtypes elicited by this approach provides a basis for the development of a universal influenza vaccine for humans.
Cells cultured from young (6-day) chicken embryos differ from those of older (13-day) embryos in having a greater susceptibility to infection by certain viruses and a considerably lesser sensitivity to the action of interferon. These circumstances parallel those observed in the intact embryo. The addition of a small percentage of cells from young embryos alters the response of cells cultured from older embryos by increasing viral susceptibility sevenfold and decreasing sensitivity to interferon 25-fold. We postulate that a repressor which inhibits the expression of interferon in older embryonic cells is elaborated by cells from young embryos.
Alteration of gene transcription by inhibition of specific transcriptional regulatory proteins is necessary for determining how these factors participate in cellular differentiation. The functions of these proteins can be antagonized by several methods, each with specific limitations. Inhibition of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins was achieved with double-stranded (ds) phosphorothioate oligonucleotides that contained octamer or kappa B consensus sequences. The phosphorothioate oligonucleotides specifically bound either octamer transcription factor or nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B. The modified oligonucleotides accumulated in cells more effectively than standard ds oligonucleotides and modulated gene expression in a specific manner. Octamer-dependent activation of a reporter plasmid or NF-kappa B-dependent activation of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enhancer was inhibited when the appropriate phosphorothioate oligonucleotide was added to a transiently transfected B cell line. Addition of phosphorothioate oligonucleotides that contained the octamer consensus to Jurkat T leukemia cells inhibited interleukin-2 (IL-2) secretion to a degree similar to that observed with a mutated octamer site in the IL-2 enhancer. The ds phosphorothioate oligonucleotides probably compete for binding of specific transcription factors and may provide anti-viral, immunosuppressive, or other therapeutic effects.
Unexplained debilitating dementia or encephalopathy occurs frequently in adults and children with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Brains from 15 individuals with AIDS and encephalopathy were examined by Southern analysis and in situ hybridization for the presence of human T-cell leukemia (lymphotropic) virus type III (HTLV-III), the virus believed to be the causative agent of AIDS. HTLV-III DNA was detected in the brains of five patients, and viral-specific RNA was detected in four of these. In view of these findings and the recent demonstration of morphologic and genetic relatedness between HTLV-III and visna virus, a lentivirus that causes a chronic degenerative neurologic disease in sheep, HTLV-III should be evaluated further as a possible cause of AIDS encephalopathy.
Rat cells transformed by the highly oncogenic adenovirus 12 lack at least two cellular proteins which are present in cells transformed by the non-oncogenic adenovirus 5 and in untransformed cells. One protein has been identified as the heavy chain of the rat class I major histocompatibility complex. This finding may explain the difference in oncogenicity between adenoviral species.
The depletion of CD4+ T cells in AIDS is correlated with high turnover of the human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 and associated with apoptosis. The molecular mechanism of apoptosis in HIV infection, however, is largely unknown. T-cell apoptosis might be affected by viral proteins such as HIV-1 Tat and gp120 (refs 10, 11). T-cell-receptor (TCR)-induced apoptosis was recently shown to involve the CD95 (APO-1/Fas) receptor. We show here that HIV-1 Tat strongly sensitizes TCR- and CD4(gp120)-induced apoptosis by upregulation of CD95 ligand expression. Concentrations of Tat found to be effective in cultures of HIV-1-infected cells were also observed in sera from HIV-1-infected individuals. Taken together, our results indicate that HIV-1 Tat and gp120 accelerate CD95-mediated, activation-induced T-cell apoptosis, a mechanism that may contribute to CD4+ T-cell depletion in AIDS.
Retroviruses, acting as somatic cell insertional mutagens, have been widely used to identify cancer genes in the haematopoietic system and mammary gland. An insertional mutagen for use in other mouse somatic cells would facilitate the identification of genes involved in tumour formation in a wider variety of tissues. Here we report the ability of the Sleeping Beauty transposon to act as a somatic insertional mutagen to identify genes involved in solid tumour formation. A Sleeping Beauty transposon, engineered to elicit loss-of-function or gain-of-function mutations, transposed in all somatic tissues tested and accelerated tumour formation in mice predisposed to cancer. Cloning transposon insertion sites from these tumours revealed the presence of common integration sites, at known and candidate cancer genes, similar to those observed in retroviral mutagenesis screens. Sleeping Beauty is a new tool for unbiased, forward genetic screens for cancer genes in vivo.
The human T-lymphotropic retrovirus HTLV-III/LAV encodes a trans-activator that increases viral gene expression. We expressed this trans-activator in animal cells and studied its structural and functional characteristics. The putative trans-activator protein was immunoprecipitated from overproducing stable cell lines and shown to migrate as a 14-kilodalton polypeptide on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. S1 nuclease mapping experiments showed that the trans-activator increases the levels of steady-state messenger RNA transcribed from the viral long terminal repeat promoter. Sequences within the R region of the HTLV-III/LAV long terminal repeat are essential for trans-activation. Quantitations of messenger RNA and protein showed that the protein increase was greater than the messenger RNA increase in CV1 and HeLa cells, indicating that more than one mechanism was responsible for the trans-activation and that cell type-specific factors may determine the final level of trans-activation.
The Tax protein of human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV)-1 activates expression of the HTLV-1 long terminal repeat through a DNA element that resembles the cellular cyclic AMP-regulated enhancer (CRE). Tax contains a transcriptional activation domain, but its ability to activate gene expression depends on interactions with cellular CRE-binding proteins such as CREB. Whether Tax can activate the expression of cellular CRE-containing genes has been controversial. Here we show that Tax can activate both the HTLV-1 and consensus cellular CREs, and propose that this activation may occur through mechanisms that are differentially dependent on CREB phosphorylation. Tax not only increases the binding of CREB to the viral CRE but also recruits the transcriptional co-activator CBP in a manner independent of CREB phosphorylation. In contrast, association of Tax with the cellular CRE occurs through CBP which, in turn, is recruited only in the presence of phosphorylated CREB.
A herpes-type virus infection, the first to be found in an invertebrate animal, is reported in the oyster Crassostrea virginica. Intranuclear herpes-type viral inclusions were more prevalent in the oyster at elevated water temperatures of 28 degrees to 30 degrees C than at normal ambient temperatures of 18 degrees to 20 degrees C. The inclusions were associated with a lethal disease at the elevated temperatures.
Dengue fever is the most frequent arthropod-borne viral disease of humans, with almost half of the world's population at risk of infection. The high prevalence, lack of an effective vaccine, and absence of specific treatment conspire to make dengue fever a global public health threat. Given their compact genomes, dengue viruses (DENV-1-4) and other flaviviruses probably require an extensive number of host factors; however, only a limited number of human, and an even smaller number of insect host factors, have been identified. Here we identify insect host factors required for DENV-2 propagation, by carrying out a genome-wide RNA interference screen in Drosophila melanogaster cells using a well-established 22,632 double-stranded RNA library. This screen identified 116 candidate dengue virus host factors (DVHFs). Although some were previously associated with flaviviruses (for example, V-ATPases and alpha-glucosidases), most of the DVHFs were newly implicated in dengue virus propagation. The dipteran DVHFs had 82 readily recognizable human homologues and, using a targeted short-interfering-RNA screen, we showed that 42 of these are human DVHFs. This indicates notable conservation of required factors between dipteran and human hosts. This work suggests new approaches to control infection in the insect vector and the mammalian host.
We report the genome sequence of Theileria parva, an apicomplexan pathogen causing economic losses to smallholder farmers in Africa. The parasite chromosomes exhibit limited conservation of gene synteny with Plasmodium falciparum, and its plastid-like genome represents the first example where all apicoplast genes are encoded on one DNA strand. We tentatively identify proteins that facilitate parasite segregation during host cell cytokinesis and contribute to persistent infection of transformed host cells. Several biosynthetic pathways are incomplete or absent, suggesting substantial metabolic dependence on the host cell. One protein family that may generate parasite antigenic diversity is not telomere-associated.
Once inside a host cell, HIV must make its way to the nucleus in order to replicate, but until now, its journey has largely been uncharted territory. As researchers begin to explore this landscape a common theme is emerging: Soon after viruses enter cells, they enlist components of their hosts to assist them in their journey. Now, in what is being called one of the most exciting frontiers in AIDS research, preliminary findings on how HIV enters cell nuclei are giving AIDS researchers new leads on possible drug targets to fight the ever-mounting epidemic.
Small round-structured viruses (SRSVs), also known as Norwalk or Norwalk-like viruses, are the major worldwide cause of acute, epidemic nonbacterial gastroenteritis in humans. These viruses, which contain a single-stranded RNA genome, have remained refractory to molecular characterization because of the small amounts of virus in clinical samples and the absence of an animal model and an in vitro culture system. The complete genomic nucleotide sequence of an SRSV, Southampton virus, was determined. The 7696-nucleotide RNA genome encodes three open reading frames whose sequences and organization strongly support proposals that SRVSs are members of the Caliciviridae.
Avian myelocytomatosis virus MC29 is a replication-defective acute leukaemia virus which induces a variety of tumours in chickens including sarcomas, renal and hepatic carcinomas, and myelocytomatosis. The oncogenic potential of the virus is mediated by the gene v-myc, acquired from sequences (c-myc) present in normal uninfected chicken DNA. Sequences closely related to chicken c-myc have been highly conserved throughout evolution, from Drosophila to vertebrates. The hypothesis that c-myc may be involved in neoplastic transformation has been strengthened by the finding that B-cell lymphomas induced in chickens by avian leukosis virus (ALV) are often associated with increased expression of c-myc resulting from integration of the ALV provirus adjacent to the c-myc gene. More recently, it has been demonstrated that the malignant human cell line HL-60, derived from the peripheral blood leukocytes of a patient with acute promyelocytic leukaemia, expresses elevated levels of myc-related mRNA associated with an amplification of the c-myc gene. To explore the relationship of the human cellular myc gene with the corresponding viral oncogene from MC29, and to provide a framework for the analysis of the mechanism and significance of c-myc amplification in human tumours, we have isolated and determined the nucleotide sequence of a genomic clone prepared from a normal human library which contains all domains sharing homology with v-myc.
The transforming proteins of several DNA tumour viruses, including adenovirus E1a and simian virus 40 large T antigen, complex with the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumour-suppressor gene product. This requires regions in these viral proteins necessary for transformation and is thought to inactivate the growth-suppressing properties of the Rb protein by disrupting its interaction with cellular targets. Indeed, regions of Rb required to form a complex with E1a and large T antigen are often mutated in transformed cells. The level at which the Rb protein regulates proliferation is unknown, although one possibility is transcription. We have previously characterized a sequence-specific transcription factor, DRTF1, the activity of which is downregulated as embryonal carcinoma stem cells differentiate. DRTF1 is found in several discrete protein complexes (a, b and c) which are of different sizes but have the same DNA specificity. We now show that one of these also contains the Rb protein and, further, that the adenovirus E1a protein causes the dissociation of the Rb protein from this complex. This requires conserved regions 1 and 2 of E1a that are known to be required for efficient transformation. These results demonstrate that the Rb protein forms a complex with a DNA-bound transcription factor, and suggests that the Rb protein might act by regulating transcription.
The CD4 T-lymphocyte differentiation antigen is an essential component of the cell surface receptor for human immunodeficiency viruses (HIVs) causing AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) (refs 1-3). Peripheral blood lymphocytes of apes, New World and Old World monkeys express cell surface antigens homologous to CD4 of human T-helper lymphocytes. The cells of several of these species can be infected in short term culture with diverse strains of the type-1 or type-2 human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV-1 and HIV-2). HIV-1 is the prototype AIDS virus, and HIV-2 is the second type of AIDS virus, prevalent in West Africa. Infection of the primate cells correlates with evolutionary conservation on CD4 of one particular epitope cluster, and is inhibited by treatment of the cells with monoclonal antibodies to this epitope. The capacity of HIV to replicate in simian cells may provide a means for evaluating antiviral drugs and vaccines.
Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) have been implicated in many aspects of cell growth and differentiation both in normal and neoplastic settings. For example, the mouse int-2 gene, which encodes an FGF-related product, is a frequent target of proviral activation in carcinomas induced by mouse mammary tumour virus, but apparently functions at discrete stages of normal embryonic development. Six classes of int-2 messenger RNA have been identified in embryonic cells, each of which is predicted to encode the same 245-amino-acid protein. But all known int-2 transcripts include sequences upstream of the AUG codon presumed to be the initiation codon. Here we report an additional N-terminally extended int-2 gene product initiated at an in-frame CUG codon. In COS-1 cells transiently transfected with appropriate int-2 complementary DNAs, the AUG-initiated product is found predominantly in the secretory pathway, whereas the CUG-initiated form is localized to the nucleus. These data indicate that the Int-2 oncoprotein could influence cellular behaviour by two distinct mechanisms.
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) matrix protein, p17, forms the outer shell of the core of the virus, lining the inner surface of the viral membrane. The protein has several key functions. It orchestrates viral assembly via targeting signals that direct the gag precursor polyprotein, p55, to the host cell membrane and it interacts with the transmembrane protein, gp41, to retain the env-encoded proteins in the virus. In addition, p17 contains a nuclear localization signal that directs the preintegration complex to the nucleus of infected cells. This permits the virus to infect productively non-dividing cells, a distinguishing feature of HIV and other lentiviruses. We have determined the solution structure of p17 by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) with a root-mean square deviation for the backbone of the well-defined regions of 0.9 A. It consists of four helices connected by short loops and an irregular, mixed beta-sheet which provides a positively charged surface for interaction with the inner layer of the membrane. The helical topology is unusual; the Brookhaven protein database contains only one similar structure, that of the immune modulator interferon-gamma.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes lyse target cells after T-cell-receptor-mediated recognition of class I major histocompatibility complex molecules presenting peptides. Antigenic peptides are generated in the cytoplasm by proteasomes and translocated into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by peptide transporters (TAP). Herpes simplex virus (HSV) expresses a cytoplasmic protein, ICP47, which seems to interfere with such immune surveillance by mediating retention of 'empty' class I molecules in the ER. By expressing ICP47 in HeLa cells under an inducible promoter, we show that ICP47 efficiently inhibits peptide transport across the ER membrane such that nascent class I molecules fail to acquire antigenic peptides. This inhibition was overcome by transfecting murine TAP. Further, we demonstrate that ICP47 colocalizes and physically associates with TAP within the cell. Inhibition of peptide translocation by a viral protein indicates a previously undocumented potential mechanism for viral immune evasion.
Cellular compartmentalization of RNAs is thought to influence their susceptibility to ribozyme cleavage. As a test of this idea, two retroviral vectors--one encoding a hammer-head ribozyme designed to cleave lacZ transcripts and another encoding the lacZ messenger RNA--were coexpressed inside retroviral packaging cells. Because of the retroviral packaging signal, the ribozyme would be expected to colocalize with the lacZ-containing viral genomic RNA but not with the lacZ messenger RNA. The ribozyme was found to reduce the titer of infectious virus containing lacZ by 90 percent, but had no effect on translation of lacZ messenger RNA. These results indicate that sorting gene inhibitors to appropriate intracellular sites may increase their effectiveness.
Kinetic analysis of the hybridization of 71S RNA from Prague strain of Rous sarcoma virus with an excess of DNA from virus induced sarcomas indicated the presence of the majority of the viral genome sequences in cellular DNA with a very low average frequency per cell. About one-third of the viral sequences were at least partially complementary to DNA sequences with a higher average frequency on the order of 50 to 100 per cell. Normal chick embryo DNA was distinctly different, but contained sequences at least partially homologous to some fraction of the viral RNA.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transmission from infected patients to health-care workers has been well documented, but transmission from an infected health-care worker to a patient has not been reported. After identification of an acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patient who had no known risk factors for HIV infection but who had undergone an invasive procedure performed by a dentist with AIDS, six other patients of this dentist were found to be HIV-infected. Molecular biologic studies were conducted to complement the epidemiologic investigation. Portions of the HIV proviral envelope gene from each of the seven patients, the dentist, and 35 HIV-infected persons from the local geographic area were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and sequenced. Three separate comparative genetic analyses--genetic distance measurements, phylogenetic tree analysis, and amino acid signature pattern analysis--showed that the viruses from the dentist and five dental patients were closely related. These data, together with the epidemiologic investigation, indicated that these patients became infected with HIV while receiving care from a dentist with AIDS.
Two simian virus 40 transcriptional promoter elements, the 72-base pair (bp) repeat and the 21-bp repeat region, induce chromatin structures of increased DNase I sensitivity when transposed elsewhere in the viral genome. The induction of a sufficiently long stretch of DNase I-sensitive chromatin leads to the appearance of a visible nucleosome-free region.
The primary structure of the poliovirus genome has been determined. The RNA molecule is 7,433 nucleotides long, polyadenylated at the 3' terminus, and covalently linked to a small protein (VPg) at the 5' terminus. An open reading frame of 2,207 consecutive triplets spans over 89% of the nucleotide sequence and codes for the viral polyprotein NCVPOO. Twelve viral polypeptides have been mapped by amino acid sequence analysis and were found to be proteolytic cleavage products of the polyprotein, cleavages occurring predominantly at Gln-Gly pairs.
The mechanism of DNA ejection, viral assembly and evolution are related to the structure of bacteriophage phi X174. The F protein forms a T = 1 capsid whose major folding motif is the eight-stranded antiparallel beta barrel found in many other icosahedral viruses. Groups of 5 G proteins form 12 dominating spikes that enclose a hydrophilic channel containing some diffuse electron density. Each G protein is a tight beta barrel with its strands running radially outwards and with a topology similar to that of the F protein. The 12 'pilot' H proteins per virion may be partially located in the putative ion channel. The small, basic J protein is associated with the DNA and is situated in an interior cleft of the F protein. Tentatively, there are three regions of partially ordered DNA structure,
Poliovirus virion RNA contains a single covalently bound sequence of polyadenylic acid which is approximately 49 nucleotides long. A single, slightly longer polyadenylic acid sequence is contained in Eastern Equine Encephalitis virus RNA. Since these viruses are otherwise dissimilar these sequences may play a common role in viral replication, possibly in translation of the viral RNA.
The gag-pol gene of HTLV-III (human T-lymphotropic virus), the virus linked to AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), was expressed in yeast, and processing of the gag precursor into proteins of the same size as those in the virion was observed. Processing of the gag gene in yeast cells mimics the process that naturally occurs in mammalian cells during maturation of virions. Therefore it was possible to perform mutational analysis of the virus genome to localize the gene that codes for the protease function to the amino terminal coding region of the pol gene. Since this region overlaps the gag gene, it is likely that ribosomal frameshifting occurs from gag to pol. Antibodies in all of the AIDS patients' sera tested recognized the yeast synthesized gag proteins, although the sera showed differences in relative reactivity to the individual gag proteins and the precursor. This yeast system should be valuable not only for production of viral proteins for diagnostic or vaccine purposes but also for analysis of the genetics and biochemistry of viral gene functions--parameters that are difficult to study otherwise with this virus.
The retrovirus involved in acquired immune deficiency syndrome (HTLV-III/LAV) contains a region that is necessary for stimulation of gene expression directed by the viral long terminal repeat. This region is located between nucleotides 5365 and 5607, immediately 5' to the envelope gene. A doubly-spliced message containing this region could encode an 86-amino acid protein with structural features similar to those of nucleic acid-binding proteins.
Ten strains of a new arbovirus belonging to the Bunyamwera group (Bunyaviridae) were recovered from field-collected Aedes albopictus mosquitoes in Potosi, Missouri. This evidence indicates that this species may serve as an arbovirus vector in the United States. The urban-suburban distribution, aggressive biting behavior, and broad viral susceptibility of Ae. albopictus may lead to the transmission of viruses of known public health importance and perhaps of viruses hitherto not transmitted to humans because of the feeding pattern of their usual vectors.
Transposable elements can be identified by their ability to induce mutant alleles at new loci. The retrotransposon family is thought to transpose through an RNA intermediate and has many similarities to vertebrate proretroviruses. In plants, retrotransposons have been described in maize, Arabidopsis and wheat, and non-viral retroposons in maize. Most of these elements, however, have been found as non-mobile integrated units. Here, we report the isolation of the first tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) transposable element, Tnt1, which seems to be the most complete mobile retrotransposon characterized in higher plants. Tnt1 has been isolated after its transposition into the nitrate reductase (NR) structural gene of tobacco, and transposition events have been detected through in vitro selection of spontaneous NR-deficient (NR-) mutant lines in cell cultures derived from tobacco mesophyll protoplasts. Tnt1 is 5,334 nucleotides long, contains two 610-base-pair-long terminal repeats and a single open reading frame of 3,984 nucleotides. Comparison of the Tnt1 open reading frame coding potential with those of the Drosophila melanogaster copia retrotransposon, yeast Ty retrotransposon, and vertebrate proretroviruses revealed that Tnt1 is closely related to copia and carries all the functions known to be required for autonomous transposition by reverse transcription.
The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-causing lentiviruses human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) effectively evade host immunity and, once established, infections with these viruses are only rarely controlled by immunological mechanisms. However, the initial establishment of infection in the first few days after mucosal exposure, before viral dissemination and massive replication, may be more vulnerable to immune control. Here we report that SIV vaccines that include rhesus cytomegalovirus (RhCMV) vectors establish indefinitely persistent, high-frequency, SIV-specific effector memory T-cell (T(EM)) responses at potential sites of SIV replication in rhesus macaques and stringently control highly pathogenic SIV(MAC239) infection early after mucosal challenge. Thirteen of twenty-four rhesus macaques receiving either RhCMV vectors alone or RhCMV vectors followed by adenovirus 5 (Ad5) vectors (versus 0 of 9 DNA/Ad5-vaccinated rhesus macaques) manifested early complete control of SIV (undetectable plasma virus), and in twelve of these thirteen animals we observed long-term (>=1 year) protection. This was characterized by: occasional blips of plasma viraemia that ultimately waned; predominantly undetectable cell-associated viral load in blood and lymph node mononuclear cells; no depletion of effector-site CD4(+) memory T cells; no induction or boosting of SIV Env-specific antibodies; and induction and then loss of T-cell responses to an SIV protein (Vif) not included in the RhCMV vectors. Protection correlated with the magnitude of the peak SIV-specific CD8(+) T-cell responses in the vaccine phase, and occurred without anamnestic T-cell responses. Remarkably, long-term RhCMV vector-associated SIV control was insensitive to either CD8(+) or CD4(+) lymphocyte depletion and, at necropsy, cell-associated SIV was only occasionally measurable at the limit of detection with ultrasensitive assays, observations that indicate the possibility of eventual viral clearance. Thus, persistent vectors such as CMV and their associated T(EM) responses might significantly contribute to an efficacious HIV/AIDS vaccine.
In the host cell, retroviral DNAs exist in three main forms: unintegrated linear, unintegrated circular, and integrated (the provirus). High levels of unintegrated forms of retroviral DNA often correlate with superinfection and accompanying cytopathic effects, as, for example, in the case of feline acquired immunodeficiency. In culture, HIV-1 infection also results in high levels of unintegrated viral DNA although direct correlations with cytopathicity have not been made. The low frequency of HIV-1-infected cells in patients has made it difficult to determine the structure of the viral DNA in fresh tissue samples from AIDS patients by standard methods such as Southern hybridization. The PCR technique however, which allows the detection of viral DNA at levels far below that possible by other hybridization methods is, in its conventional form, of limited use for quantitative analysis. To study the amount and form of HIV-1 DNA in primary tissue of AIDS patients we have therefore modified the PCR method. Our results indicate that each of the three species of viral DNA are detectable in blood and brain of AIDS patients, and that in autopsy samples from patients with HIV encephalitis there is a considerably higher proportion of unintegrated viral DNA.
Interstitial pneumonia linked with reactivation of latent human cytomegalovirus due to iatrogenic immunosuppression can be a serious complication of bone marrow transplantation therapy of aplastic anaemia and acute leukaemia. Cellular immunity plays a critical role in the immune surveillance of inapparent cytomegalovirus infections in man and the mouse. The molecular basis of latency, however, and the interaction between latently or recurrently infected cells and the immune system of the host are poorly understood. We have detected a so far unknown antigen in the mouse model. This antigen is found in infected cells in association with the expression of the herpesvirus 'immediate early' genes and is recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTL). We now demonstrate that an unexpectedly high proportion of the CTL precursors generated in vivo during acute murine cytomegalovirus infection are specific for cells that selectively synthesize immediate early proteins, indicating an immunodominant role of viral non-structural proteins.
Integrase is an essential retroviral enzyme that binds both termini of linear viral DNA and inserts them into a host cell chromosome. The structure of full-length retroviral integrase, either separately or in complex with DNA, has been lacking. Furthermore, although clinically useful inhibitors of HIV integrase have been developed, their mechanism of action remains speculative. Here we present a crystal structure of full-length integrase from the prototype foamy virus in complex with its cognate DNA. The structure shows the organization of the retroviral intasome comprising an integrase tetramer tightly associated with a pair of viral DNA ends. All three canonical integrase structural domains are involved in extensive protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. The binding of strand-transfer inhibitors displaces the reactive viral DNA end from the active site, disarming the viral nucleoprotein complex. Our findings define the structural basis of retroviral DNA integration, and will allow modelling of the HIV-1 intasome to aid in the development of antiretroviral drugs.
The virion of filamentous bacterial viruses comprises a cylindrical protein shell of o.d. approximately 60 A and i.d. 20A, containing a single-stranded circular DNA molecule which has two oppositely directed but not base-paired strands extending the length of the virion. The assembly of the virion involves an intracellular prepackaging of the DNA with a viral DNA-binding protein which is then displaced by the coat protein as the growing virion crosses the bacterial membrane. Studies of the virion by X-ray fibre diffraction show that the protein coat consists largely of alpha-helices oriented roughly parallel to the axis of the virion. As the normal to a planar peptide tends to align normal to a magnetic field, it is possible to improve significantly the orientation of virions in fibres using a strong magnet. The success of this technique with the Pf1 strain of virus led us to apply it to the better-known fd (f1, M13) strain. We report here new information about the arrangement of protein and DNA in the fd virion obtained from the improved diffraction pattern (Fig. 1).
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) may be one of the agents involved in the aetiology of human primary liver cancer. This hypothesis is supported by (1) the similarity between the geographical distribution of chronic carriers of the viral surface antigen (HBsAg) and that of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); (2) the increase in the prevalence of HBV markers in serum of patients with primary liver cancer when compared with the general population; (3) the observation that HBV infection precedes the development of the tumour. Moreover, these epidemiological indications of an association between HBV infecton and hepatocellular carcinoma are supported by the detection of HBV markers such as HBsAg or viral DNA sequences, although in a non-integrated form in tumour tissue. To study the relationship between HBV and primary liver cancer further, we looked for the presence of free or integrated viral DNA in tumour tissue of human hepatocellular carcinomas and in a HBsAg-producing human hepatoma cell line. Using the blot-transfer hybridization technique and cloned HBV DNA as a probe, we have now demonstrated that the viral DNA is integrated in the cellular genome both in tumour tissue and in a hepatoma cell line.
During a herpes simplex virus (HSV-1) lytic infection, three classes of viral genes are transcribed in a temporally regulated manner. The HSV-1 'immediate-early' (IE) promoter sequences contain multiple copies of a hexanucleotide sequence, GGGCGG, known as a GC box, and one or more copies of an 11-base pair (bp) conserved A + T-rich element, designated TAATGARAT. The TAATGARAT elements are thought to mediate the trans-activation of IE RNA synthesis by a virion-associated protein(s), and the flanking G + C-rich sequences appear both to potentiate this induction and to direct IE promoter activity in vivo. The similarity of the herpesvirus GC box repeats to those of the simian virus 40 (SV40) early promoter prompted the in vitro analysis of HSV IE transcription reported here. We show that the mammalian gene-specific transcription factor Sp1 binds to eight distinct regions of the HSV short terminal repeat and stimulates transcription 25-fold from the divergent IE-3 (ICP-4) and IE-4/5 promoters.
Evidence was presented earlier that a host-cell receptor for the highly neurotropic rabies virus might be the acetylcholine receptor. The amino acid sequence of the glycoprotein of rabies virus was compared by computer analysis with that of snake venom curaremimetic neurotoxins, potent ligands of the acetylcholine receptor. A statistically significant sequence relation was found between a segment of the rabies glycoprotein and the entire sequence of long neurotoxins. The greatest identity occurs with residues considered most important in neurotoxicity, including those interacting with the acetylcholine binding site of the acetylcholine receptor. Because of the similarity between the glycoprotein and the receptor-binding region of the neurotoxins, this region of the viral glycoprotein may function as a recognition site for the acetylcholine receptor. Direct binding of the rabies virus glycoprotein to the acetylcholine receptor could contribute to the neurotropism of this virus.
The persistence of H5N1 avian influenza viruses in many Asian countries and their ability to cause fatal infections in humans have raised serious concerns about a global flu pandemic. Here we report the isolation of an H5N1 virus from a Vietnamese girl that is resistant to the drug oseltamivir, which is an inhibitor of the viral enzyme neuraminidase and is currently used for protection against and treatment of influenza. Further investigation is necessary to determine the prevalence of oseltamivir-resistant H5N1 viruses among patients treated with this drug.
Immunological memory is the ability of the immune system to respond with enhanced vigour to pathogens that have been encountered in the past. Following infection or immunization, most effector T cells undergo apoptotic cell death, but a small fraction of these cells, proportional to the early antigen load and initial clonal burst size, persist in the host as a stable pool of memory T cells. The existence of immunological memory has been recognized for over 2,000 years, but our understanding of this phenomenon is limited, primarily because memory lymphocytes cannot be unequivocally identified as they lack specific, permanent markers. Here we have developed a transgenic mouse model system whereby memory T cells and their precursors can be irreversibly marked with a reporter gene and thus can be unambiguously identified. Adoptive transfer of marked CD8+ T cells specific for lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus protected naive recipients following viral challenge, demonstrating that we have marked memory T cells. We also show that cytotoxic effector lymphocytes that develop into memory T cells can be identified in the primary response.
Eukaryotic cells contain genes termed proto-oncogenes (c-onc) which have the potential to transform cells in culture and induce tumours in vivo. Most of these genes have been identified by their occasional incorporation into retroviral genomes which can act as natural transducing vectors for these and perhaps other cellular genes. Cell-derived oncogenes of retroviruses (v-onc) are associated mostly with the induction of mesenchymal tumours whereas carcinoma induction is rare. One of these rare carcinoma-inducing viruses is the acutely transforming avian retrovirus MH2 (refs 3-5). Recently we and others have shown that this virus carries a novel putative oncogene, v- mil , in addition to the known oncogene v-myc. While the transforming ability of v- mil has not been directly established, we have recently discovered by hybridization analysis that v- mil is homologous to v-raf (ref. 9), the transforming gene of the murine retrovirus 3611 MSV (ref. 10). Both viruses express the mil /raf oncogene product as a gag-fusion polyprotein, while the myc oncogene of MH2 is expressed via a subgenomic mRNA. Here we report the complete nucleotide sequence of v- mil and compare it with that of v-raf. The 80% homology between the nucleotide sequences and the 94% homology between the predicted amino acid sequences of the two viral genes clearly indicate that these are the avian and murine forms of the same gene. Comparison of the two sequences with that of the human cellular homologue (T. I. Bonner et al., manuscript in preparation) indicates that v-raf has more 3' untranslated sequences while v- mil has additional sequences from two 5' exons of the cellular homologue. Although the mil /raf amino acid sequences reveal partial homology to that of the v-src product, no tyrosine-specific protein kinase activity is detected for the gag- mil and the gag-raf hybrid proteins.
It has been found that soluble guanidine salts show an antiviral effect on poliovirus and on some other enteroviruses. The activity was first detected in a cell culture screening system when the guanidine salt of hydroxyaminomethylene malononitrile inhibited the cytopathic effect of poliovirus in cell cultures. The studies were extended to various in vivo experiments in which the suggestive therapeutic activity of guanidine salts was again observed in monkeys infected with poliovirus. While these drugs cannot be considered for use in human disease because of severe toxicity, it is significant that potential antiviral compounds detected by the cell culture test show in vivo activity and point to the validity of such direct chemotherapeutic trials.
Infection with vaccinia virus (a poxvirus) quickly and efficiently shuts off host protein synthesis in the presence of actinomycin D (refs 3--5) or cycloheximide. The cellular messenger RNA apparently remains stable in the infected cells exposed to inhibitors of viral gene transcription. In some cases vaccinia viral RNA or poly(A) synthesis have been implicated in the establishment of this effect. However, in the presence of cordycepin (3-deoxyadenosine) which blocks viral gene transcription and cytoplasmic poly(A) synthesis, cellular protein synthesis is still efficiently inhibited in vaccinia virus-infected cells. This shutoff is also observed in vitro, in the corresponding cell-free extracts, and in a reticulocyte lysate. Therefore the shutoff of host protein synthesis is probably mediated by a factor associated with vaccinia virions. We now report that the formation of the 40S--Met-tRNAfMet initiation complex is inhibited in cytoplasmic extracts derived from vaccinia virus-infected cells exposed to cordycepin to block viral gene expression. A similar inhibition is found in reticulocyte lysates incubated with purified vaccinia cores, confirming the hypothesis that the factor associated with the viral cores is responsible for the inhibition observed in vaccinia virus-infected cells exposed to inhibitors of transcription.
Viruses that infect ependyma cause ependymitis in humans and hydrocephalus in experimental animals. We report that reovirus type 1 (which induces hydrocephalus in mice) binds to the surface of isolated human and murine ciliated ependymal cells. With the use of recombinant viral clones, the binding property was mapped to the type 1 viral hemagglutinin, which also determines in vivo the affinity of reovirus type 1 for ependyma. Mumps virus, measles virus, parainfluenza type 3, and herpes simplex virus type 1 bind to murine ependyma cells, whereas reovirus type 3, herpes simplex virus type 2, and poliovirus type 2 do not.
Antiviral immunity against a pathogen is mounted upon recognition by the host of virally associated structures. One of these viral 'signatures', double-stranded (ds) RNA, is a replication product of most viruses within infected cells and is sensed by Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and the recently identified cytosolic RNA helicases RIG-I (retinoic acid inducible gene I, also known as Ddx58) and Mda5 (melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5, also known as Ifih1 or Helicard). Both helicases detect dsRNA, and through their protein-interacting CARD domains, relay an undefined signal resulting in the activation of the transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-kappaB. Here we describe Cardif, a new CARD-containing adaptor protein that interacts with RIG-I and recruits IKKalpha, IKKbeta and IKKvarepsilon kinases by means of its C-terminal region, leading to the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3. Overexpression of Cardif results in interferon-beta and NF-kappaB promoter activation, and knockdown of Cardif by short interfering RNA inhibits RIG-I-dependent antiviral responses. Cardif is targeted and inactivated by NS3-4A, a serine protease from hepatitis C virus known to block interferon-beta production. Cardif thus functions as an adaptor, linking the cytoplasmic dsRNA receptor RIG-I to the initiation of antiviral programmes.
Primate genomes contain a large number of endogenous retroviruses and encode evolutionarily dynamic proteins that provide intrinsic immunity to retroviral infections. We report here the resurrection of the core protein of a 4-million-year-old endogenous virus from the chimpanzee genome and show that the human variant of the intrinsic immune protein TRIM5alpha can actively prevent infection by this virus. However, we suggest that selective changes that have occurred in the human lineage during the acquisition of resistance to this virus, and perhaps similar viruses, may have left our species more susceptible to infection by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1).
Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is usually a benign lymphoproliferative disease caused by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Although EBV induces a state of continuous proliferation in infected B lymphocytes in vitro, the most prominent lymphoproliferation during IM is of activated, or atypical, T lymphocytes presumably responding to the virus or virus-infected cells. However, EBV genome-carrying cells are known to be circulating during IM, as cultured peripheral blood leukocytes from patients with the disease give rise to continuous lymphoblastoid cell lines, each cell of which contains the EBV genome and expresses the EBV determined nuclear antigen (EBNA). The proposal that EBV-infected cells in IM blood are not endowed with enhanced growth potential but are merely latently infected is supported by demonstrations that cells infected in vivo enter a viral replicative cycle when placed in vitro and that most cell lines derived from cultured lymphocytes of IM patients are infected by virus released in vitro. However the cells could also be capable of proliferation in vivo, since virus production and transformation are not mutually exclusive properties of EBV-transformed cells. Recently, EBNA has been detected in a very small fraction of peripheral blood lymphocytes of IM patients after T cells were first removed and this has been interpreted to indicate that cell transformation occurs in vivo during IM. The isolation of colonies of EBNA-positive cells from IM blood leukocytes cultures in soft agar suggests that at least some infected cells are capable of direct outgrowth into transformed cells. We report here direct evidence that circulating EBV-infected cells exhibit increased growth properties during IM.
Spike (S) proteins of coronaviruses, including the coronavirus that causes severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), associate with cellular receptors to mediate infection of their target cells. Here we identify a metallopeptidase, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), isolated from SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV)-permissive Vero E6 cells, that efficiently binds the S1 domain of the SARS-CoV S protein. We found that a soluble form of ACE2, but not of the related enzyme ACE1, blocked association of the S1 domain with Vero E6 cells. 293T cells transfected with ACE2, but not those transfected with human immunodeficiency virus-1 receptors, formed multinucleated syncytia with cells expressing S protein. Furthermore, SARS-CoV replicated efficiently on ACE2-transfected but not mock-transfected 293T cells. Finally, anti-ACE2 but not anti-ACE1 antibody blocked viral replication on Vero E6 cells. Together our data indicate that ACE2 is a functional receptor for SARS-CoV.
The determination of the total 5,224 base-pair DNA sequence of the virus SV40 has enabled us to locate precisely the known genes on the genome. At least 15.2% of the genome is presumably not translated into polypeptides. Particular points of interest revealed by the complete sequence are the initiation of the early t and T antigens at the same position and the fact that the T antigen is coded by two non-contiguous regions of the genome; the T antigen mRNA is spliced in the coding region. In the late region the gene for the major protein VP1 overlaps those for proteins VP2 and VP3 over 122 nucleotides but is read in a different frame. The almost complete amino acid sequences of the two early proteins as well as those of the late proteins have been deduced from the nucleotide sequence. The mRNAs for the latter three proteins are presumably spliced out of a common primary RNA transcript. The use of degenerate codons is decidedly non-random, but is similar for the early and late regions. Codons of the type NUC, NCG and CGN are absent or very rare.
Infection of macaques with chimeric simian-human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) provides an excellent in vivo model for examining the influence of envelope on HIV-1 pathogenesis. Infection with a pathogenic CCR5 (R5)-specific enveloped virus, SHIVSF162P, was compared with infection with the CXCR4 (X4)-specific SHIVSF33A.2. Despite comparable levels of viral replication, animals infected with the R5 and X4 SHIV had distinct pathogenic outcomes. SHIVSF162P caused a dramatic loss of CD4+ intestinal T cells followed by a gradual depletion in peripheral CD4+ T cells, whereas infection with SHIVSF33A.2 caused a profound loss in peripheral T cells that was not paralleled in the intestine. These results suggest a critical role of co-receptor utilization in viral pathogenesis and provide a reliable in vivo model for preclinical examination of HIV-1 vaccines and therapeutic agents in the context of the HIV-1 envelope protein.
Plant genome stability is known to be affected by various abiotic environmental conditions, but little is known about the effect of pathogens. For example, exposure of maize plants to barley stripe mosaic virus seems to activate transposable elements and to cause mutations in the non-infected progeny of infected plants. The induction by barley stripe mosaic virus of an inherited effect may mean that the virus has a non-cell-autonomous influence on genome stability. Infection with Peronospora parasitica results in an increase in the frequency of somatic recombination in Arabidopsis thaliana; however, it is unclear whether effects on recombination require the presence of the pathogen or represent a systemic plant response. It is also not clear whether the changes in the frequency of somatic recombination can be inherited. Here we report a threefold increase in homologous recombination frequency in both infected and non-infected tissue of tobacco plants infected with either tobacco mosaic virus or oilseed rape mosaic virus. These results indicate the existence of a systemic recombination signal that also results in an increased frequency of meiotic and/or inherited late somatic recombination.
Interferons are a family of proteins first identified by their ability to induce cellular resistance to infection by many viruses. In addition to the antiviral properties it shares with the alpha- and beta-interferons, gamma-interferon (IFN-gamma), a lymphokine secreted by activated T cells, activates macrophages, stimulates B cells, increases fibroblast and endothelial cell resistance to many nonviral intracellular parasites and modulates cell-surface proteins central to immune cell regulation. To identify molecules involved in the IFN-gamma response and characterize their modulation, we have isolated genes that are induced following recombinant IFN-gamma treatment of U937 cells, a histiocytic lymphoma cell line with monocytic characteristics. We report here the molecular cloning and characterization of a gene regulated by rIFN-gamma in U937 cells as well as in human mononuclear cells, fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Messenger RNA from this gene is induced within 30 min of rIFN-gamma treatment and demonstrates maximal (greater than 30-fold) accumulation within 5 h. Increased transcription is partly responsible for this accumulation. This gene encodes a protein of relative molecular mass (Mr) 12,378 which has significant amino-acid homology to platelet factor-4 and beta-thromboglobulin, two chemotatic proteins released by platelets on degranulation. This IFN-gamma-inducible protein may be a member of a family of proteins involved in the inflammatory process.
The human AIDS viruses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and type 2 (HIV-2) represent cross-species (zoonotic) infections. Although the primate reservoir of HIV-2 has been clearly identified as the sooty mangabey (Cercocebus atys), the origin of HIV-1 remains uncertain. Viruses related to HIV-1 have been isolated from the common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes), but only three such SIVcpz infections have been documented, one of which involved a virus so divergent that it might represent a different primate lentiviral lineage. In a search for the HIV-1 reservoir, we have now sequenced the genome of a new SIVcpzstrain (SIVcpzUS) and have determined, by mitochondrial DNA analysis, the subspecies identity of all known SIVcpz-infected chimpanzees. We find that two chimpanzee subspecies in Africa, the central P. t. troglodytes and the eastern P. t. schweinfurthii, harbour SIVcpz and that their respective viruses form two highly divergent (but subspecies-specific) phylogenetic lineages. All HIV-1 strains known to infect man, including HIV-1 groups M, N and O, are closely related to just one of these SIVcpz lineages, that found in P. t. troglodytes. Moreover, we find that HIV-1 group N is a mosaic of SIVcpzUS- and HIV-1-related sequences, indicating an ancestral recombination event in a chimpanzee host. These results, together with the observation that the natural range of P. t. troglodytes coincides uniquely with areas of HIV-1 group M, N and O endemicity, indicate that P. t. troglodytes is the primary reservoir for HIV-1 and has been the source of at least three independent introductions of SIVcpz into the human population.
Several acute transforming retroviruses encode tyrosine-specific protein kinases which possess structural and functional relationships to cell-surface receptors for certain growth factors. One such tyrosine kinase is encoded by the onc gene, v-fgr, of Gardner-Rasheed feline sarcoma virus (GR-FeSV). Recently, we have isolated and characterized the human gene, c-fgr, corresponding to the viral onc sequence and have shown that c-fgr is a unique gene located on the short arm of chromosome 1 (ref. 7). Here we report that certain lymphomas (but not sarcomas or carcinomas) express fgr-related messenger RNA. This transcript is detected in Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines naturally infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), but not in EBV-negative Burkitt's lymphoma cells. Normal umbilical cord or peripheral blood lymphocyte lines established in vitro by EBV infection also contain detectable c-fgr mRNA. Moreover, a 50-fold increase of the steady-state c-fgr mRNA concentration is observed when uninfected Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines are deliberately infected with EBV. These findings demonstrate for the first time the induction of a proto-oncogene in response to infection by a DNA tumour virus.
H-2 class I antigens appear to direct the recognition of virus-infected and neoplastic transformed cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). Here, to identify the regions of class I antigens involved in CTL recognition, four hybrid class I genes were constructed in which exons were exchanged between the H-2Kb and H-2Db genes. These class I genes were expressed in mouse L cells and recognition of the hybrid Kb/Db antigens by CTLs and monoclonal antibodies specific for either Kb or Db was investigated. The pattern of CTL and monoclonal antibody recognition obtained indicates three correlations between structure and function of class I antigens. First, most CTL recognition sites and alloantigenic determinants are located on domains 1 and 2 of the antigen molecule. Second, these CTL recognition sites and alloantigenic determinants are not influenced by interaction of domains 1 and 2 with polymorphic regions of domain 3. Third, in contrast, interaction between domains 1 and 2 alters these CTL recognition sites and alloantigenic determinants. The alteration of CTL recognition sites by interaction between domains 1 and 2 suggests that a CTL site may be formed by amino acids from both domains 1 and 2, or that the conformation of amino acids at a CTL site may be altered by interactions between domains 1 and 2. Through these two features, the conformation of CTL recognition sites on H-2 class I antigens may be sensitive to alteration by interaction of either domain 1 or 2 with viral antigens.
The molecularly cloned, long terminal repeat (LTR) of the Moloney sarcoma virus (M-MSV) provirus has been covalently linked to c-mos, the cellular homolog of the M-MSV-specific sequence, v-mos. These newly constructed clones lack any M-MSV-derived sequences other than the LTR, but in DNA transfection assays they transform cells as efficiently as cloned subgenomic M-MSV fragments containing both v-mos and LTR. Cells transformed by LTR:c-mos hybrid molecules contain additional copies of mos DNA, and several size classes of polyadenylated RNA's with sequence homology to mos. The activation of the transforming potential of c-mos by the proviral LTR suggests a model whereby LTR-like elements could activate other normal cell sequences with oncogenic potential.
The question concerning whether all membranes fuse according to the same mechanism has yet to be answered satisfactorily. During fusion of model membranes or viruses, membranes dock, the outer membrane leaflets mix (termed hemifusion), and finally the fusion pore opens and the contents mix. Viral fusion proteins consist of a membrane-disturbing 'fusion peptide' and a helical bundle that pin the membranes together. Although SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor) complexes form helical bundles with similar topology, it is unknown whether SNARE-dependent fusion events on intracellular membranes proceed through a hemifusion state. Here we identify the first hemifusion state for SNARE-dependent fusion of native membranes, and place it into a sequence of molecular events: formation of helical bundles by SNAREs precedes hemifusion; further progression to pore opening requires additional peptides. Thus, SNARE-dependent fusion may proceed along the same pathway as viral fusion: both use a docking mechanism via helical bundles and additional peptides to destabilize the membrane and efficiently induce lipid mixing. Our results suggest that a common lipidic intermediate may underlie all fusion reactions of lipid bilayers.
Expression of high levels of the structural proteins of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) requires the presence of the protein encoded by the rev open reading frame (Rev) and its associated target sequence CAR (cis anti-repression sequence) which is present in the env region of viral RNA. Extensive mutagenesis demonstrated that CAR has a complex secondary structure consisting of a central stem and five stem/loops. Disruption of any of these structures severely impaired the Rev response, but many of the stem/loops contain material that was unnecessary for Rev regulation and must be retained in these structures to avoid disturbing adjacent structures critical for CAR function. Probably no more than two of the described structural components are involved in sequence-specific recognition by regulatory proteins.
A single gene, src of Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) coding for a protein of pp60src, is responsible for the transformation of fibroblasts. DNA sequences homologous to src (the endogenous sarc) are presented in uninfected cells of chickens and other vertebrates. Endogenous nucleotide sequences have also been found in the putative transforming genes of MC29 (ref. 6) and avian erythroblastosis virus. These viruses, however, induce different spectra of tumours in animals. From analysis of a new avian sarcoma virus, Y73, we present here evidence suggesting that multiforms of viral sarcoma genes originated from cellular genetic sequences, and that these viral genes are structurally unrelated, but have similar pathogenicities.
The Kleinschmidt technique has been used to observe reovirus cores that have synthesized messenger RNA. Some individual viral cores probably synthesize all ten messenger RNA molecules in vitro. Each messenger RNA molecule appears to be attached to a different site on the core surface, implying that there are probably a number of different enzymic sites in each core.
Cyanobacteria, and the viruses (phages) that infect them, are significant contributors to the oceanic 'gene pool'. This pool is dynamic, and the transfer of genetic material between hosts and their phages probably influences the genetic and functional diversity of both. For example, photosynthesis genes of cyanobacterial origin have been found in phages that infect Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus, the numerically dominant phototrophs in ocean ecosystems. These genes include psbA, which encodes the photosystem II core reaction centre protein D1, and high-light-inducible (hli) genes. Here we show that phage psbA and hli genes are expressed during infection of Prochlorococcus and are co-transcribed with essential phage capsid genes, and that the amount of phage D1 protein increases steadily over the infective period. We also show that the expression of host photosynthesis genes declines over the course of infection and that replication of the phage genome is a function of photosynthesis. We thus propose that the phage genes are functional in photosynthesis and that they may be increasing phage fitness by supplementing the host production of these proteins.
The human T-cell leukemia viruses (HTLV) are associated with T-cell malignancies in man and will transform normal human T cells in vitro. The mechanism of malignant transformation by HTLV is unknown but appears to be distinct from that of other classes of retroviruses, which induce malignant transformation through viral or cellular oncogenes. Recently a new gene, termed x, was identified in HTLV. This gene has been hypothesized to be the transforming gene of HTLV because of its conservation within the HTLV class of retroviruses. By in vitro mutagenesis of the HTLV-II x gene, it is now demonstrated that the presence of a functional x gene product is necessary for efficient HTLV transcription. Therefore, these studies provide direct evidence for an important function of the x gene in HTLV replication. The functional analogies between the x gene and transcriptional regulatory genes of some DNA viruses suggest that these viruses share similar mechanisms for cellular transformation.
Several members of the chemokine-receptor family serve, in conjunction with CD4, as receptors for the entry of human immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1) into cells. The principal receptor for entry of macrophage-tropic (M-tropic) HIV-1 strains is CCR5, whereas that for T-cell-line-tropic (T-tropic) strains is CXCR4. Unlike HIV-1, infection with either M-tropic or T-tropic strains of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) can be mediated by CCR5, but not CXCR4. SIV strains will also infect CD4+ cells that lack CCR5, which suggests that these strains use as yet unidentified receptors. Here we use an expression-cloning strategy to identify SIV receptors and have isolated genes encoding two members of the seven-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptor family that are used not only by SIVs, but also by strains of HIV-2 and M-tropic HIV-1. Both receptors are closely related to the chemokine-receptor family and are expressed in lymphoid tissues. One of the receptors is also expressed in colon and may therefore be important in viral transmission. Usage of these new receptors following experimental infection of non-human primates with SIV strains may provide important insight into viral transmission and the mechanisms of SIV- and HIV-induced acquired immune-deficiency syndrome.
Most isolates of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections are resistant to interferon, the only available therapy, but the mechanism underlying this resistance has not been defined. Here it is shown that the HCV envelope protein E2 contains a sequence identical with phosphorylation sites of the interferon-inducible protein kinase PKR and the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha, a target of PKR. E2 inhibited the kinase activity of PKR and blocked its inhibitory effect on protein synthesis and cell growth. This interaction of E2 and PKR may be one mechanism by which HCV circumvents the antiviral effect of interferon.
Transgenic mice containing intact copies of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) proviral DNA were constructed. Founder animals were not viremic for HIV and remained healthy during a 9-month observation period. After being mated with nontransgenic animals, one founder mouse (No. 13) gave rise to F1 progeny that developed a disease syndrome characterized by marked epidermal hyperplasia, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, pulmonary lymphoid infiltrates, growth retardation, and death by day 25 of life. Infectious HIV, indistinguishable from parental virus by immunoblot analysis, was recovered from the spleen, lymph nodes, and skin of five of five affected animals.
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Rev protein acts post-transcriptionally to increase the amounts of the viral gag-pol and env messenger RNAs in the cytoplasm of infected cells. The mechanism of Rev action is uncertain. Possibilities include an accelerating effect on the rate of export of its mRNA targets from the nucleus and/or modulation of the splicing of pre-mRNAs. Both the gag-pol and env mRNAs contain a sequence that is required for responsiveness to Rev--the Rev responsive element, RRE. Here we show that Rev is a sequence-specific binding protein, whose binding site is the RRE. This information should help to clarify the mechanism by which Rev acts.
Potential live vaccines against hepatitis B virus have been produced. The coding sequence for hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg) has been inserted into the vaccinia virus genome under control of vaccinia virus early promoters. Cells infected with these vaccinia virus recombinants synthesize and excrete HBsAg and vaccinated rabbits rapidly produce antibodies to HBsAg.
Viral replication usually requires that innate intracellular lines of defence be overcome, a task usually accomplished by specialized viral gene products. The virion infectivity factor (Vif) protein of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is required during the late stages of viral production to counter the antiviral activity of APOBEC3G (apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G; also known as CEM15), a protein expressed notably in human T lymphocytes. When produced in the presence of APOBEC3G, vif-defective virus is non-infectious. APOBEC3G is closely related to APOBEC1, the central component of an RNA-editing complex that deaminates a cytosine residue in apoB messenger RNA. APOBEC family members also have potent DNA mutator activity through dC deamination; however, whether the editing potential of APOBEC3G has any relevance to HIV inhibition is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that it does, as APOBEC3G exerts its antiviral effect during reverse transcription to trigger G-to-A hypermutation in the nascent retroviral DNA. We also find that APOBEC3G can act on a broad range of retroviruses in addition to HIV, suggesting that hypermutation by editing is a general innate defence mechanism against this important group of pathogens.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a widespread opportunistic herpesvirus that causes severe and fatal diseases in immune-compromised individuals, including organ transplant recipients and individuals with AIDS. It is also a leading cause of virus-associated birth defects and is associated with atherosclerosis and coronary restenosis. HCMV initiates infection and intracellular signalling by binding to its cognate cellular receptors and by activating several signalling pathways including those mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinase, phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase, interferons, and G proteins. But a cellular receptor responsible for viral entry and HCMV-induced signalling has yet to be identified. Here we show that HCMV infects cells by interacting with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and inducing signalling. Transfecting EGFR-negative cells with an EGFR complementary DNA renders non-susceptible cells susceptible to HCMV. Ligand displacement and crosslinking analyses show that HCMV interacts with EGFR through gB, its principal envelope glycoprotein. gB preferentially binds EGFR and EGFR-ErbB3 oligomeric molecules in Chinese hamster ovary cells transfected with erbB family cDNAs. Taken together, these data indicate that EGFR is a necessary component for HCMV-triggered signalling and viral entry.
Substantial evidence has implicated Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in the aetiology of two human neoplasms, nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and Burkitt's lymphoma. This is supported by the presence of high antibody titres to EBV early antigen and virus capsid antigen, as well as antibody to two viral-associated enzymes, DNase and DNA polymerase. Patients with NPC, particularly the undifferentiated form, are commonly found to have EBV DNA in the tumour. Ito and others have presented strong epidemiological evidence that phorbol esters are related to the unusual geographic distribution of NPC in southeastern regions of China. There appears to be a close link between the widespread EBV infection of the Asian population and the distinct regional distribution in China of plants that produce diterpene ester. Naturally occurring phorbol esters are produced by plants of the Euphorbiaceae and Thymelaeaceae, which are used as traditional herbal medicines. Although it has been established that EBV can infect epithelial cells isolated from NPC as well as certain normal epithelial cells, there has been no in vitro evidence that EBV induces neoplastic transformation in normal human epithelial cells with or without exposure to phorbol esters. We report here evidence that transformation of normal human epithelial cells results from exposure to infectious EBV and that transformation is dependent on the presence of phorbol esters.
Strategies for the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) infection must contend with the obstacle of drug resistance. HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein zinc fingers are prime antiviral targets because they are mutationally intolerant and are required both for acute infection and virion assembly. Nontoxic disulfide-substituted benzamides were identified that attack the zinc fingers, inactivate cell-free virions, inhibit acute and chronic infections, and exhibit broad antiretroviral activity. The compounds were highly synergistic with other antiviral agents, and resistant mutants have not been detected. Zinc finger-reactive compounds may offer an anti-HIV strategy that restricts drug-resistance development.
I-Adamantanamine (amantadine) causes a selective, reproducible, dose-related inhibition of influenza infections in tissue culture, chick embryos, and mice. The compound is not virucidal and appears to act by interfering with the penetration of the host cell by the virus. In influenza infections of mice, greatest efficacy occurs with treatment at the time of infection; however, there is significant antiviral activity with treatment delayed up to 72 hours after infection. Virus inhibition is not complete and survivors are immune to a challenge infection with the original infecting virus.
Synthetic peptides corresponding to microbial epitopes stimulate T cell immunity but their immunogenicity is poor and their half-lives are short. A viral epitope inserted into the complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3) loop of the heavy chain of a self immunoglobulin (Ig) molecule was generated from the Ig context and was presented by I-Ed class II molecules to virus-specific, CD4+ T cells. Chimeric Ig-peptide was presented 100 to 1000 times more efficiently than free synthetic peptide and was able to prime virus-specific T cells in vivo. These features suggest that antigenized Ig can provide an improved and safe vaccine for the presentation of microbial and other peptides.
Infection of macaques with simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) and human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) are useful models for studies of immunotherapy and vaccination against HIV as well as for testing of antiviral drugs. Vaccine research showing protective immunity in immunized monkeys has indicated that it will be possible to develop a vaccine for prevention of human HIV infection, although many hurdles remain. The design of an HIV vaccine would be helped if the basis of the protective immunity could be elucidated. Passive immune prophylaxis offers a means to determine the relative role of antibodies in protection against infection. We have studied whether a transfer of antibodies can prevent HIV-2 and SIVsm (SIV of sooty mangabey origin) infection in cynomolgus monkeys. Sera with high antibody titres were collected, heat-treated and injected into naive animals 6 h before challenge with 10-100 monkey-infectious doses of live homologous virus. All control animals treated with normal monkey serum (n = 6) or no serum (n = 39) became infected by the challenge virus, whereas five out of seven animals pretreated with antibody-containing serum at a dose of 9 ml kg-1 resisted infection. Thus passively transferred antibodies can protect against a low-dose lentivirus challenge in a nonhuman primate.
Comparative genomics of 45 epidemiologically varied variola virus isolates from the past 30 years of the smallpox era indicate low sequence diversity, suggesting that there is probably little difference in the isolates' functional gene content. Phylogenetic clustering inferred three clades coincident with their geographical origin and case-fatality rate; the latter implicated putative proteins that mediate viral virulence differences. Analysis of the viral linear DNA genome suggests that its evolution involved direct descent and DNA end-region recombination events. Knowing the sequences will help understand the viral proteome and improve diagnostic test precision, therapeutics, and systems for their assessment.
Coronavirus-like particles were found by electron microscopy in stools from infants with necrotizing enterocolitis. Stool samples from these infants as well as control specimens were passaged in cultures of human fetal intestinal organs. Two samples yielded virus-like particles and these have now been passaged 14 times (HEC 14). Gradient-purified HEC 14 strains had typical coronavirus morphology on electron microscopy and contained five major proteins with molecular sizes ranging from 190 to 23 kilodaltons. Infants with necrotizing enterocolitis developed specific antibody to the viral antigens between the acute and convalescent stages of the disease, as shown by examining serum specimens by single radial hemolysis, immunoenzymatic assay, and Western immunoblotting. No cross-reactivity was shown with other coronavirus strains tested, or with the newly isolated viruses of the Breda-Berne group, responsible for calf or horse diarrhea.
An infectious virus which causes persistent lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy, lesions in the central nervous system (CNS), progressive weakness and emaciation was previously isolated from the leukocytes of cattle. Our present studies show that this virus encodes a reverse transcriptase (RT) with Mg2+ cation preference, replicates and induces syncytia in a variety of embryonic bovine tissues in vitro, and has a morphology most similar to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Moreover, serologic analyses have demonstrated a conservation of epitopes between the major core protein of this bovine retrovirus and HIV. Shared antigenic determinants were also observed with other pathogenic retroviruses of the lentivirus subfamily. To resolve the phylogenetic relationship of this virus, proviral molecular clones were derived and used to determine the nucleotide sequence of the highly conserved RT domain. The sequence data and serologic analyses together show that this bovine retrovirus is a novel lentivirus related to HIV and other lentiviruses. We propose that this virus be tentatively named bovine immunodeficiency-like virus (BIV) to reflect its genetic relationship and biological similarity to HIV.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene expression is activated by Tat, a virally encoded protein. Tat trans-activation requires viral (trans-activation--responsive; TAR) RNA sequences located in the R region of the long terminal repeat (LTR). Existing evidence suggests that Tat probably cooperates with cellular factors that bind to TAR RNA in the overall trans-activation process. A HeLa complementary DNA was isolated and characterized that encodes a TAR RNA-binding protein (TRBP). TRBP activated the HIV-1 LTR and was synergistic with Tat function.
Papillomaviruses cause benign tumours in their natural hosts, which, in some cases, become foci for the appearance and spread of malignant carcinomas. It is therefore of considerable interest to analyse the strategy of gene expression of this group of viruses. Towards this end, we have used a generally applicable technique, in which we monitor the ability of DNA fragments to induce the expression of an inactive thymidine kinase (tk) gene, from which the promoter region has been deleted. Using this approach we now report for the first time the location of four transcriptional control sequences in the early region of the genome of bovine papillomavirus type 1 (BPV-1). Two of the sequences with the characteristics of 'promoter' elements are located proximal to the putative 5' leaders of the early genes. The third sequence is located within the region coding for the main body of the early transcripts, and the fourth within the region spanning the 3' end of the early open reading frames and the 5' end of the late ones. The fourth sequence displays the characteristics of an 'enhancer' element; however, unlike previously described 'enhancers', it is located three to five kilobases (kb) away from the first two promoters and to the 3' side of the third element.
Infection by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is initiated by the binding of its extracellular envelope glycoprotein, gp120, to the CD4 antigen on target cells. To map the residues of the HIV-1 glycoprotein that are critical for binding and to analyse the effects of binding on viral infectivity, we created 15 mutations in a region of gp120 that is important for binding to CD4 (refs 4,5). We find that substitution of a single amino acid (tryptophan at position 432) can abrogate CD4 binding and that virus carrying this mutation is non-infectious. By contrast, other amino-acid changes in the same region do not affect CD4 binding but restrict viral tropism: virions containing isoleucine substitutions at position 425 lose their ability to infect a monocyte cell line (U937 cells) but can still infect T-lymphocyte cell lines (CEM, SUP-T1) and activated human peripheral blood lymphocytes. These results indicate that cellular tropism of HIV can be influenced by a single amino-acid change in gp120.
Serial human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) isolates were obtained from five individuals with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) who changed therapy to 2',3'-dideoxyinosine (ddI) after at least 12 months of treatment with 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine, AZT). The in vitro sensitivity to ddI decreased during the 12 months following ddI initiation, whereas AZT sensitivity increased. Analysis of the reverse transcriptase coding region revealed a mutation associated with reduced sensitivity to ddI. When this mutation was present in the same genome as a mutation known to confer AZT resistance, the isolates showed increased sensitivity to AZT. Analysis of HIV-1 variants confirmed that the ddI resistance mutation alone conferred ddI and 2',3'-dideoxycytidine resistance, and suppressed the effect of the AZT resistance mutation. The use of combination therapy for HIV-1 disease may prevent drug-resistant isolates from emerging.
Retroviruses are the aetiological agents of a range of human diseases including AIDS and T-cell leukaemias. They follow complex life cycles, which are still only partly understood at the molecular level. Maturation of newly formed retroviral particles is an essential step in production of infectious virions, and requires proteolytic cleavage of Gag polyproteins in the immature particle to form the matrix, capsid and nucleocapsid proteins present in the mature virion. Capsid proteins associate to form a dense viral core that may be spherical, cylindrical or conical depending on the genus of the virus. Nonetheless, these assemblies all appear to be composed of a lattice formed from hexagonal rings, each containing six capsid monomers. Here, we describe the X-ray structure of an individual hexagonal assembly from N-tropic murine leukaemia virus (N-MLV). The interface between capsid monomers is generally polar, consistent with weak interactions within the hexamer. Similar architectures are probably crucial for the regulation of capsid assembly and disassembly in all retroviruses. Together, these observations provide new insights into retroviral uncoating and how cellular restriction factors may interfere with viral replication.
Visna virus is a pathogenic lentivirus of sheep that is related to human T-cell lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III), the probable etiologic agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). The transcriptional activity of visna virus promoter and enhancer sequences was studied by means of an assay based on the transient expression of the bacterial gene chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT). The results suggest that the high level of expression of visna virus is due in part to cis-acting enhancer sequences that give the viral promoter a high level of transcriptional activity. In addition, the rate of transcription from the visna virus promoter situated in a plasmid expressing the CAT gene was much greater in infected than uninfected cells. This phenomenon of trans-acting transcriptional activation may involve either virally or cellularly encoded factors.
A small RNA accumulating late in adenovirus infection is required for efficient protein synthesis, although not specifically for the translation of viral proteins. This RNA maintains the activity of an initiation factor catalysing the earliest step of polypeptide chain initiation.
Viral infection of bacteria can be lytic, causing destruction of the host cell, or lysogenic, in which the viral genome is instead stably maintained as a prophage within its host. Here we show that lysogeny occurs in natural populations of an autotrophic picoplankton (Synechococcus) and that there is a seasonal pattern to this interaction. Because lysogeny confers immunity to infection by related viruses, this process may account for the resistance to viral infection seen in common forms of autotrophic picoplankton.
For RNA viruses, rapid viral evolution and the biological similarity of closely related host species have been proposed as key determinants of the occurrence and long-term outcome of cross-species transmission. Using a data set of hundreds of rabies viruses sampled from 23 North American bat species, we present a general framework to quantify per capita rates of cross-species transmission and reconstruct historical patterns of viral establishment in new host species using molecular sequence data. These estimates demonstrate diminishing frequencies of both cross-species transmission and host shifts with increasing phylogenetic distance between bat species. Evolutionary constraints on viral host range indicate that host species barriers may trump the intrinsic mutability of RNA viruses in determining the fate of emerging host-virus interactions.
Induction of transcription of the immediate-early (IE) genes of herpes simplex virus (HSV) involves the assembly of a DNA-binding complex containing the cellular transcription factor Oct-1 and the virus regulatory protein Vmw65 (VP16). Complex assembly can be observed using deletion variants of Vmw65 which lack the acidic C-terminal activation domain and are therefore defective for IE transactivation. Similar variants of Vmw65 interfere with IE activation by the normal protein, and with HSV replication. It has therefore been suggested that dominant interfering products of viruses such as HSV and HIV could be used in a form of intracellular immunization against virus infection. Here we report that a small peptide overlapping a region of Vmw65 which is critical for complex assembly specifically inhibits assembly of the complex but has no observed effect on the DNA-binding activity of the cellular factor alone. Selective interference with the assembly of transcription complexes by short peptides corresponding to functionally critical regions of virus regulatory proteins may be more feasible than the use of defective polypeptides as an antiviral strategy based on competitive interference.
Normal human tissues have been found to contain RNA which hybridises with four regions of the adenovirus type 2 genome, including one which contains the transforming gene(s) of this virus. The RNAs have also been extracted from gorilla organs, but not from those of chickens, suggesting that they are a feature of all normal higher primate tissues. Serological test suggest that these homologous RNAs are translated into proteins connected with essentially normal and virus-infected cell functions.
Neutralizing antibodies (Nab) are a principal component of an effective human immune response to many pathogens, yet their role in HIV-1 infection is unclear. To gain a better understanding of this role, we examined plasma from patients with acute HIV infection. Here we report the detection of autologous Nab as early as 52 days after detection of HIV-specific antibodies. The viral inhibitory activity of Nab resulted in complete replacement of neutralization-sensitive virus by successive populations of resistant virus. Escape virus contained mutations in the env gene that were unexpectedly sparse, did not map generally to known neutralization epitopes, and involved primarily changes in N-linked glycosylation. This pattern of escape, and the exceptional density of HIV-1 envelope glycosylation generally, led us to postulate an evolving 'glycan shield' mechanism of neutralization escape whereby selected changes in glycan packing prevent Nab binding but not receptor binding. Direct support for this model was obtained by mutational substitution showing that Nab-selected alterations in glycosylation conferred escape from both autologous antibody and epitope-specific monoclonal antibodies. The evolving glycan shield thus represents a new mechanism contributing to HIV-1 persistence in the face of an evolving antibody repertoire.
The human T-cell leukemia (lymphotropic) virus type III (HTLV-III) appears to be central to the causation of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Two full-length integrated proviral DNA forms of HTLV-III have now been cloned and analyzed, and DNA sequences of the virus in cell lines and fresh tissues from patients with AIDS or AIDS-related complex (ARC) have been characterized. The results revealed that (i) HTLV-III is an exogenous human retrovirus, approximately 10 kilobases in length, that lacks nucleic acid sequences derived from normal human DNA; (ii) HTLV-III, unlike HTLV types I and II, shows substantial diversity in its genomic restriction enzyme cleavage pattern; (iii) HTLV-III persists in substantial amounts in cells as unintegrated linear DNA, an uncommon property that has been linked to the cytopathic effects of certain animal retroviruses; and (iv) HTLV-III viral DNA can be detected in low levels in fresh (primary) lymphoid tissue of a minority of patients with AIDS or ARC but appears not to be present in Kaposi's sarcoma tissue. These findings have important implications concerning the biological properties of HTLV-III and the pathophysiology of AIDS and Kaposi's sarcoma.
Some individuals infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) experience multiple episodes of acute hepatitis. It is unclear whether these episodes are due to reinfection with HCV or to reactivation of the original virus infection. Markers of viral replication and host immunity were studied in five chimpanzees sequentially inoculated over a period of 3 years with different HCV strains of proven infectivity. Each rechallenge of a convalescent chimpanzee with the same or a different HCV strain resulted in the reappearance of viremia, which was due to infection with the subsequent challenge virus. The evidence indicates that HCV infection does not elicit protective immunity against reinfection with homologous or heterologous strains, which raises concerns for the development of effective vaccines against HCV.
Influenza A virus is an RNA virus that encodes up to 11 proteins and this small coding capacity demands that the virus use the host cellular machinery for many aspects of its life cycle. Knowledge of these host cell requirements not only informs us of the molecular pathways exploited by the virus but also provides further targets that could be pursued for antiviral drug development. Here we use an integrative systems approach, based on genome-wide RNA interference screening, to identify 295 cellular cofactors required for early-stage influenza virus replication. Within this group, those involved in kinase-regulated signalling, ubiquitination and phosphatase activity are the most highly enriched, and 181 factors assemble into a highly significant host-pathogen interaction network. Moreover, 219 of the 295 factors were confirmed to be required for efficient wild-type influenza virus growth, and further analysis of a subset of genes showed 23 factors necessary for viral entry, including members of the vacuolar ATPase (vATPase) and COPI-protein families, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) proteins, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)-beta. Furthermore, 10 proteins were confirmed to be involved in post-entry steps of influenza virus replication. These include nuclear import components, proteases, and the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase) IIbeta (CAMK2B). Notably, growth of swine-origin H1N1 influenza virus is also dependent on the identified host factors, and we show that small molecule inhibitors of several factors, including vATPase and CAMK2B, antagonize influenza virus replication.
Envelope glycoprotein (Env) spikes on AIDS retroviruses initiate infection of host cells and are therefore targets for vaccine development. Though crystal structures for partial Env subunits are known, the structure and distribution of native Env spikes on virions is obscure. We applied cryoelectron microscopy tomography to define ultrastructural details of spikes. Virions of wild-type human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) and a mutant simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) had approximately 14 and approximately 73 spikes per particle, respectively, with some clustering of HIV-1 spikes. Three-dimensional averaging showed that the surface glycoprotein (gp120) 'head' of each subunit of the trimeric SIV spike contains a primary mass, with two secondary lobes. The transmembrane glycoprotein 'stalk' of each trimer is composed of three independent legs that project obliquely from the trimer head, tripod-like. Reconciling available atomic structures with the three-dimensional whole spike density map yields insights into the orientation of Env spike structural elements and possible structural bases of their functions.
Phenotype-driven recessive genetic screens in diploid organisms require a strategy to render the mutation homozygous. Although homozygous mutant mice can be generated by breeding, a reliable method to make homozygous mutations in cultured cells has not been available, limiting recessive screens in culture. Cultured embryonic stem (ES) cells provide access to all of the genes required to elaborate the fundamental components and physiological systems of a mammalian cell. Here we have exploited the high rate of mitotic recombination in Bloom's syndrome protein (Blm)-deficient ES cells to generate a genome-wide library of homozygous mutant cells from heterozygous mutations induced with a revertible gene trap retrovirus. We have screened this library for cells with defects in DNA mismatch repair (MMR), a system that detects and repairs base-base mismatches. We demonstrate the recovery of cells with homozygous mutations in known and novel MMR genes. We identified Dnmt1(ref. 5) as a novel MMR gene and confirmed that Dnmt1-deficient ES cells exhibit micro-satellite instability, providing a mechanistic explanation for the role of Dnmt1 in cancer. The combination of insertional mutagenesis in Blm-deficient ES cells establishes a new approach for phenotype-based recessive genetic screens in ES cells.
A cell-free translation system has been constructed that uses a continuous flow of the feeding buffer [including amino acids, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and guanosine triphosphate (GTP)] through the reaction mixture and a continuous removal of a polypeptide product. Both prokaryotic (Escherichia coli) and eukaryotic (wheat embryos, Triticum sp.) versions of the system have been tested. In both cases the system has proven active for long times, synthesizing polypeptides at a high constant rate for tens of hours. With the use of MS2 phage RNA or brome mosaic virus RNA 4 as templates, 100 copies of viral coat proteins per RNA were synthesized for 20 hours in the prokaryotic or eukaryotic system, respectively. With synthetic calcitonin messenger RNA, 150 to 300 copies of calcitonin polypeptide were produced per messenger RNA in both types of continuous translation systems for 40 hours.
The mechanisms underlying interferon (IFN)-induced antiviral states are not well understood. Interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) is an IFN-inducible transcriptional activator, whereas IRF-2 suppresses IRF-1 action. The inhibition of encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) replication by IFN-alpha and especially by IFN-gamma was impaired in cells from mice with a null mutation in the IRF-1 gene (IRF-1-/- mice). The IRF-1-/- mice were less resistant than normal mice to EMCV infection, as revealed by accelerated mortality and a larger virus titer in target organs. The absence of IRF-1 did not clearly affect replication of two other types of viruses. Thus, IRF-1 is necessary for the antiviral action of IFNs against some viruses, but IFNs activate multiple activation pathways through diverse target genes to induce the antiviral state.
Genetic recombination of DNA is one of the fundamental mechanisms underlying the evolution of DNA-based organisms and results in their diversity and adaptability. The importance of the role of recombination is far less evident for the RNA-based genomes that occur in most plant viruses and in many animal viruses. RNA recombination has been shown to promote the evolutionary variation of picornaviruses, it is involved in the creation of defective interfering (DI) RNAs of positive- and negative-strand viruses and is implicated in the synthesis of the messenger RNAs of influenza virus and coronavirus. However, RNA recombination has not been found to date in viruses that infect plants. In fact, the lack of DI RNAs and the inability to demonstrate recombination in mixedly infected plants has been regarded as evidence that plants do not support recombination of viral RNAs. Here we provide the first molecular evidence for recombination of plant viral RNA. For brome mosaic virus (BMV), a plus-stranded, tripartite-genome virus of monocots, we show that a deletion in the 3' end region of a single BMV RNA genomic component can be repaired during the development of infection by recombination with the homologous region of either of the two remaining wild-type BMV RNA components. This result clearly shows that plant viruses have available powerful recombinatory mechanisms that previously were thought to exist only in animal hosts, thus they are able to adapt and diversify in a manner comparable to animal viruses. Moreover, our observation suggests an increased versatility of viruses for use as vectors in introducing new genes into plants.
Since the identification of the hepatitis C virus, great strides have been made in the development of an antiviral therapy. As a crucial mediator of the innate antiviral immune response, interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) was a natural choice for treatment. Whereas treatment with IFN-alpha alone achieved only modest success, the addition of the broad-spectrum antiviral agent ribavirin greatly improved responses. However, half of the infected individuals with chronic disease do not achieve sustained clearance of hepatitis C virus. To optimize current therapeutic strategies and to develop new therapies, a better understanding of the mechanism of action of IFN and ribavirin will be essential.
The production of the second messenger molecules diacylglycerol and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate is mediated by activated phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PLC) enzymes. Here we report the cloning of a bovine brain complementary DNA encoding an enzyme PLC-148 that is characterized by calcium-dependent and phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C activity when expressed in mammalian cells. Bovine brain messenger RNA contains a 7.5-kilobase transcript corresponding to the isolated cDNA; a related transcript of the same size is present in mRNA from some but not all human cell lines tested. Southern blot analysis of the bovine genome indicated that one or possibly two genes hybridize to the cloned PLC-148 cDNA. There is a striking sequence similarity between specific regions of PLC-148 and the non-catalytic domain of the non-receptor tyrosine kinases. The newly characterized crk transforming gene of the avian sarcoma virus CT10 also contains extensive sequence similarities with PLC-148.
A collection of superantigens, molecules which in combination with class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) engage T cells bearing particular V beta chains as part of their alpha beta receptors, have recently been described. The mouse self superantigen, Mls-1a, for example, in conjunction with many MHC class II proteins, engages mouse T cells bearing V beta 6, 7, 8.1 and 9, almost regardless of the sequences of the other variable components of the receptors on the T cells. Two types of superantigen have been identified so far: first, superantigens encoded in the mouse genome, such as Mls-1a; second, superantigens produced by bacteria, such as the staphylococcal enterotoxins. Although the latter type of superantigens are in many cases known to be proteins of about 220 amino acids, nothing is known about the structures of any of the superantigens encoded in mouse. Here we describe the properties of a new mouse superantigen. The antigen is maternally transmitted in milk and is probably encoded by a mammary tumour virus (MTV). Given the known genetic linkage between at least one of the mouse genomic superantigens and endogenous MTV integration sites, it is tempting to speculate that the superantigen described here and some of the endogenous mouse superantigens are encoded by MTVs.
The success of adenoviral vectors for gene therapy of lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF) depends on efficient transfer of the complementary DNA encoding the correct version of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) to the affected columnar epithelial cells lining the airways of the lung. Pre-clinical studies in vitro suggest that low doses of adenovirus vectors carrying this CFTR cDNA can correct defective Cl- transport in cultured human CF airway epithelia. Here we use mice carrying the disrupted CF gene to test the efficacy of this transfer system in vivo. We find that even repeated high doses can only partially (50%) correct the CF defect in Cl- transport in vivo and do not correct the Na+ transport defect at all. We investigated this discrepancy between the in vivo and in vitro transfer efficiency using CF mouse and human samples, and found that it reflects a difference in the susceptibility to adenovirus-5 transduction of the epithelial cell types dosed in vivo (columnar) and in vitro (basal-cell-like). These studies indicate that more efficient adenoviral gene-transfer vectors and/or refinement of dosing strategies are needed for therapy of CF lung disease.
The inhibition by interferons of viral replication was studied with cell-free preparations of the enzyme RNA synthetase derived from calf kidney cells infected with influenza virus and from chick embryo fibroblasts infected with Newcastle disease virus. Calf, mouse, and chicken interferons inhibited these enzymes with the same characteristic species specificity observed in tissue culture. A mechanism of action is proposed.
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) encodes a protease that is essential for viral replication and is a member of the aspartic protease family. The recently determined three-dimensional structure of the related protease from Rous sarcoma virus has been used to model the smaller HIV-1 dimer. The active site has been analyzed by comparison to the structure of the aspartic protease, rhizopuspepsin, complexed with a peptide inhibitor. The HIV-1 protease is predicted to interact with seven residues of the protein substrate. This information can be used to design protease inhibitors and possible antiviral drugs.
Heat shock proteins are evolutionarily highly conserved polypeptides that are produced under a variety of stress conditions to preserve cellular functions. A major antigen of tubercle bacilli of 65 kilodaltons is a heat shock protein that has significant sequence similarity and cross-reactivity with antigens of various other microbes. Monoclonal antibodies against this common bacterial heat shock protein were used to identify a molecule of similar size in murine macrophages. Macrophages subjected to various stress stimuli including interferon-gamma activation and viral infection were recognized by class I-restricted CD8 T cells raised against the bacterial heat shock protein. These data suggest that heat shock proteins are processed in stressed host cells and that epitopes shared by heat shock proteins of bacterial and host origin are presented in the context of class I molecules.
The innate immune system recognizes nucleic acids during infection and tissue damage. Whereas viral RNA is detected by endosomal toll-like receptors (TLR3, TLR7, TLR8) and cytoplasmic RIG-I and MDA5, endosomal TLR9 and cytoplasmic DAI bind DNA, resulting in the activation of nuclear factor-kappaB and interferon regulatory factor transcription factors. However, viruses also trigger pro-inflammatory responses, which remain poorly defined. Here we show that internalized adenoviral DNA induces maturation of pro-interleukin-1beta in macrophages, which is dependent on NALP3 and ASC, components of the innate cytosolic molecular complex termed the inflammasome. Correspondingly, NALP3- and ASC-deficient mice display reduced innate inflammatory responses to adenovirus particles. Inflammasome activation also occurs as a result of transfected cytosolic bacterial, viral and mammalian (host) DNA, but in this case sensing is dependent on ASC but not NALP3. The DNA-sensing pro-inflammatory pathway functions independently of TLRs and interferon regulatory factors. Thus, in addition to viral and bacterial components or danger signals in general, inflammasomes sense potentially dangerous cytoplasmic DNA, strengthening their central role in innate immunity.
Gliotoxin inhibits intracellular replication of poliovirus in HeLa cells at a stage subsequent to adsorption and penetration of virus. The sensitive step is synthesis of viral RNA: synthesis of viral protein is unaffected except as a consequence of blockade of RNA synthesis. Concentrations of gliotoxin sufficient to block viral RNA synthesis completely do not affect cellular RNA synthesis.
Epidemiological results suggest that the etiological agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is transmitted primarily through blood products, semen, and saliva. There is evidence that the human T-cell leukemia (lymphotropic) virus type III (HTLV-III) is this agent. HTLV-III has been isolated repeatedly from T cells obtained from peripheral blood or lymph node tissue of AIDS and pre-AIDS patients and of healthy people believed to have been exposed to the virus. In the present study, HTLV-III was detected in and isolated from T cells present in the seminal fluid of AIDS patients. Mononuclear cells from the semen of AIDS patients and normal individuals were cultured in the presence of T-cell growth factor (interleukin-2). After 6 to 8 days, HTLV-III antigens were transiently expressed by the cells from the AIDS patients but not by those from the normal individuals. When the mononuclear cells from the semen of AIDS patients were cocultured with a permissive human T-cell line, cell cultures were produced that expressed high levels of reverse transcriptase activity, showed retroviral particles by electron microscopy, and were positive for HTLV-III-specific antigens when tested by fixed-cell indirect immunofluorescence with the use of monoclonal antibodies to the p24 and p15 antigens of HTLV-III.
A mechanical fractionator was developed to produce electrophorograms by extrusion of polyacrylamide gels through a narrow orifice in a continuous, sequential stream. The system permits separation of uniform fractions free of zone distortion. An electrophorogram of radioactive type-2 adenovirus proteins so fractionated gave a pattern in excellent agreement with the pattern obtained by laborious manual sectioning and in agreement with the pattern obtained on a replicate gel stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250. The adenovirus particle yielded about ten resolvable protein components in unequal amounts. Like picornaviruses, these icosahedral animal viruses have multiple protein components in the viral coat.
Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) are a distinctive feature of the genomes of most Bacteria and Archaea and are thought to be involved in resistance to bacteriophages. We found that, after viral challenge, bacteria integrated new spacers derived from phage genomic sequences. Removal or addition of particular spacers modified the phage-resistance phenotype of the cell. Thus, CRISPR, together with associated cas genes, provided resistance against phages, and resistance specificity is determined by spacer-phage sequence similarity.
Mitochondria use transport proteins of the eukaryotic mitochondrial carrier family (MCF) to mediate the exchange of diverse substrates, including ATP, with the host cell cytosol. According to classical endosymbiosis theory, insertion of a host-nuclear-encoded MCF transporter into the protomitochondrion was the key step that allowed the host cell to harvest ATP from the enslaved endosymbiont. Notably the genome of the microsporidian Encephalitozoon cuniculi has lost all of its genes for MCF proteins. This raises the question of how the recently discovered microsporidian remnant mitochondrion, called a mitosome, acquires ATP to support protein import and other predicted ATP-dependent activities. The E. cuniculi genome does contain four genes for an unrelated type of nucleotide transporter used by plastids and bacterial intracellular parasites, such as Rickettsia and Chlamydia, to import ATP from the cytosol of their eukaryotic host cells. The inference is that E. cuniculi also uses these proteins to steal ATP from its eukaryotic host to sustain its lifestyle as an obligate intracellular parasite. Here we show that, consistent with this hypothesis, all four E. cuniculi transporters can transport ATP, and three of them are expressed on the surface of the parasite when it is living inside host cells. The fourth transporter co-locates with mitochondrial Hsp70 to the E. cuniculi mitosome. Thus, uniquely among eukaryotes, the traditional relationship between mitochondrion and host has been subverted in E. cuniculi, by reductive evolution and analogous gene replacement. Instead of the mitosome providing the parasite cytosol with ATP, the parasite cytosol now seems to provide ATP for the organelle.
Ebola virus (EBOV) entry requires the surface glycoprotein (GP) to initiate attachment and fusion of viral and host membranes. Here we report the crystal structure of EBOV GP in its trimeric, pre-fusion conformation (GP1+GP2) bound to a neutralizing antibody, KZ52, derived from a human survivor of the 1995 Kikwit outbreak. Three GP1 viral attachment subunits assemble to form a chalice, cradled by the GP2 fusion subunits, while a novel glycan cap and projected mucin-like domain restrict access to the conserved receptor-binding site sequestered in the chalice bowl. The glycocalyx surrounding GP is likely central to immune evasion and may explain why survivors have insignificant neutralizing antibody titres. KZ52 recognizes a protein epitope at the chalice base where it clamps several regions of the pre-fusion GP2 to the amino terminus of GP1. This structure provides a template for unravelling the mechanism of EBOV GP-mediated fusion and for future immunotherapeutic development.
In mouse cell lines derived from mammary adenocarcinomnas, the synthetic steroid dexamnethasone stimulates production of murine mammary tumor virus. Viral RNA and antigens are increased as much as 20-fold, and culture fluid supernatants from steroid-treated cells contain type B particles with reverse transcriptase. These cells provide a possible tissue culture source of this virus and a model system for studying the mechanism of action of corticosteroids and the regulation of transcription of integrated viral DNA.
The interferon-inducible dynamin-like myxovirus resistance protein 1 (MxA; also called MX1) GTPase is a key mediator of cell-autonomous innate immunity against pathogens such as influenza viruses. MxA partially localizes to COPI-positive membranes of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment. At the point of infection, it redistributes to sites of viral replication and promotes missorting of essential viral constituents. It has been proposed that the middle domain and the GTPase effector domain of dynamin-like GTPases constitute a stalk that mediates oligomerization and transmits conformational changes from the G domain to the target structure; however, the molecular architecture of this stalk has remained elusive. Here we report the crystal structure of the stalk of human MxA, which folds into a four-helical bundle. This structure tightly oligomerizes in the crystal in a criss-cross pattern involving three distinct interfaces and one loop. Mutations in each of these interaction sites interfere with native assembly, oligomerization, membrane binding and antiviral activity of MxA. On the basis of these results, we propose a structural model for dynamin oligomerization and stimulated GTP hydrolysis that is consistent with previous structural predictions and has functional implications for all members of the dynamin family.
Endogenous retroviruses are a common ancestral feature of mammalian genomes with most having been inactivated over time through mutation and deletion. A group of more intact endogenous retroviruses are considered to have entered the genomes of some species more recently, through infection by exogenous viruses, but this event has never been directly proved. We have previously reported koala retrovirus (KoRV) to be a functional virus that is associated with neoplasia. Here we show that KoRV also shows features of a recently inserted endogenous retrovirus that is vertically transmitted. The finding that some isolated koala populations have not yet incorporated KoRV into their genomes, combined with its high level of activity and variability in individual koalas, suggests that KoRV is a virus in transition between an exogenous and endogenous element. This ongoing dynamic interaction with a wild species provides an exciting opportunity to study the process and consequences of retroviral endogenization in action, and is an attractive model for studying the evolutionary event in which a retrovirus invades a mammalian genome.
Quantitative competitive polymerase chain reaction (QC-PCR) methods were used to quantify virion-associated human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) RNA in plasma from 66 patients with Centers for Disease Control stage I to IVC1 infection. HIV-1 RNA, ranging from 100 to nearly 22,000,000 copies per milliliter of plasma (corresponding to 50 to 11,000,000 virions per milliliter), was readily quantified in all subjects, was significantly associated with disease stage and CD4+ T cell counts, and decreased by as much as 235-fold with resolution of primary infection or institution of antiretroviral therapy. Plasma virus levels determined by QC-PCR correlated with, but exceeded by an average of 60,000-fold, virus titers measured by endpoint dilution culture. Quantitation of HIV-1 in plasma by QC-PCR may be useful in assessing the efficacy of antiretroviral agents, especially in early stage disease when conventional viral markers are often negative.
Influenza viruses are remarkably adept at surviving in the human population over a long timescale. The human influenza A virus continues to thrive even among populations with widespread access to vaccines, and continues to be a major cause of morbidity and mortality. The virus mutates from year to year, making the existing vaccines ineffective on a regular basis, and requiring that new strains be chosen for a new vaccine. Less-frequent major changes, known as antigenic shift, create new strains against which the human population has little protective immunity, thereby causing worldwide pandemics. The most recent pandemics include the 1918 'Spanish' flu, one of the most deadly outbreaks in recorded history, which killed 30-50 million people worldwide, the 1957 'Asian' flu, and the 1968 'Hong Kong' flu. Motivated by the need for a better understanding of influenza evolution, we have developed flexible protocols that make it possible to apply large-scale sequencing techniques to the highly variable influenza genome. Here we report the results of sequencing 209 complete genomes of the human influenza A virus, encompassing a total of 2,821,103 nucleotides. In addition to increasing markedly the number of publicly available, complete influenza virus genomes, we have discovered several anomalies in these first 209 genomes that demonstrate the dynamic nature of influenza transmission and evolution. This new, large-scale sequencing effort promises to provide a more comprehensive picture of the evolution of influenza viruses and of their pattern of transmission through human and animal populations. All data from this project are being deposited, without delay, in public archives.
Single-stranded RNA viruses encompass broad classes of infectious agents and cause the common cold, cancer, AIDS and other serious health threats. Viral replication is regulated at many levels, including the use of conserved genomic RNA structures. Most potential regulatory elements in viral RNA genomes are uncharacterized. Here we report the structure of an entire HIV-1 genome at single nucleotide resolution using SHAPE, a high-throughput RNA analysis technology. The genome encodes protein structure at two levels. In addition to the correspondence between RNA and protein primary sequences, a correlation exists between high levels of RNA structure and sequences that encode inter-domain loops in HIV proteins. This correlation suggests that RNA structure modulates ribosome elongation to promote native protein folding. Some simple genome elements previously shown to be important, including the ribosomal gag-pol frameshift stem-loop, are components of larger RNA motifs. We also identify organizational principles for unstructured RNA regions, including splice site acceptors and hypervariable regions. These results emphasize that the HIV-1 genome and, potentially, many coding RNAs are punctuated by previously unrecognized regulatory motifs and that extensive RNA structure constitutes an important component of the genetic code.
The cerebral cortex of the mammalian brain has expanded rapidly during the course of evolution and acquired structurally distinguishable areas devoted to separate functions. In some brain regions, topographic restrictions to cell intermixing occur during embryonic development. As a means of examining experimentally whether such restrictions occur during formation of functional subdivisions in the rat neocortex, clonally related neocortical cells were marked by retroviral-mediated transfer of a histochemical marker gene. Clonal boundaries were determined by infection of the developing brain with a library of genetically distinct viruses and amplification of single viral genomes by the polymerase chain reaction. Many clonally related neurons in the cerebral cortex became widely dispersed across functional areas of the cortex. Specification of cortical areas therefore occurs after neurogenesis.
Clonal deletion in the thymus plays a major part in T-cell tolerance to self antigens. But the mechanism of negative selection, its fine specificity and the threshold of affinity and avidity remains unknown. We have now examined these aspects of negative selection with mice expressing a transgenic T-cell receptor with specificity for lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) glycoprotein in association with the class I H-2Db molecule. These mice were rendered tolerant to LCMV by neonatal infection with mutant LCMVs bearing point mutations in the T-cell epitope recognized by the transgenic T-cell receptor. Variant LCMVs were also tested for their ability to elicit antiviral responses in transgenic mice in vivo and in vitro. Comparison in vivo revealed that a low-avidity receptor interaction, which was unable to induce effector T cells in the periphery, was still sufficient for clonal deletion in the thymus.
The primate lentivirus auxiliary protein Vpx counteracts an unknown restriction factor that renders human dendritic and myeloid cells largely refractory to HIV-1 infection. Here we identify SAMHD1 as this restriction factor. SAMHD1 is a protein involved in Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, a genetic encephalopathy with symptoms mimicking congenital viral infection, that has been proposed to act as a negative regulator of the interferon response. We show that Vpx induces proteasomal degradation of SAMHD1. Silencing of SAMHD1 in non-permissive cell lines alleviates HIV-1 restriction and is associated with a significant accumulation of viral DNA in infected cells. Concurrently, overexpression of SAMHD1 in sensitive cells inhibits HIV-1 infection. The putative phosphohydrolase activity of SAMHD1 is probably required for HIV-1 restriction. Vpx-mediated relief of restriction is abolished in SAMHD1-negative cells. Finally, silencing of SAMHD1 markedly increases the susceptibility of monocytic-derived dendritic cells to infection. Our results demonstrate that SAMHD1 is an antiretroviral protein expressed in cells of the myeloid lineage that inhibits an early step of the viral life cycle.
DNA viruses have evolved elaborate mechanisms to overcome host antiviral defences. In adenovirus-infected cells, programmed cell death (apoptosis) induced by the cytokine tumour necrosis factor (TNF) is inhibited by several adenovirus-encoded proteins. Occupation of the cell-surface receptor Fas, a member of the TNF-receptor superfamily that is expressed on most cell types, triggers apoptosis of that cell. Here we show that the adenovirus RID (for receptor internalization and degradation) protein complex, which is an inhibitor of TNF-induced apoptosis, mediates internalization of cell-surface Fas and its destruction inside lysosomes within the cell. Fas has not previously been shown to be internalized and then degraded. RID also mediates internalization of the receptor for epidermal growth factor, but it does not affect the transferrin receptor or class I antigens of the major histocompatibility complex. Removal of Fas from the surface of adenovirus-infected cells expressing RID may allow infected cells to resist Fas-mediated cell death and thus promote their survival.
Viral development induces changes in the permeability properties of the plasma membrane of the host cell. Here it is shown that, because of this leakiness, inhibitors of protein synthesis normally impermeable to uninfected cells are able to enter infected cells and thereby specifically inhibit viral protein synthesis.
Recent work has defined a class of transcriptional activators, members of which activate transcription in yeast, plant, insect and mammalian cells. These proteins contain two parts: one directs DNA binding and the other, called the activating region, presumably interacts with some component of the transcriptional machinery. Activating regions are typically acidic and require some poorly-understood aspect of structure, probably at least in part an alpha-helix. Here we describe a new member of this class, formed by fusing a DNA-binding fragment of the yeast activator GAL4 to a highly acidic portion of the herpes simplex virus protein VP16 (ref. 11; also called Vmw65). VP16 activates transcription of immediate early viral genes by using its amino-terminal sequences to attach to one or more host-encoded proteins that recognise DNA sequences in their promoters. We show that the hybrid protein (GAL4-VP16) activates transcription unusually efficiently in mammalian cells when bound close to, or at large distances from the gene. We suggest that the activating region of VP16 may be near-maximally potent and that it is not coincidental that such a strong activator is encoded by a virus.
The Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV8) is a gamma-2 herpesvirus that is implicated in the pathogenesis of Kaposi's sarcoma and of primary effusion B-cell lymphomas (PELs). KSHV infects malignant and progenitor cells of Kaposi's sarcoma and PEL, it encodes putative oncogenes and genes that may cause Kaposi's sarcoma pathogenesis by stimulating angiogenesis. The G-protein-coupled receptor encoded by an open reading frame (ORF 74) of KSHV is expressed in Kaposi's sarcoma lesions and in PEL and stimulates signalling pathways linked to cell proliferation in a constitutive (agonist-independent) way. Here we show that signalling by this KSHV G-protein-coupled receptor leads to cell transformation and tumorigenicity, and induces a switch to an angiogenic phenotype mediated by vascular endothelial growth factor, an angiogenesis and Kaposi's-spindle-cell growth factor. We find that this receptor can activate two protein kinases, JNK/SAPK and p38MAPK, by triggering signalling cascades like those induced by inflammatory cytokines that are angiogenesis activators and mitogens for Kaposi's sarcoma cells and B cells. We conclude that the KSHV G-protein-coupled receptor is a viral oncogene that can exploit cell signalling pathways to induce transformation and angiogenesis in KSHV-mediated oncogenesis.
Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) comprises a variety of clinically similar diseases of viral etiology that are endemic to and sporadically epidemic throughout the Eurasian continent and Japan. Although HFRS has not been reported in North America, viruses that are antigenically similar to HFRS agents were recently isolated from rodents in the United States. Examination and comparison of eight representative isolates from endemic disease areas and from regions with no known associated HFRS indicate that these viruses represent a new and unique group that constitutes a separate genus in the Bunyaviridae family of animal viruses.
Structural and functional homologies have been found among proteins encoded by several retroviral oncogenes, demonstrating the existence of families of these genes. Because the retroviral oncogenes have cellular homologues, the existence of similar families among these 'cellular oncogenes' is also implied (for a review, see ref. 2). Cellular genes belonging to these families have been found in such evolutionarily distant species as humans, fruit flies, nematodes and brewer's yeast (E. Scolnick and S. Reed, personal communications), consistent with the hypothesis that these genes have evolved from a small number of ancestral sequences. We extend these observations by showing here that the proteins encoded by the oncogenes myc, myb and adenovirus E1a are structurally related. Our findings suggest that oncogenes of RNA and DNA tumour viruses may in at least some instances share evolutionary origins and function according to common principles.
The structure of the membrane-containing bacteriophage PRD1 has been determined by X-ray crystallography at about 4 A resolution. Here we describe the structure and location of proteins P3, P16, P30 and P31. Different structural proteins seem to have specialist roles in controlling virus assembly. The linearly extended P30 appears to nucleate the formation of the icosahedral facets (composed of trimers of the major capsid protein, P3) and acts as a molecular tape-measure, defining the size of the virus and cementing the facets together. Pentamers of P31 form the vertex base, interlocking with subunits of P3 and interacting with the membrane protein P16. The architectural similarities with adenovirus and one of the largest known virus particles PBCV-1 support the notion that the mechanism of assembly of PRD1 is scaleable and applies across the major viral lineage formed by these viruses.
Enveloped viruses have evolved complex glycoprotein machinery that drives the fusion of viral and cellular membranes, permitting entry of the viral genome into the cell. For the paramyxoviruses, the fusion (F) protein catalyses this membrane merger and entry step, and it has been postulated that the F protein undergoes complex refolding during this process. Here we report the crystal structure of the parainfluenza virus 5 F protein in its prefusion conformation, stabilized by the addition of a carboxy-terminal trimerization domain. The structure of the F protein shows that there are profound conformational differences between the pre- and postfusion states, involving transformations in secondary and tertiary structure. The positions and structural transitions of key parts of the fusion machinery, including the hydrophobic fusion peptide and two helical heptad repeat regions, clarify the mechanism of membrane fusion mediated by the F protein.
Tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and lymphotoxin were initially described as tumoricidal proteins that are produced by activated macrophages and lymphocytes, respectively. Since TNF and lymphotoxin are structurally related, bind to the same cell surface receptor and have indistinguishable biological activities, they have been designated as TNF-alpha and TNF-beta, respectively. The multiple activities of these molecules indicate their importance in immunoregulative responses. Here we report that both TNF-alpha and TNF-beta have antiviral activity and synergize with interferons (IFNs) in the induction of resistance to both RNA and DNA virus infection in diverse cell types. These effects of TNFs are not due to the induction of IFN synthesis. Virus-infected cells are selectively killed by TNFs and this activity is accelerated by IFN-gamma. The production of TNFs is induced by viruses, further suggesting the importance of TNFs in the physiological antiviral response.
Human T-cell leukaemia-lymphoma virus (HTLV) is an exogenous human retrovirus distinct from all known animal retroviruses. HTLV is closely linked to a subtype of adult T-cell malignancies and except for isolated cases, has not been found associated with any other form of leukaemia, lymphoma or other cancers (see refs 1, 2 for review). HTLV can be transmitted to cord blood T lymphocytes in vitro and the infected cells exhibit characteristics of transformed neoplastic T cells. We have recently cloned DNA sequences derived from approximately 1 kilobase (kb) of the 5' and 3' termini of the HTLV genome, as well as a 4-5-kb defective HTLV provirus flanked by cellular sequences. The availability of these probes has enabled us to carry out a limited survey of different fresh or cultured cells from patients of different lymphoid and myeloid malignancies for HTLV-related DNA sequences. The results presented here show that cells from all Japanese patients with adult T-cell leukaemia and several patients with various mature T-cell malignancies from elsewhere contained one or more copies of a highly conserved HTLV genome. The infected cells are of clonal origin. Fresh cells from 1 of the 10 myeloid leukaemic patients contained exogenous DNA sequences distantly related to HTLV.
Individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) may be asymptomatic or have AIDS-related complex or the acquired immuno deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Little is known about the factors that influence progression of infection to AIDS. In this study of isolates of HIV-1 obtained at intervals during the infection of four individuals, the development of disease was found to be correlated with the emergence of HIV-1 variants that were more cytopathic in vitro as the disease progressed and that replicated more efficiently in a wide variety of different human cells. The biologic properties of HIV-1 in vitro thus appear to reflect its virulence in the host. Further studies of such sequentially isolated viruses may lead to the identification of viral genes that govern pathogenesis.
TFIID is a multisubunit protein complex comprised of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and multiple TBP-associated factors (TAFs). The TAFs in TFIID are essential for activator-dependent transcription. The cloning of a complementary DNA encoding a human TFIID TAF, TAFII55, that has no known homolog in Drosophila TFIID is now described. TAFII55 is shown to interact with the largest subunit (TAFII230) of human TFIID through its central region and with multiple activators--including Sp1, YY1, USF, CTF, adenoviral E1A, and human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 Tat proteins--through a distinct amino-terminal domain. The TAFII55-interacting region of Sp1 was localized to its DNA-binding domain, which is distinct from the glutamine-rich activation domains previously shown to interact with Drosophila TAFII110. Thus, this human TFIID TAF may be a co-activator that mediates a response to multiple activators through a distinct mechanism.
It is projected that in the absence of effective therapy, most individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) will develop acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and ultimately succumb to a combination of opportunistic microbial infections, malignancies and direct pathogenic effects of the virus. Anti-viral agents, immunomodulators, and inhibitors of specific HIV functions are being tested as potential treatments to alleviate the high morbidity and mortality. An alternative therapeutic concept involves the development of cytotoxic agents that are targeted to kill HIV-infected cells. Here we describe the purification and characterization of a recombinant protein produced in Escherichia coli that contains the HIV-binding portion of the human CD4 molecule linked to active regions of Pseudomonas exotoxin A. This hybrid protein displays selective toxicity toward cells expressing the HIV envelope glycoprotein and thus represents a promising novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of AIDS.
The DNA genomes of human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III) isolated from 18 individuals with AIDS or who were at risk for AIDS were evaluated for evidence of variation. Although all of the 18 viral DNA's hybridized throughout their entire genomes to a full-length cloned probe of the original HTLV-III isolate, each of the 18 isolates showed a different restriction enzyme pattern. The number of restriction site differences between isolates ranged from only 1 site in 23 to at least 16 sites in 31. No particular viral genotype was associated with a particular disease state and 2 of the 18 patients had evidence of concurrent infection by more than one viral genotype. Propagation of three different viral isolates in vitro for up to 9 months did not lead to detectable changes in their restriction patterns. These findings indicate that different isolates of HTLV-III comprise a spectrum of highly related but distinguishable viruses and have important implications regarding the pathogenicity of HTLV-III and attempts to develop effective diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventive measures for this virus.
Innate immunity is stimulated not only by viral or bacterial components, but also by non-microbial danger signals (damage-associated molecular patterns). One of the damage-associated molecular patterns is chromosomal DNA that escapes degradation. In programmed cell death and erythropoiesis, DNA from dead cells or nuclei expelled from erythroblasts is digested by DNase II in the macrophages after they are engulfed. DNase II(-/-) (also known as Dnase2a(-/-)) mice suffer from severe anaemia or chronic arthritis due to interferon-beta (IFN-beta) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) produced from the macrophages carrying undigested DNA in a Toll-like receptor (TLR)-independent mechanism. Here we show that Eyes absent 4 (EYA4), originally identified as a co-transcription factor, stimulates the expression of IFN-beta and CXCL10 in response to the undigested DNA of apoptotic cells. EYA4 enhanced the innate immune response against viruses (Newcastle disease virus and vesicular stomatitis virus), and could associate with signalling molecules (IPS-1 (also known as MAVS), STING (TMEM173) and NLRX1). Three groups have previously shown that EYA has phosphatase activity. We found that mouse EYA family members act as a phosphatase for both phosphotyrosine and phosphothreonine. The haloacid dehalogenase domain at the carboxy terminus contained the tyrosine-phosphatase, and the amino-terminal half carried the threonine-phosphatase. Mutations of the threonine-phosphatase, but not the tyrosine-phosphatase, abolished the ability of EYA4 to enhance the innate immune response, suggesting that EYA regulates the innate immune response by modulating the phosphorylation state of signal transducers for the intracellular pathogens.
Since the discovery of the hepatitis C virus over 15 years ago, scientists have raced to develop diagnostics, study the virus and find new therapies. Yet virtually every attempt to dissect this pathogen has met with roadblocks that impeded progress. Its replication was restricted to humans or experimentally infected chimpanzees, and efficient growth of the virus in cell culture failed until very recently. Nevertheless hard-fought progress has been made and the first wave of antiviral drugs is entering clinical trials.
An important aspect of the pathophysiology of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) infection is the ability of the virus to replicate in non-dividing cells. HIV-1 matrix (MA), the amino-terminal domain of the Pr55 gag polyprotein (Pr55), bears a nuclear localization signal that promotes localization of the viral preintegration complex to the nucleus of non-dividing cells following virus entry. However, late during infection, MA, as part of Pr55, directs unspliced viral RNA to the plasma membrane, the site of virus assembly. How MA can mediate these two opposing targeting functions is not understood. Here we demonstrate that MA has a previously undescribed nuclear export activity. Although MA lacks the canonical leucine-rich nuclear export signal, nuclear export is mediated through the conserved Crm1p pathway and functions in both mammalian cells and yeast. A mutation that disrupts the MA nuclear export signal (MA-M4) mislocalizes Pr55 and genomic viral RNA to the nucleus, thereby severely impairing viral replication. Furthermore, we show that MA-M4 can act in a dominant-negative fashion to mislocalize genomic viral RNA even in the presence of wild-type MA. We conclude that the MA nuclear export signal is required to counteract the MA nuclear localization signal, thus ensuring the cytoplasmic availability of the components required for virion assembly.
A T lymphotropic virus found in patients with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) or lymphadenopathy syndrome has been postulated to be the cause of AIDS. Immunological analysis of this retrovirus and its biological properties suggest that it is a member of the family of human T-lymphotropic retroviruses known as HTLV. Accordingly, it has been named HTLV-III. In the present report it is shown by nucleic acid hybridization that sequences of the genome of HTLV-III are homologous to the structural genes (gag, pol, and env) of both HTLV-I and HTLV-II and to a potential coding region called pX located between the env gene and the long terminal repeating sequence that is unique to the HTLV family of retroviruses.
Primate and rodent genomes contain a family of highly repetitive, long interspersed sequences, designated the L1 family or LINE-1. Characteristic features of the L1 family sequences such as an A-rich stretch at the 3' end, a truncated 5' end, the existence of significantly long open reading frames (ORFs) and the presence of L1 family transcripts in various types of cells, including pluripotential embryonic cells, suggest that the L1 family is derived from a sequence encoding a protein(s) and dispersed in the genome through an RNA-mediated process. These features of the L1 family are believed to be due to reverse transcription beginning at the 3' end of the L1 transcript and terminating prematurely and to the site duplication caused by the insertion of the complementary DNA. It is likely that this type of transcript is converted to cDNA and inserted into the chromosome through a process similar to that of the formation of processed pseudogenes. The above model, however, does not necessarily explain why the L1 family should produce the extraordinarily large number of copies (more than 10(4) per haploid genome) seen during evolution. It seems likely that the progenitor of the L1 family itself carries (or carried) a function which promotes the active dispersion of the L1 family sequence. We reasoned that such a function, if present, must be conserved during evolution and may be shown by comparative analysis of L1 family sequences from evolutionarily distant species. We show here that the L1 family sequence contains an ORF possessing significant sequence homology to several RNA-dependent DNA polymerases of viral and transposable element origins.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
The rotavirus nonstructural glycoprotein NSP4 is an intracellular receptor that mediates the acquisition of a transient membrane envelope as subviral particles bud into the endoplasmic reticulum. NSP4 also causes an increase in intracellular calcium in insect cells. Purified NSP4 or a peptide corresponding to NSP4 residues 114 to 135 induced diarrhea in young (6 to 10 days old) CD1 mice. This disease response was age-dependent, dose-dependent, and specific. Electrophysiologic data from intestinal mucosa showed that the NSP4 114-135 peptide potentiates chloride secretion by a calcium-dependent signaling pathway. Diarrhea is induced when NSP4, acting as a viral enterotoxin, triggers a signal transduction pathway.
Flaviviruses, when complexed with antibody at subneutralizing concentrations, show enhanced replication in human and simian peripheral blood leukocytes (ref. 1, and J.S.M.P. and J.S.P., unpublished observations) and in P388 D1 and other macrophage cell lines. A comparable phenomenon has been demonstrated with alphaviruses and Bunyaviruses in P388 D1 cells, (J.S.M.P. and J.S.P., unpublished observations) but cells lacking macrophage characteristics fail to show antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of viral replication. It has been suggested that the macrophage Fc receptor (FcR) provides an efficient route of entry of virus through the attachment of non-neutralized virus-antibody complexes and that for those viruses that escape destruction by the phagocyte, antibody results in a paradoxical increase in virus replication. West Nile virus (WNV) replication in the P388 D1 macrophage cell line provides a reproducible model system for studying ADE of viral replication. Mouse macrophages have two FcRs-FcRI, which is trypsin-sensitive and binds IgG2a, and FcRII, which is trypsin-resistant and binds IgG2b and IgG1 complexes. The FcR has been purified using rat anti-mouse FcR monoclonal antibody which blocks FcRII. We show here that anti-FcRIgG and its Fab fragment block ADE of virus replication by anti-WNV monoclonal antibodies.
The nonfunctional virus protein isolated from plants infected with the PM2 strain of tobacco mosaic virus aggregates to form elongated, two-stranded, open helical structures, in marked contrast with functional tobacco mosaic virus protein which aggregates into rods. This unique type of aggregation may explain why the PM2 protein is unable to combine with viral nucleic acid to form stable infectious virus particles.
The isolation of the human T-cell leukaemia (lymphotropic) virus type III (HTLV-III or lymphadenopathy-associated virus) from cells of many patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) presented the first evidence that the virus was the aetiological agent of the disease. Subsequent seroepidemiological studies have shown the presence of HTLV-III-specific antibodies in the serum of most patients with AIDS and AIDS-related complex (ARC), and in the serum of many individuals at risk for AIDS. Despite these extensive studies, there are no reports of protective effects of HTLV-III antibodies. In contrast, neutralizing antibodies specific for HTLV-I and -II have been identified previously. Therefore, we investigated whether HTLV-III-exposed individuals possess antibody activities capable of inhibiting viral infection. Here, we report that natural antibodies capable of neutralizing HTLV-III infection of H9 cells were detected in most adults AIDS and ARC patients but in no normal healthy heterosexual controls. Geometric mean antibody titres in ARC patients were double those in AIDS patients, and were even higher in two antibody-positive healthy homosexuals. This suggests that virus neutralizing antibodies may exert an in vivo protective effect. The presence of these antibodies indicates an immunological response to HTLV-III which potentially may be manipulated for therapeutic advantage. The methodology used here will be useful in monitoring future vaccine approaches.
Retroviruses can leave a "fossil record" in their hosts' genomes in the form of endogenous retroviruses. Foamy viruses, complex retroviruses that infect mammals, have been notably absent from this record. We have found an endogenous foamy virus within the genomes of sloths and show that foamy viruses were infecting mammals more than 100 million years ago and codiverged with their hosts across an entire geological era. Our analysis highlights the role of evolutionary constraint in maintaining viral genome structure and indicates that accessory genes and mammalian mechanisms of innate immunity are the products of macroevolutionary conflict played out over a geological time scale.
The expression in normal rat cells of modified polyoma virus genomes, separately encoding large T, middle T or small T antigens, has allowed the investigation of the roles of these proteins in oncogenic transformation. Middle T is sufficient to transform cells of established lines but the transformants are serum dependent. Large T lacks intrinsic oncogenic potential but can relieve the serum dependence of normal and transformed cells. Middle T alone cannot transform primary rat embryo fibroblasts.
Taubenberger et al. have sequenced the polymerase genes of the pandemic 'Spanish' influenza A virus of 1918, thereby completing the decoding of the genome of this virus. The authors conclude from these sequences that the virus jumped from birds to humans shortly before the start of the pandemic and that it was not derived from earlier viruses by gene shuffling, a process called reassortment. However, we believe that their evidence does not convincingly support these conclusions and that some of their results even indicate that, on the contrary, the virus evolved in mammals before the pandemic began and that it was a reassortant. In light of this alternative interpretation, we suggest that the current intense surveillance of influenza viruses should be broadened to include mammalian sources.
The capacity of HIV-1 to establish latent infection of CD4+ T cells may allow viral persistence despite immune responses and antiretroviral therapy. Measurements of infectious virus and viral RNA in plasma and of infectious virus, viral DNA and viral messenger RNA species in infected cells all suggest that HIV-1 replication continues throughout the course of infection. Uncertainty remains over what fraction of CD4+ T cells are infected and whether there are latent reservoirs for the virus. We show here that during the asymptomatic phase of infection there is an extremely low total body load of latently infected resting CD4+ T cells with replication-competent integrated provirus (<10(7) cells). The most prevalent form of HIV-1 DNA in resting and activated CD4+ T cells is a full-length, linear, unintegrated form that is not replication competent. The infection progresses even though at any given time in the lymphoid tissues integrated HIV-1 DNA is present in only a minute fraction of the susceptible populations, including resting and activated CD4+ T cells and macrophages.
Mutagenesis was studied in cultured F9 embryonal carcinoma cells infected with a variant of Moloney murine leukemia virus. Proviral insertion induced the inactivation of the hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase locus, and the virus was used to isolate the mutated genes rapidly. Mutagenesis by these methods may be useful for the genetic dissection of the various mammalian cell phenotypes.
Harvey murine sarcoma virus is a retrovirus which transforms cells by means of a single virally encoded protein called p21 has. We have determined the nucleotide sequence of 1.0 kilobase in the 5' half of the viral genome which encompasses the has coding sequences and its associated regulatory signals. The nucleotide sequence has identified the amino acid sequence of two additional overlapping polypeptides which share their reading frames and the carboxyl termini with p21 but which contain additional NH2-terminal amino acids.
Although human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infects quiescent and proliferating CD4+ lymphocytes, the virus replicates poorly in resting T cells. Factors that block viral replication in these cells might help to prolong the asymptomatic phase of HIV infection; however, the molecular mechanisms that control this process are not fully understood. Here we show that Murr1, a gene product known previously for its involvement in copper regulation, inhibits HIV-1 growth in unstimulated CD4+ T cells. This inhibition was mediated in part through its ability to inhibit basal and cytokine-stimulated nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB activity. Knockdown of Murr1 increased NF-kappaB activity and decreased IkappaB-alpha concentrations by facilitating phospho-IkappaB-alpha degradation by the proteasome. Murr1 was detected in CD4+ T cells, and RNA-mediated interference of Murr1 in primary resting CD4+ lymphocytes increased HIV-1 replication. Through its effects on the proteasome, Murr1 acts as a genetic restriction factor that inhibits HIV-1 replication in lymphocytes, which could contribute to the regulation of asymptomatic HIV infection and the progression of AIDS.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) continues to spread, principally by heterosexual sex, but no vaccine is available. Hence, alternative prevention methods are needed to supplement educational and behavioural-modification programmes. One such approach is a vaginal microbicide: the application of inhibitory compounds before intercourse. Here, we have evaluated the microbicide concept using the rhesus macaque 'high dose' vaginal transmission model with a CCR5-receptor-using simian-human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV-162P3) and three compounds that inhibit different stages of the virus-cell attachment and entry process. These compounds are BMS-378806, a small molecule that binds the viral gp120 glycoprotein and prevents its attachment to the CD4 and CCR5 receptors, CMPD167, a small molecule that binds to CCR5 to inhibit gp120 association, and C52L, a bacterially expressed peptide inhibitor of gp41-mediated fusion. In vitro, all three compounds inhibit infection of T cells and cervical tissue explants, and C52L acts synergistically with CMPD167 or BMS-378806 to inhibit infection of cell lines. In vivo, significant protection was achieved using each compound alone and in combinations. CMPD167 and BMS-378806 were protective even when applied 6 h before challenge.
RNA editing involves posttranscriptional alterations of messenger RNA (mRNA) sequences modifying the information content encoded by the genetic message. Here, it is shown that, in chronically infected H9 cells, human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) mRNAs undergo guanine-to-adenine (G-to-A) and cytosine-to-uracil (C-to-U) changes. G-to-A modification in the untranslated region of exon 1 was present only in spliced HIV-1 mRNAs. The creation of stop codons in HIV-1 mRNAs may function to control the translation of viral proteins, such as viral protein R, that are involved in the regulation of HIV-1 expression and the survival of chronically infected cells.
Understanding the factors that regulate the induction, quality, and longevity of antiviral T cell responses is essential for devising rational strategies to prevent or combat infections. In this study, we show that interleukin-21 (IL-21), likely produced by CD4+ T cells, directly influences the generation of polyfunctional CD8+ T cells and that the number of CD4+ T cells that produce IL-21 differs markedly between acute and chronic infections. IL-21 regulates the development of CD8+ T cell exhaustion and the ability to contain chronic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection. Thus, IL-21 serves as a critical helper factor that shapes the functional quality of antiviral CD8+ T cells and is required for viral control.
Staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA), one of the most potent T-cell mitogens known, has been classified as a bacterial superantigen on the basis of ability to stimulate V beta-specific T-cell subsets. SEA interacts with class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens on antigen-presenting cells and the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) on T cells, resulting in a ternary complex of MHC-SEA-TCR. Mls antigens are known to be products of mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV), and it has been reported that two exogenous strains of MMTV encode retroviral superantigens in the open reading frames of the 3' long terminal repeat of the viral genome; however, no binding of the putative MMTV superantigen to either MHC antigens or TCR has been demonstrated. Here we use synthetic peptides to identify a site on the MMTV-1 superantigen that binds to class II MHC antigens. The site is encompassed by amino-acid residues 76-119 of the MMTV-1 superantigen. Direct binding and competition experiments show that the MMTV superantigen and SEA bind to at least one common region on class II MHC antigens.
Neoplastic cells are characterized by partial or total autonomy from the interactions that regulate the behaviour of normal cells in the intact animal. Despite the role of the host cellular environment in governing the proliferation and differentiation of both normal and malignant cells, little is known about these host factors. The characterization of host genes that influence both normal cellular processes, as well as susceptibility to tumour induction, is one approach to identifying such factors. Mice carrying two recessive mutations at the steel (Sl) locus have an environmental defect that affects both normal haematopoietic stem cell function as well as susceptibility to Friend leukaemia virus. In this study, we have used Sl/sld mice to examine whether malignant transformation by this RNA tumour virus results in a population of cells capable of proliferating even in the defective cellular microenvironment of Sl/sld mice. We report here that late after infection, the leukaemic spleens of Friend virus-infected mice contain cells which, unlike normal haematopoietic stem cells, are able to form macroscopic spleen colonies in irradiated mice of genotype Sl/Sld. This observation forms the basis for the first in vivo colony assay for leukaemic cells transformed by Friend virus.
Efficient retroviral growth requires integration of a DNA copy of the viral RNA genome into a chromosome of the host. As a first step in analyzing the mechanism of integration of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) DNA, a cell-free system was established that models the integration reaction. The in vitro system depends on the HIV integration (IN) protein, which was partially purified from insect cells engineered to express IN protein in large quantities. Integration was detected in a biological assay that scores the insertion of a linear DNA containing HIV terminal sequences into a lambda DNA target. Some integration products generated in this assay contained five-base pair duplications of the target DNA at the recombination junctions, a characteristic of HIV integration in vivo; the remaining products contained aberrant junctional sequences that may have been produced in a variation of the normal reaction. These results indicate that HIV IN protein is the only viral protein required to insert model HIV DNA sequences into a target DNA in vitro.
In a longitudinal study of HIV seropositive patients, there were fluctuations in the specificity of cytotoxic T cells for the virus. This was matched by variability in proviral gag DNA epitope sequences in the lymphocytes of these patients. Some of these viral variants are not recognized by autologous T cells. Accumulation of such mutations in T-cell antigenic targets would provide a mechanism for immune escape.
The function of the 30-kilodalton movement protein (MP) of tobacco mosaic virus is to facilitate cell-to-cell movement of viral progeny in an infected plant. A novel method for delivering non-plasmalemma-permeable fluorescent probes to the cytosol of spongy mesophyll cells of tobacco leaves was used to study plasmodesmatal size exclusion limits in transgenic plants that express the MP gene. Movement of fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled dextran (F-dextran) with an average molecular mass of 9400 daltons and an approximate Stokes radius of 2.4 nanometers was detected between cells of the transgenic plants, whereas the size exclusion limit for the control plants was 700 to 800 daltons. No evidence of F-dextran metabolism in the leaves of the transgenic plants was found. Thus, the tobacco mosaic virus movement protein has a direct effect on a plasmodesmatal function.
Nucleocapsid-pol fusion proteins have been detected by serological screening hepatocellular carcinoma tissues that contain hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA. The existence of these fusion proteins suggests that HBV may synthesize its reverse transcriptase in a fashion analogous to the way that retroviruses synthesize and process a precursor. The accumulation of HBV reverse transcriptase intermediates in tumorous tissues and not in other tissues may be related to the absence of viral core particles and possibly contributes to tumor development.
Earlier, we reported a 30-200-fold reduction in the yield of infectious vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) released from L cells treated with 10-30 reference units ml-1 of interferon (IFN); however, in these cultures virus particle production, as measured by VSV particle-associated viral RNA, virus nucleocapsid protein and viral transcriptase, was inhibited less than 10-fold. There was biochemical and morphological evidence of a significant reduction in glycoprotein (G) and membrane protein (M) of VSV particles released from IFN-treated cells. We compare here the effects of tunicamycin (TM) and IFN in L cells. Treatment with TM or IFN reduced the production of infectious VSV particles, decreased the amount of G and M proteins in VSV released from treated cells, and inhibited an early step in the formation of asparagine-linked oligosaccharide chains, the incorporation by membrane preparations from treated cells of N-acetylglucosamine into glycolipids with the properties of dolichol derivatives.
Extracts of samples of a Caribbean tunicate (ascidian, sea squirt) of the family Didemnidae inhibit in vitro at low concentrations the growth of DNA and RNA viruses as well as L1210 leukemic cells. The active compounds isolated from the tunicate, didemnins A, B, and C, are depsipeptides, and didemnin B (a derivative of didemnin A) is the component active at the lowest concentration in inhibiting viral replication in vitro and P388 leukemia in vivo.
Tumour biopsies from Burkitt lymphoma patients, as well as human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells growing in athymic mice, contain Epstein-Barr virus DNA as covalently closed circular DNA. In addition integrated viral DNA sequences seem to be present.
The analysis of the differences between two complex genomes holds promise for the discovery of infectious agents and probes useful for genetic studies. A system was developed in which subtractive and kinetic enrichment was used to purify restriction endonuclease fragments present in one population of DNA fragments but not in another. Application of this method to DNA populations of reduced complexity ("representations") resulted in the isolation of probes to viral genomes present as single copies in human DNA, and probes that detect polymorphisms between two individuals. In principle, this system, called representational difference analysis (RDA), may also be used for isolating probes linked to sites of genomic rearrangements, whether occurring spontaneously and resulting in genetic disorders or cancer, or programmed during differentiation and development.
A SIGNIFICANT proportion (up to 70%) of individuals experience an acute clinical syndrome of varying severity associated with primary infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). We report here studies on six individuals who showed an acute HIV syndrome which generally resolved within four weeks, concomitant with a dramatic downregulation of viraemia. To characterize the T-cell-mediated primary immune response to HIV, we used combined semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction assay and cytofluorometry to analyse the T-cell antigen receptor repertoire in sequential peripheral blood mononuclear cells from the patients. We found major oligoclonal expansions in a restricted set of variable-domain beta-chain (V beta) families. Cells expressing the expanded V beta s predominantly expressed the CD8 T-cell differentiation antigen and mediated HIV-specific cytotoxicity. Major oligoclonal expansions of these CD8+ T lymphocytes may represent an important component of the primary immune response to viral infections and may help to clarify both the immunopathogenic and the protective mechanisms of HIV infection.
Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) is a primate lentivirus related to human immunodeficiency viruses and is an etiologic agent for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-like diseases in macaques. To date, only inactivated whole virus vaccines have been shown to protect macaques against SIV infection. Protective immunity was elicited by recombinant subunit vaccines. Four Macaca fascicularis were immunized with recombinant vaccinia virus expressing SIVmne gp160 and were boosted with gp160 produced in baculovirus-infected cells. All four animals were protected against an intravenous challenge of the homologous virus at one to nine animal-infectious doses. These results indicate that immunization with viral envelope antigens alone is sufficient to elicit protective immunity against a primate immunodeficiency virus. The combination immunization regimen, similar to one now being evaluated in humans as candidate human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 vaccines, appears to be an effective way to elicit such immune responses.
The nucleotide sequence of molecular clones of DNA from a retrovirus, ARV-2, associated with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) was determined. Proviral DNA of ARV-2 (9737 base pairs) has long terminal repeat structures (636 base pairs) and long open reading frames encoding gag (506 codons), pol (1003 codons), and env (863 codons) genes. Two additional open reading frames were identified. Significant amino acid homology with several other retroviruses was noted in the predicted product of gag and pol, but ARV-2 was as closely related to murine and avian retroviruses as it was to human T-cell leukemia viruses (HTLV-I and HTLV-II). By means of an SV-40 vector in transfected simian cells, the cloned gag and env genes of ARV-2 were shown to express viral proteins.
RNA interference through non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) represents a vital component of the innate antiviral immune response in plants and invertebrate animals; however, a role for cellular miRNAs in the defence against viral infection in mammalian organisms has thus far remained elusive. Here we show that interferon beta (IFNbeta) rapidly modulates the expression of numerous cellular miRNAs, and that eight of these IFNbeta-induced miRNAs have sequence-predicted targets within the hepatitis C virus (HCV) genomic RNA. The introduction of synthetic miRNA-mimics corresponding to these IFNbeta-induced miRNAs reproduces the antiviral effects of IFNbeta on HCV replication and infection, whereas neutralization of these antiviral miRNAs with anti-miRNAs reduces the antiviral effects of IFNbeta against HCV. In addition, we demonstrate that IFNbeta treatment leads to a significant reduction in the expression of the liver-specific miR-122, an miRNA that has been previously shown to be essential for HCV replication. Therefore, our findings strongly support the notion that mammalian organisms too, through the interferon system, use cellular miRNAs to combat viral infections.
West Nile (WN) virus, a mosquito-transmitted virus native to Africa, Asia, and Europe, was isolated from two species of mosquitoes, Culex pipiens and Aedes vexans, and from brain tissues of 28 American crows, Corvus brachyrhynchos, and one Cooper's hawk, Accipiter cooperii, in Connecticut. A portion of the genome of virus isolates from four different hosts was sequenced and analyzed by comparative phylogenetic analysis. Our isolates from Connecticut were similar to one another and most closely related to two WN isolates from Romania (2.8 and 3.6 percent difference). If established in North America, WN virus will likely have severe effects on human health and on the health of populations of birds.
In the early stages of viral infection, outcomes depend on a race between expansion of infection and the immune response generated to contain it. We combined in situ tetramer staining with in situ hybridization to visualize, map, and quantify relationships between immune effector cells and their targets in tissues. In simian immunodeficiency virus infections in macaques and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infections in mice, the magnitude and timing of the establishment of an excess of effector cells versus targets were found to correlate with the extent of control and the infection outcome (i.e., control and clearance versus partial or poor control and persistent infection). This method highlights the importance of the location, timing, and magnitude of the immune response needed for a vaccine to be effective against agents of persistent infection, such as HIV-1.
Study of heterologous gene expression in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has shown that this organism is incapable of correctly removing intervening sequences from transcripts of higher eukaryotic genes. This is probably due to the stringent requirement for the presence of a TACTAAC box close to the 3' end of the intervening sequence if splicing in S. cerevisiae is to occur. Comparison of the introns found in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe has identified conserved sequences similar to those found in higher eukaryotes. Therefore, we have investigated whether Schiz. pombe is capable of accurately excising intervening sequences from the transcripts of higher eukarotic genes. We show here that both the 5' and 3' splice sites of the simian virus 40 (SV40) small-T antigen transcript are accurately utilized when cloned viral DNA is expressed in Schiz. pombe cells. These data suggest that Schiz. pombe may be a better model system than S. cerevisiae for the genetic study of RNA splicing and for expressing higher eukaryotic genes.
Diverse bacterial and viral pathogens induce actin polymerization in the cytoplasm of host cells to facilitate infection. Here, we describe a pathogenic mechanism for promoting dynamic actin assembly in the nucleus to enable viral replication. The baculovirus Autographa californica multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus induced nuclear actin polymerization by translocating the host actin-nucleating Arp2/3 complex into the nucleus, where it was activated by p78/83, a viral Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP)-like protein. Nuclear actin assembly by p78/83 and Arp2/3 complex was essential for viral progeny production. Recompartmentalizing dynamic host actin may represent a conserved mode of pathogenesis and reflect viral manipulation of normal functions of nuclear actin.
The human type C adenovirus E1a 13S messenger RNA encodes a gene product, that positively regulates the transcription of viral genes and certain cellular genes and is involved in the transformation of primary mammalian cells. The E1a gene product was expressed at high levels in Escherichia coli. In a Xenopus oocyte microinjection assay, the purified Escherichia coli-produced protein activated the E1a-responsive adenovirus E3 promoter and functioned as efficiently as the E1a gene itself.
The potential impact of pandemic influenza makes effective measures to limit the spread and morbidity of virus infection a public health priority. Antiviral drugs are seen as essential requirements for control of initial influenza outbreaks caused by a new virus, and in pre-pandemic plans there is a heavy reliance on drug stockpiles. The principal target for these drugs is a virus surface glycoprotein, neuraminidase, which facilitates the release of nascent virus and thus the spread of infection. Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza) are two currently used neuraminidase inhibitors that were developed using knowledge of the enzyme structure. It has been proposed that the closer such inhibitors resemble the natural substrate, the less likely they are to select drug-resistant mutant viruses that retain viability. However, there have been reports of drug-resistant mutant selection in vitro and from infected humans. We report here the enzymatic properties and crystal structures of neuraminidase mutants from H5N1-infected patients that explain the molecular basis of resistance. Our results show that these mutants are resistant to oseltamivir but still strongly inhibited by zanamivir owing to an altered hydrophobic pocket in the active site of the enzyme required for oseltamivir binding. Together with recent reports of the viability and pathogenesis of H5N1 (ref. 7) and H1N1 (ref. 8) viruses with neuraminidases carrying these mutations, our results indicate that it would be prudent for pandemic stockpiles of oseltamivir to be augmented by additional antiviral drugs, including zanamivir.
The 11-kD protease (PR) encoded by the human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) is essential for the correct processing of viral polyproteins and the maturation of infectious virus, and is therefore a target for the design of selective acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) therapeutics. To facilitate the identification of novel inhibitors of HIV-1 PR, as well as to permit detailed studies on the enzymology and inhibition of this enzyme, a continuous assay for its activity was developed that was based on intramolecular fluorescence resonance energy transfer (RET). The assay used the quenched fluorogenic substrate 4-(4-dimethylaminophenylazo)benzoic acid (DABCYL)--Ser Gln Asn Tyr Pro Ile Val Gln--5-[(2-aminoethyl)amino]naphthalene-1 sulfonic acid (EDANS), whose peptide sequence is derived from a natural processing site for HIV-1 PR. Incubation of recombinant HIV-1 PR with the fluorogenic substrate resulted in specific cleavage at the Tyr-Pro bond and a time-dependent increase in fluorescence intensity that was linearly related to the extent of substrate hydrolysis. An internally quenched fluorogenic substrate was also designed that was selectively cleaved by the related PR from avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV). The fluorescence quantum yields of the HIV-1 PR and AMV PR substrates in the RET assay increased by 40.0- and 34.4-fold, respectively, per mole of substrate cleaved. Because of its simplicity, rapidity, and precision in the determination of reaction rates required for kinetic analysis, this method offers many advantages over the commonly used high-performance liquid chromatography- or electrophoresis-based assays for peptide substrate hydrolysis by retroviral PRs.
The zebrafish is rapidly becoming a popular model system for the study of vertebrate development because it is ideal for both embryological studies and genetic analysis. To determine if a retroviral vector pseudotyped with the envelope glycoprotein of the vesicular stomatitis virus could infect zebrafish embryos, and in particular, the cells destined to become the germ line, a pseudotyped virus was injected into blastula-stage zebrafish embryos. Fifty-one embryos were allowed to develop and eight transmitted proviral DNA to their progeny. Founders were mosaic, but as expected, transgenic F1's transmitted proviral DNA in a Mendelian fashion to the F2 progeny. Transgenic F1 fish inherited a single integrated provirus, and a single founder could transmit more than one viral integration to its progeny. These results demonstrate that this pantropic pseudotyped vector, originally developed for human gene therapy, will make the use of retroviral vectors in zebrafish possible.
Polyoma virus can develop lytically in differentiated mouse cells, but is unable to express either early or late functions in undifferentiated early embryonic cells or in embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells of the mouse. However, the EC cells become susceptible during differentiation and then behave as do mouse somatic cells. We have recently described the isolation of a new class of polyoma virus mutant (Py EC) able to develop normally in an EC cell line (PCC4-Aza) that is capable of trigerminal differentiation in vivo but exhibits a very limited differentiation in vitro. The mutants do not grow in another EC cell line (F9) that is 'blocked'--'nullipotent' in vivo, but able to differentiate in vitro when grown in the presence of chemical inducers. Compared with their parental strain, all Py EC genomes analysed so far have an extra 20-50 bases in their HpaII-3 restriction fragment. We now describe polyoma mutants that will grow in EC F9 cells, and the sequence changes in two of them. The region involved in the mutations can be folded into a putative tRNA-like secondary structure which may be involved in the regulation of viral early transcription with respect to the state of differentiation of the host cell.
Linear sucrose-density gradient was used to detect and isolate typical "C"-type viral particles in plasma of cats with spontaneous and experimentally induced leukemia. The density of the agent is similar to known murine leukemia virus (1.15 to 1.17 grams per cubic centimeter). In the electron microscope the virus showed typical "C"-type particle morphology with various maturation stages. The maximum diameter of the mature viral particles in plasma was 115 millimicrons, a diameter slightly larger than budding particles observed in tissue. Leukemia was transmitted with cellular and cell-free inoculum after a 5-week period of latency.
The genome of the avian retrovirus MH2 contains, in addition to the v-myc oncogene shared with three other avian retroviruses (MC29, CMII and OK-10), a second cell-derived oncogene, v-mil (refs 1-3). Like the three other viruses, which contain only v-myc, MH2 induces mainly liver and kidney carcinomas in fowl and transforms fibroblasts and macrophages in vitro. However, MH2 and MC29 differ in their biological properties when assayed on cultures of chicken embryo neuroretina (NR) cells. Indeed, NR cells, which normally do not multiply in vitro, are induced to proliferate and become transformed upon infection with MH2, whereas infection with MC29 has no apparent effect on these cells. To analyse the functions of the two oncogenes of MH2, we isolated spontaneous and in vitro-constructed mutants of this virus and investigated their effects on NR cell multiplication and transformation. We report here that expression of v-mil is sufficient to induce NR cell proliferation, although it does not result in cell transformation. In addition, viruses expressing only the v-myc oncogene fail to induce any detectable change in NR cells. However, cooperation of the two oncogenes is required to achieve transformation of NR cells by MH2.
The human APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases are potent inhibitors of diverse retroviruses, including human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1). HIV-1 Vif forms an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex with cullin 5 (CUL5), elongin B and elongin C , which promotes the polyubiquitination and degradation of APOBEC3 substrates. Here we demonstrate in human T cells that core binding factor b (CBF-b) is a key regulator of the evasion of HIV-1 from the host defence mediated by APOBEC3. CBF-b, the non-DNA-binding subunit of a heterodimeric transcription factor, regulates the folding and DNA-binding activity of partner RUNX family proteins, which have important roles in the development and differentiation of diverse cell types, including T lymphocytes. In our study, knockdown of endogenous CBF-b blocked Vif-induced APOBEC3G polyubiquitination and degradation. CBF-b was not required for the interaction between Vif and APOBEC3G, yet was essential for the assembly of the Vif-CUL5 E3-ubiquitin-ligase complex. CBF-b proved to be a unique regulator of primate lentiviral Vif and not a general component of the CUL5 E3 ubiquitin ligase. We show that Vif and CBF-b physically interact, and that the amino-terminal region of Vif is required for this interaction. Furthermore, interactions with Vif required regions in CBF-b that are not involved in RUNX protein binding. Considering the importance of the interaction between Vif and CBF-b, disrupting this interaction represents an attractive pharmacological intervention against HIV-1.
Viral infection of mammalian cells entails the regulated induction of viral gene expression. The induction of many viral genes, including the herpes simplex virus gene encoding thymidine kinase (tk), depends on viral regulatory proteins that act in trans. Because recognition of the tk promoter by cellular transcription factors is well understood, its trans induction by viral regulatory proteins may serve as a useful model for the regulation of eukaryotic gene expression. A comprehensive set of mutations was therefore introduced into the chromosome of herpes simplex virus at the tk promoter to directly analyze the effects of promoter mutations on tk transcription. The promoter domains required for efficient tk expression under conditions of trans induction corresponded to those important for recognition by cellular transcription factors. Thus, trans induction of tk expression may be catalyzed initially by the interaction of viral regulatory proteins with cellular transcription factors.
Lymph nodes (LNs) capture microorganisms that breach the body's external barriers and enter draining lymphatics, limiting the systemic spread of pathogens. Recent work has shown that CD11b(+)CD169(+) macrophages, which populate the subcapsular sinus (SCS) of LNs, are critical for the clearance of viruses from the lymph and for initiating antiviral humoral immune responses. Here we show, using vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), a relative of rabies virus transmitted by insect bites, that SCS macrophages perform a third vital function: they prevent lymph-borne neurotropic viruses from infecting the central nervous system (CNS). On local depletion of LN macrophages, about 60% of mice developed ascending paralysis and died 7-10 days after subcutaneous infection with a small dose of VSV, whereas macrophage-sufficient animals remained asymptomatic and cleared the virus. VSV gained access to the nervous system through peripheral nerves in macrophage-depleted LNs. In contrast, within macrophage-sufficient LNs VSV replicated preferentially in SCS macrophages but not in adjacent nerves. Removal of SCS macrophages did not compromise adaptive immune responses against VSV, but decreased type I interferon (IFN-I) production within infected LNs. VSV-infected macrophages recruited IFN-I-producing plasmacytoid dendritic cells to the SCS and in addition were a major source of IFN-I themselves. Experiments in bone marrow chimaeric mice revealed that IFN-I must act on both haematopoietic and stromal compartments, including the intranodal nerves, to prevent lethal infection with VSV. These results identify SCS macrophages as crucial gatekeepers to the CNS that prevent fatal viral invasion of the nervous system on peripheral infection.
The chemokine receptors CXCR4 and CCR5 have recently been shown to act as coreceptors, in concert with CD4, for human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) infection. RANTES and other chemokines that interact with CCR5 and block infection of peripheral blood mononuclear cell cultures inhibit infection of primary macrophages inefficiently at best. If used to treat HIV-1-infected individuals, these chemokines could fail to influence HIV replication in nonlymphocyte compartments while promoting unwanted inflammatory side effects. A derivative of RANTES that was created by chemical modification of the amino terminus, aminooxypentane (AOP)-RANTES, did not induce chemotaxis and was a subnanomolar antagonist of CCR5 function in monocytes. It potently inhibited infection of diverse cell types (including macrophages and lymphocytes) by nonsyncytium-inducing, macrophage-tropic HIV-1 strains. Thus, activation of cells by chemokines is not a prerequisite for the inhibition of viral uptake and replication. Chemokine receptor antagonists like AOP-RANTES that achieve full receptor occupancy at nanomolar concentrations are strong candidates for the therapy of HIV-1-infected individuals.
The acute avian leukaemia retroviruses AMV and E26 both induce myeloblastosis in vivo and transform myeloblasts in vitro. Both viruses contain the oncogene v-myb first described for AMV. Unlike AMV, E26 has the additional capacity to induce erythroblastosis in vivo and to transform erythroblasts. Previous analyses indicated that the genome of E26 also contained nucleotide sequences distinct from v-myb and unrelated to viral replicative genes. Using a molecularly cloned E26 provirus, we have now identified a novel nucleotide sequence designated v-ets (for E-twenty-six specific) of approximately 1.5 kilobase pairs (kbp) located next to v-myb. v-ets possesses all the structural characteristics of a putative new oncogene: it has a conserved cellular counterpart c-ets which is transcribed in some normal chicken cells as a major 7.5-kb polyadenylated RNA. Although our results now await elucidation of their biological significance, we propose that v-ets could be a new oncogene accounting for the additional transforming properties of E26, or potentiating the transforming properties of the v-myb oncogene.
Highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza A viruses are now endemic in avian populations in Southeast Asia, and human cases continue to accumulate. Although currently incapable of sustained human-to-human transmission, H5N1 represents a serious pandemic threat owing to the risk of a mutation or reassortment generating a virus with increased transmissibility. Identifying public health interventions that might be able to halt a pandemic in its earliest stages is therefore a priority. Here we use a simulation model of influenza transmission in Southeast Asia to evaluate the potential effectiveness of targeted mass prophylactic use of antiviral drugs as a containment strategy. Other interventions aimed at reducing population contact rates are also examined as reinforcements to an antiviral-based containment policy. We show that elimination of a nascent pandemic may be feasible using a combination of geographically targeted prophylaxis and social distancing measures, if the basic reproduction number of the new virus is below 1.8. We predict that a stockpile of 3 million courses of antiviral drugs should be sufficient for elimination. Policy effectiveness depends critically on how quickly clinical cases are diagnosed and the speed with which antiviral drugs can be distributed.
The complete nucleotide sequence of hepatitis B virus genome (subtype ayw) cloned in Escherichia coli has been determined using the Maxam and Gilbert method and the dideoxynucleotide method. This sequence is 3,182 nucleotides long. Location of the nonsense codons shows that the coding capacity of the L chain is larger than the coding capacity of the S chain. Eight open regions, able to code for polypeptide chains larger than 100 amino acids, have been located. Region 6, which is the largest, covers more than 80% of the genome. The gene S which codes for polypeptide I of the Hbs Ag and was previously located between coordinates 95.1 and 73.6 is contained in region 7.
The rex gene of the type I human T-cell leukaemia virus (HTLV-I) encodes a phosphorylated nuclear protein of relative molecular mass 27,000 which is required for viral replication. The Rex protein acts by promoting the cytoplasmic expression of the incompletely spliced viral messenger RNAs that encode the virion structural proteins. To identify the biologically important peptide domains within Rex, we introduced a series of mutations throughout its sequence. Two distinct classes of mutations lacking Rex biological activity were identified. One class corresponds to trans-dominant repressors as they inhibit the function of the wild-type Rex protein. The second class of mutants, in contrast, are recessive negative, rather than dominant negative, as they are not appropriately targeted to the cell nucleus. These results indicate the presence of at least two functionally distinct domains within the Rex protein, one involved in protein localization and a second involved in effector function. The trans-dominant Rex mutants may represent a promising new class of anti-viral agents.
Several observations suggest that retroviral infection is involved in the pathogenesis of the human demyelinating disease multiple sclerosis (MS). First, lymphadenopathy-associated virus/human T-lymphotropic virus type III (LAV/HTLV-III), the agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), has been shown to be neurotropic in man. Second, the genetic organization of the lentivirus visna, which causes a chronic demyelinating disease of sheep, closely resembles that of LAV/HTLV-III. Recently, Koprowski and colleagues reported that MS is associated both with raised levels of circulating antibodies to HTLV-I and with the presence of HTLV-I-specific RNA within cell lines derived from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Here we report that no HTLV-I-like or LAV/HTLV-III-like sequences can be detected, by in situ hybridization, in central nervous system (CNS) tissues from MS patients, and that nonspecific HTLV-I-like signal in peripheral blood mononuclear cells or in CSF cell lines is characteristic of MS. Furthermore, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) analysis of circulating and CSF antibodies for HTLV-I reactivity fails to distinguish between MS and control groups.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is unique among the DNA tumour viruses by virtue of its association with two human malignancies, Burkitt's lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), the former a tumour of B lymphocytes and the latter encompassing low-differentiated epithelial cells of the nasopharynx. A viral gene product has not been definitively linked to these malignant diseases, although an EBV nuclear antigen(s) (EBNA) seems to be ubiquitous in EBV-infected cells; indeed, the detection of EBNA by immunofluorescence is often taken as an indication of the presence of the viral genome. As part of a study to investigate which part of the EBV genome is responsible for transformation and whether the same mechanism of cellular transformation is involved in the case of B lymphocytes and epithelial cells, we have tried to establish whether a detectable cellular alteration(s) can be induced in primate epithelial cells by the presence of a specific region of the EBV genome. We report here that it can--the result is immortalization of the cells.
Enhancers are cis-acting activators of transcription from homologous or heterologous promoter elements of viral and cellular genes (see refs 1-6 for reviews). The activity of the simian virus 40 (SV40) (refs 7-9) and immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene (IgH) (refs 10, 11) enhancers has been reproduced to some extent in vitro and appears to be mediated by trans-acting factors both in vitro and in vivo. The SV40 enhancer consists of multiple sequence motifs in two domains, A and B (Fig. 1, see ref. 14): domain B contains GT-I and -II and two TC motifs, of which only TC-II is important for enhancer activity in HeLa cells; and domain A contains the P and the two Sph motifs, the repetition of which generates the sequence 5'-ATGCAAAG-3', similar to the 'octameric' sequence of the IgH enhancer, (Fig. 4i; refs 14, 16), where it is important for enhancing activity. Each SV40 enhancer motif is a binding site for a protein or proteins present in HeLa cell nuclear extracts. Unlike the SV40 enhancer, which is active in HeLa and lymphoid B cells, the IgH enhancer is preferentially active in B cells, suggesting that not all the trans-acting factors necessary for its activity are present in HeLa cells. However, the IgH enhancer can compete with the SV40 enhancer in vitro in HeLa or lymphoid cell extracts and in vivo in B cells. Here we show that both human HeLa and BJA-B lymphoid B-cell nuclear extracts contain proteins that bind to specific, sometimes overlapping, motifs of the SV40 enhancer. Some binding is cell-specific, suggesting that it is not the same set of sequence motifs and proteins that is responsible for the enhancer activity in the two cell types. This is confirmed by our results obtained in vivo with mutated SV40 enhancers.
Influenza virus presents an important and persistent threat to public health worldwide, and current vaccines provide immunity to viral isolates similar to the vaccine strain. High-affinity antibodies against a conserved epitope could provide immunity to the diverse influenza subtypes and protection against future pandemic viruses. Cocrystal structures were determined at 2.2 and 2.7 angstrom resolutions for broadly neutralizing human antibody CR6261 Fab in complexes with the major surface antigen (hemagglutinin, HA) from viruses responsible for the 1918 H1N1 influenza pandemic and a recent lethal case of H5N1 avian influenza. In contrast to other structurally characterized influenza antibodies, CR6261 recognizes a highly conserved helical region in the membrane-proximal stem of HA1 and HA2. The antibody neutralizes the virus by blocking conformational rearrangements associated with membrane fusion. The CR6261 epitope identified here should accelerate the design and implementation of improved vaccines that can elicit CR6261-like antibodies, as well as antibody-based therapies for the treatment of influenza.
Since the discovery of transcription enhancer sequences in the genomes of the DNA viruses simian virus 40(SV40) and polyoma virus, these elements have been shown to play an important part in the control of both viral and cellular gene expression. Enhancer elements act in cis to increase the amount of RNA produced from linked genes in a manner largely independent of distance and orientation. The mechanisms by which enhancers act are not understood; in particular, it is not known whether the enhancer-dependent increase in the level of stable RNA reflects an increase in the rate of transcription. To address this question, we have used an in vitro nuclear transcription assay to examine the effect of the SV40 enhancer on transcription of cloned human beta-globin genes transiently introduced into HeLa cells. We show here that the SV40 enhancer acts at least in part to increase the number of RNA polymerase II molecules transcribing the linked gene.
Most cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) recognize epitopes of foreign viral proteins in association with class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Viral proteins synthesized in the cytoplasm require intracellular fragmentation and exposure to the class I antigens for the development of CTL responses. Although indirect evidence for binding of peptides to class I antigens has accumulated, direct binding has only been shown recently. The formation of complexes between peptide and class I antigen may occur in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and peptides have been shown to induce assembly of the class I complex. We have translated the messenger RNAs encoding HLA-B27 (subtype 2705) and beta 2-microglobulin in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate supplemented with human microsomal membranes (to mimic ER membranes), in the absence and presence of a peptide derived from the nucleoprotein (residues 384-394) of influenza A virus. This peptide induces CTL activity against target cells expressing the HLA-B27 antigen. Here we report direct evidence that the nucleoprotein peptide promotes assembly of the HLA-B27 heavy chain and beta 2-microglobulin, and that this can occur in the ER immediately after synthesis of the two proteins.
The study of retrovirus-induced leukaemias in mice is a powerful tool for the elucidation of the normal regulation of the haematopoietic system. The acute murine spleen focus-forming viruses (SFFV) can be classified according to the haematopoietic lineage on which they exert their effects in the adult mouse. Here we report a new SFFV isolate, the AF-1 virus, with the novel ability to transform cells of the mononuclear phagocyte lineage. The virus was isolated from sarcomas that were induced on passage of a cloned Friend helper virus (F-MuLV, 643/22F) in newborn BALB/c mice. We have cloned the transforming defective subunit of the AF-1 viral complex in NRK cells and isolated several subclones. Analysis of the proviral genome in two non-producer cell clones reveals that AF-1 virus contains Harvey v-ras-specific sequences (Fig. 1). Thus, AF-1 virus is closely related to Harvey murine sarcoma virus (Ha-MSV), and is, at present, the only tool by which permanent cell lines can be obtained from mononuclear phagocytes in the mouse.
Heterokaryon studies suggest that senescent and quiescent human diploid fibroblasts (HDF) contain a common inhibitor of entry into S phase. DNA synthesis can be induced in senescent and quiescent HDF by fusing them with cells containing DNA viral oncogenes such as SV40 T antigen, adenovirus E1A, or human papillomavirus E7. Both senescent and quiescent HDF contained the unphosphorylated form (p110Rb) of the retinoblastoma protein, a putative inhibitor of proliferation. After serum stimulation, senescent HDF did not phosphorylate p110Rb and did not enter S phase, whereas quiescent HDF phosphorylated p110Rb and entered S phase. These findings, combined with the observations that T antigen, E1A, and E7 form complexes with, and presumably inactivate, unphosphorylated p110Rb, suggest that failure to phosphorylate p110Rb may be an immediate cause of failure to enter S phase in senescent HDF.
Kinetic analysis of the reassociation of DNA synthesized in vitro by a murine leukemia virus DNA polymerase revealed two classes of double-stranded product representative of 25 and 100 percent of viral genetic information. The DNA product representing the smaller portion of the viral genome comprised 85 percent of the double-stranded DNA generated in vitro and was extensively duplicated in the genomes of both normal cells and cells containing RNA tumor virus.
Foot and mouth disease virus (FMDV), of the family Picornaviridae, consists of a single-stranded RNA (approximately 8,000 nucleotides), the translation of which is initiated on the 3' side of a 150-nucleotide poly(C) tract and yields a single polyprotein which is processed by host cell proteases into four primary products (Fig. 1). One or more virus-specified proteases further cleave these into the final products, the capsid proteins (VP1-4) being derived from the precursor p88 (for review see ref. 5). There are seven serotypes of the virus and as it has been shown that the immunizing activity of FMDV particles is associated primarily with VP1 (refs 6, 7), it seems likely that antigenic variation in FMDV is a result of changes in the structure of this protein. To further our understanding of this variation and as a first step in the possible development of FMDV vaccines from genetically manipulated microorganisms, we report here the construction and analysis of recombinant plasmids containing cDNA copies of the RNA. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence with the known polypeptide sequences shows that the NH2-termini of VP2 and VP3 are conserved between the A and O serotypes whereas that of VP1 (the immunizing antigen) varies by as much as 42% between serotypes.
Wolbachia pipientis bacteria are common endosymbionts of insects that are best known for their ability to increase their prevalence in populations by manipulating host reproductive systems. However, there are examples of Wolbachia that exist in nature that seem to induce no reproductive parasitism trait and yet are able to invade populations. We demonstrate a fitness benefit for Wolbachia-infected insects that may explain this paradox. Drosophila melanogaster flies infected with Wolbachia are less susceptible to mortality induced by a range of RNA viruses. The antiviral protection associated with Wolbachia infection might be exploited in future strategies to reduce transmission of pathogens by insects.
The M2 protein of influenza A virus is a membrane-spanning tetrameric proton channel targeted by the antiviral drugs amantadine and rimantadine. Resistance to these drugs has compromised their effectiveness against many influenza strains, including pandemic H1N1. A recent crystal structure of M2(22-46) showed electron densities attributed to a single amantadine in the amino-terminal half of the pore, indicating a physical occlusion mechanism for inhibition. However, a solution NMR structure of M2(18-60) showed four rimantadines bound to the carboxy-terminal lipid-facing surface of the helices, suggesting an allosteric mechanism. Here we show by solid-state NMR spectroscopy that two amantadine-binding sites exist in M2 in phospholipid bilayers. The high-affinity site, occupied by a single amantadine, is located in the N-terminal channel lumen, surrounded by residues mutated in amantadine-resistant viruses. Quantification of the protein-amantadine distances resulted in a 0.3 A-resolution structure of the high-affinity binding site. The second, low-affinity, site was observed on the C-terminal protein surface, but only when the drug reaches high concentrations in the bilayer. The orientation and dynamics of the drug are distinct in the two sites, as shown by (2)H NMR. These results indicate that amantadine physically occludes the M2 channel, thus paving the way for developing new antiviral drugs against influenza viruses. The study demonstrates the ability of solid-state NMR to elucidate small-molecule interactions with membrane proteins and determine high-resolution structures of their complexes.
Multiple genetic loci for induction of murine leukemia viruses are demonstrated in cells of the high leukemic incidence C58 mouse strain. The biologic properties of viruses at C58 inducibility loci are clearly distinguishable from those of viruses activated from mouse cells containing a locus for virus induction of the low leukemia incidence BALB/c strain. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that the genes for virus induction in normal mouse embryo cells represent viral structural information.
The effect of antiretroviral therapy (ART) in preventing human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections and averting acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) deaths in the San Francisco gay community over the next 10 years was predicted. A transmission model was coupled with a statistical approach that enabled inclusion of a high degree of uncertainty in the potential treatment effects of ART (in terms of infectivity and survival), increase in risky behavior, and rate of emergence of drug resistance. Increasing the usage of ART in San Francisco would decrease the AIDS death rate and could substantially reduce the incidence rate.
Phagocytosis of group A streptococci requires type-specific antibodies directed against the variable determinants of the bacterial surface M protein molecule. As a step toward developing a broadly protective anti-streptococcal vaccine, a vaccinia virus (VV) recombinant was constructed that expresses the conserved region of the structural gene encoding the M6 molecule (VV:M6'). Mice immunized intranasally with the VV:M6' virus showed markedly reduced pharyngeal colonization by streptococci after intranasal and oral challenge with these bacteria. M protein-specific serum immunoglobulin G was significantly elevated in vaccinated animals and absent in controls. A similar approach may prove useful for the identification of protective determinants present on other bacterial and viral pathogens.
Enhancers are regulatory DNA elements, usually about 200 base pairs (bp) long, which are able to stimulate transcription of linked genes in eukaryotic cells. This activation can be exerted over large distances, and from a position 5' or 3' to the gene. Enhancers have been identified in viral genomes and cellular genes. Using a transient expression assay, we have analysed transcription of the rabbit beta-globin gene and the thymidine kinase gene from herpes simplex virus with and without a simian virus 40 (SV40) enhancer. S1 nuclease mapping shows a high level of specific transcripts when the genes are linked to the enhancer. To determine whether this increased number of transcripts is due to a higher transcription rate, or perhaps to a shift from nonspecific to specific initiation, we have performed run-on transcription assays with isolated nuclei. Our results, presented here, demonstrate that the SV40 enhancer increases the RNA polymerase density within the linked gene. Therefore, enhancers apparently increase the rate of transcription initiation without influencing the specificity of initiation.
Coat protein gp120 from the human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) increased intracellular free calcium and injured rodent retinal ganglion cells and hippocampal neurons in culture. Highly purified recombinant gp120 envelope protein produced these effects in a dose-dependent fashion at picomolar concentrations. Immunoprecipitation with antibody to gp120, but not with control immunoglobulin-containing serum, depleted solutions of the viral envelope protein and also prevented both the rise in intracellular calcium and neuronal toxicity. The gp120-induced increase in intracellular calcium was abrogated by transiently lowering extracellular calcium or by adding the dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonist nimodipine (100 nM). Calcium channel antagonists also prevented gp120-induced neuronal injury. In addition, intracellular stores appeared to contribute substantially to the increase in calcium elicited by gp120. Since increases in intracellular calcium have been associated with neurotoxicity, it is possible that an injurious effect of gp120 on neurons might be related to this mechanism and that treatment with calcium channel antagonists may prove useful in mitigating HIV-1-related neuronal injury.
Since the discovery of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in 1983, significant progress has been made toward the discovery, development, and licensing of anti-HIV drugs. In vitro screens against whole virus are now being complemented by screens against specific viral targets, resulting in the development of clinical candidates acting at several critical stages of the viral life cycle. Despite these advances, clinical therapy remains largely palliative. In addition, it has recently been recognized that HIV resistance to most drugs may pose even greater obstacles. Moreover, emerging data on immunopathogenesis raise the possibility that even if virus was eliminated from an infected individual, the patient's immune system might not be capable of restoration to normal function. In the face of such obstacles, deeper insights into the pathogenic mechanisms of disease, aggressive exploitation of those mechanisms for therapeutic gain, and continued commitment of both public and private sectors to support and collaborate in this research are needed.
In the lytic cycle of papova viruses, both uncoating of the viral genome after infection and assembly of functional virions take place in the cell nucleus. The mechanisms by which newly internalized virions are targeted to the nucleus and viral DNA encapsidated into particles are poorly understood. Although the major capsid protein VP1 is involved in endocytosis, and largely defines virion structure, the functions of the minor proteins VP2 and VP3 have remained obscure. Here we show that VP2 from both polyoma virus and simian virus 40 (SV40) is covalently linked to myristic acid; this is the first report of a myristylated protein in the nucleus and of a fatty acid being important in the structure of a nonenveloped virus. We consider the implications of this unusual modification on encapsidation and suggest that VP2 may be a scaffolding protein for virion assembly.
Virus-induced disease occurs both through direct destruction of cells by viruses and/or secondarily through lysis of infected cells by immunological assault. We asked whether viruses could also cause injury and disease by altering the cell's normal or expected functions without destroying the cells. Here we show that a relatively noncytopathic virus can perturb endocrine functions by disordering the synthesis of a hormone needed for growth and glucose regulation, while replicating in a specialized cell making that hormone. Yet, despite viral replication and alteration in synthesis of the specialized cell's homeostatic product, the infected cell remains free from structural injury.
Interferons (IFNs) induce antiviral activity in many cell types. The ability of IFN-gamma to inhibit replication of ectromelia, vaccinia, and herpes simplex-1 viruses in mouse macrophages correlated with the cells' production of nitric oxide (NO). Viral replication was restored in IFN-gamma-treated macrophages exposed to inhibitors of NO synthase. Conversely, epithelial cells with no detectable NO synthesis restricted viral replication when transfected with a complementary DNA encoding inducible NO synthase or treated with organic compounds that generate NO. In mice, an inhibitor of NO synthase converted resolving ectromelia virus infection into fulminant mousepox. Thus, induction of NO synthase can be necessary and sufficient for a substantial antiviral effect of IFN-gamma.
Endocarditis has not been generally considered to be a complication of viral infection. We show that mural and valvular endocarditis can be produced in mice infected with Coxsackie virus B(4). Because this virus commonly infects man and is highly cardiotropic, it is important to know whether it produces valvular lesions in man similar to those we describe in mice.
Human immunodeficiency virus gene expression is regulated transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally by the virally encoded tat protein (Tat). Tat functions through an RNA target sequence located in the untranslated region at the 5' end of viral transcripts. In Xenopus oocytes, translation of RNA containing the target sequence is specifically activated by Tat. This activation only occurs if the RNA is injected into the nucleus, and might be due to Tat-dependent, nucleus-specific chemical modification of the RNA which somehow facilitates translation. Here we demonstrate that Tat activation of its target RNA in the nucleus involves a Tat-dependent covalent modification. The modified RNA is competent for translation after reinjection into either the nucleus or the cytoplasm in the absence of Tat. Furthermore, we find that the nucleoside analogue 5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole, which inhibits processivity of RNA polymerase II (ref. 9), blocks this Tat-dependent modification.
Human adenovirus (Ad2), like many other viruses, contains a virion-associated proteinase essential for the synthesis of infectious virus particles. We observed proteinase activity in wild-type virus but not in the ts-1 virus, which contains a mutation in the Ad2 L3 endoprotease gene that confers temperature-sensitive processing of virion precursor proteins. Unexpectedly, we did not observe proteinase activity with purified recombinant endoprotease protein (M(r) 23 K). Purified recombinant endoprotease protein, however, complemented the mutation in ts-1 virions, restoring proteinase activity when mixed together. This implied that cofactors may be required. Here we reconstitute proteinase activity in vitro with three purified viral components: (1) the recombinant endoprotease protein; (2) an 11-amino-acid peptide that originates from the carboxy terminus of pVI, the precursor to virion component VI; and (3) adenovirus DNA. The use of DNA for a proteinase activity is unprecedented.
Motors generating mechanical force, powered by the hydrolysis of ATP, translocate double-stranded DNA into preformed capsids (proheads) of bacterial viruses and certain animal viruses. Here we describe the motor that packages the double-stranded DNA of the Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage phi29 into a precursor capsid. We determined the structure of the head-tail connector--the central component of the phi29 DNA packaging motor--to 3.2 A resolution by means of X-ray crystallography. We then fitted the connector into the electron densities of the prohead and of the partially packaged prohead as determined using cryo-electron microscopy and image reconstruction analysis. Our results suggest that the prohead plus dodecameric connector, prohead RNA, viral ATPase and DNA comprise a rotary motor with the head-prohead RNA-ATPase complex acting as a stator, the DNA acting as a spindle, and the connector as a ball-race. The helical nature of the DNA converts the rotary action of the connector into translation of the DNA.
CD8+ lymphocytes are believed to be important in host defence against the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1, inhibiting HIV-1 replication through both cytolytic and non-cytolytic pathways. The cytolytic pathway involves calcium-dependent exocytosis of perforin and granzyme proteases, as well as Fas-mediated programmed cell death, whereas the noncytolytic pathway involves the release of chemokines that prevent viral entry. Using granzyme A as a marker of cytolytic granule proteins, and macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha and RANTES as markers of HIV-1 inhibitory chemokines, we show that these two very different mediators of viral inhibition are both localized in the cytolytic granules of HIV-1-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL). Following antigen-specific activation, these mediators are secreted together, facilitating both lysis of virion-producing cells and the inhibition of free virus. In addition, RANTES, MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta are secreted by CTL as a macromolecular complex containing sulphated proteoglycans. This association appears to have a functional significance, because heparan sulphate facilitates RANTES inhibition of HIV-1 infection of monocytes.
Phosphate-methylated DNA hybridizes strongly and specifically to natural DNA and RNA. Hybridization to single-stranded and double-stranded DNA leads to site-selective blocking of replication and transcription. Phosphate-methylated DNA was used to interrupt the life cycle of the human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1), the causative agent of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Both antisense and sense phosphate-methylated DNA 20-nucleotide oligomers, targeted at the transactivator responsive region and the primer binding site, caused complete inhibition of viral infectivity at a low concentration. Hybridization of phosphate-methylated DNA with folded and unfolded RNA was studied by ultraviolet and proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The combined results of hybridization studies and biological experiments suggest that the design of effective antisense phosphate-methylated DNA should focus on hairpin loop structures in the viral RNA. For sense systems, the 5' end of the integrated viral genome is considered to be the important target site.
HIV-1 integrates into the host chromosome and persists as a provirus flanked by long terminal repeats (LTRs). To date, treatment regimens primarily target the virus enzymes or virus-cell fusion, but not the integrated provirus. We report here the substrate-linked protein evolution of a tailored recombinase that recognizes an asymmetric sequence within an HIV-1 LTR. This evolved recombinase efficiently excised integrated HIV proviral DNA from the genome of infected cells. Although a long way from use in the clinic, we speculate that this type of technology might be adapted in future antiretroviral therapies, among other possible uses.
Class I HLA (histocompatibility locus antigen) molecules are the targets of allospecific cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTL) in graft rejection, and constitute the restricting elements necessary for the interaction between antiviral CTL and virus-infected cells. Cells expressing only one HLA in the absence of other human molecules would provide a remarkable model for studying the function of these molecules. However, HLA+ murine cells transfected with human genes are generally not lysed by allospecific human CTL, and this is ascribed to insufficient HLA expression, lack of human beta 2-microglobulin, alteration of HLA molecules or absence of receptors for human T8 or LFA1 molecules in murine cells. Here we report, for the first time, the specific lysis of virus-infected HLA+ murine cells by HLA-restricted antiviral human CTL. Therefore, these murine cells constitute an excellent model for studying the role of HLA molecules.
Usually only cells exposed to virus, double-stranded RNA or other inducers synthesize interferon (IFN). Interferon mRNA appears 1-2 h after induction, peaks at 1.5-20 h and decays with a half life of about 30 min. So far, it has not been determined whether induction of interferon is due to transient stabilization of a rapidly turning-over mRNA or to activation of transcription. To clarify this issue we transformed mouse L cells with a hybrid gene in which the 5'-flanking region of the human IFN-alpha 1 gene was followed by the rabbit beta-globin transcription unit. Correctly initiated beta-globin RNA appeared only after viral induction, with the kinetics described for interferon mRNA. Cells transformed with the converse construction, or with the complete rabbit beta-globin gene, constitutively produced correctly initiated transcripts; viral infection decreased the level of transcripts. We conclude that induction acts by activating transcription rather than by reducing turnover, and that the regulatory elements are contained in the 5'-flanking region of the interferon gene.
An RNA virus population does not consist of a single genotype; rather, it is an ensemble of related sequences, termed quasispecies. Quasispecies arise from rapid genomic evolution powered by the high mutation rate of RNA viral replication. Although a high mutation rate is dangerous for a virus because it results in nonviable individuals, it has been hypothesized that high mutation rates create a 'cloud' of potentially beneficial mutations at the population level, which afford the viral quasispecies a greater probability to evolve and adapt to new environments and challenges during infection. Mathematical models predict that viral quasispecies are not simply a collection of diverse mutants but a group of interactive variants, which together contribute to the characteristics of the population. According to this view, viral populations, rather than individual variants, are the target of evolutionary selection. Here we test this hypothesis by examining the consequences of limiting genomic diversity on viral populations. We find that poliovirus carrying a high-fidelity polymerase replicates at wild-type levels but generates less genomic diversity and is unable to adapt to adverse growth conditions. In infected animals, the reduced viral diversity leads to loss of neurotropism and an attenuated pathogenic phenotype. Notably, using chemical mutagenesis to expand quasispecies diversity of the high-fidelity virus before infection restores neurotropism and pathogenesis. Analysis of viruses isolated from brain provides direct evidence for complementation between members in the quasispecies, indicating that selection indeed occurs at the population level rather than on individual variants. Our study provides direct evidence for a fundamental prediction of the quasispecies theory and establishes a link between mutation rate, population dynamics and pathogenesis.
The primary function of the adenovirus E1A-region genes is to activate other adenoviral genes during a permissive viral infection by modifying the host cell transcriptional apparatus. Host cell immortalization, or transformation by the whole adenoviral early region, presumably results as a consequence of these modifications. Both transcriptional activation and transcriptional repression of non-adenoviral genes by the E1A proteins have been reported. It is currently not clear which, if either, of these activities contributes to host cell transformation and immortalization. Although there may be a physiological impact of some E1A-stimulated host cell genes, in many cases the functional significance is unclear. No common target sequences have been recognized in stimulated cellular genes and it has recently been proposed that in many cases, particularly involving newly transfected genes, available 'TATA-box' sequences may be the opportunistic beneficiaries of E1A assistance as a secondary consequence of E1A primary functions within the host cell nucleus. E1A-mediated transcriptional repression appears to be a more specific process insofar as common core elements are shared by the E1A-suppressed SV40, polyoma B, IgG heavy-chain and insulin enhancers. In the present communication we report that the complete myogenic programme of L8 and C2 myoblasts can be blocked by the introduction of constitutively expressing E1A genes, and show that the transcriptional induction of muscle-specific genes is inhibited. In particular, the promoter-inducing activities of well-defined elements that are required for the muscle-specific expression of the two sarcomeric alpha-actins, and which normally bind cellular trans-acting factors, become targets for E1A suppression. The results support the hypothesis that the suppression of differentiation by E1A products is effected by an E1A-mediated block in the transcriptional activation of cellular genes by specific developmentally regulated cis-acting promoter elements.
Papaya, a fruit crop cultivated in tropical and subtropical regions, is known for its nutritional benefits and medicinal applications. Here we report a 3x draft genome sequence of 'SunUp' papaya, the first commercial virus-resistant transgenic fruit tree to be sequenced. The papaya genome is three times the size of the Arabidopsis genome, but contains fewer genes, including significantly fewer disease-resistance gene analogues. Comparison of the five sequenced genomes suggests a minimal angiosperm gene set of 13,311. A lack of recent genome duplication, atypical of other angiosperm genomes sequenced so far, may account for the smaller papaya gene number in most functional groups. Nonetheless, striking amplifications in gene number within particular functional groups suggest roles in the evolution of tree-like habit, deposition and remobilization of starch reserves, attraction of seed dispersal agents, and adaptation to tropical daylengths. Transgenesis at three locations is closely associated with chloroplast insertions into the nuclear genome, and with topoisomerase I recognition sites. Papaya offers numerous advantages as a system for fruit-tree functional genomics, and this draft genome sequence provides the foundation for revealing the basis of Carica's distinguishing morpho-physiological, medicinal and nutritional properties.
There is now good evidence that the induction of mammary carcinomas by mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) involves provirus activation of specific cellular genes. Thus, a high percentage of virally induced tumours contain an acquired MMTV provirus in either of two defined integration regions, termed int-1 and int-2, and provirus insertion is accompanied by expression of specific RNA transcripts from these regions. We show here that in some recurring, pregnancy-dependent mammary tumours provirus integration within int-2 has already occurred at the earliest appearance of the tumour and may therefore represent an important step in the development of neoplasia. As judged by the distribution of the acquired MMTV proviruses, the tumours recurring at any one site represent the same clonal population of cells as the original tumour and remain clonal during cycles of proliferation and regression, including the transition to hormone-independent status. These data suggest that either the expression of the int-2 locus or the function of this putative oncogene must remain responsive to hormones and that some additional event must be responsible for the transition to autonomous growth.
Under specified growth conditions, simian virus 40 encapsidated host DNA in a noncircular form free of viral DNA. Two bands of virus particles were present in cesium chloride equilibrium density centrifugation. The host DNA species contained in the upper band was of a lower molecular weight than the DNA present in the mature virus in the lower band.
Murine sarcoma virus transformed mouse 3T3 cells, which are negative for murine leukemia virus and which yield sarcoma virus after superinfection with murine leukenmia virus, spotaneously give rise to flat variants front which murine sarcoma virus can no longer be rescued. The revertants support leukemia viruis growth and show an enhanced sensitivity to murine sarcoma superinfection and, like normal cells, do not release RNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity. Because revertants could be obtained with high frequency from progeny of single transformed cells, each cell that containts the sarconma virus genome seems to have the capacity to suppress or eliminate an RNA tumor virus native to its species of origin.
The genome of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) contains several open reading frames (ORFs) not present in other viruses. The 'A' gene, also known as Q2 P'3, ORF-1(4) or sor5, partially overlaps the pol gene; its protein product has a relative molecular mass of 23,000 (Mr 23K) and is present in productively infected cells. The function of this protein is unclear; mutant viruses deleted in 'A' replicate in and kill CD4+ lymphocyte lines, but the high degree of conservation of the deduced amino-acid sequence in nine different HIV isolates (80%) and the presence of analogous genes in HIV-2 and other lentiviruses suggest that the gene function is an important one. Here we describe a mutant virus deficient in the 'A' gene which produces virion particles normally; however, the particles are approximately 1,000 times less infective than wild type. Transcomplementation experiments partially restore infectivity. The mutant virus spreads efficiently when virus-producing cells are co-cultivated with CD4+ lymphocytes, however, indicating that HIV can spread from cell to cell in a mechanism that does not require the 'A' gene product and probably does not require the production of infective virus particles.
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), or human herpesvirus 8, is invariably present in Kaposi's sarcoma lesions. KSHV contains several viral oncogenes and serological evidence suggests that KSHV infection is necessary for the development of Kaposi's sarcoma, but cellular transformation by this virus has not so far been demonstrated. KSHV is found in the microvascular endothelial cells in Kaposi's sarcoma lesions and in the spindle 'tumour' cells, which are also thought to be of endothelial origin. Here we investigate the biological consequences of infecting human primary endothelial cells with purified KSHV particles. We find that infection causes long-term proliferation and survival of these cells, which are associated with the acquisition of telomerase activity and anchorage-independent growth. KSHV was present in only a subset of cells, and paracrine mechanisms were found to be responsible for the survival of uninfected cells. Their survival may have been mediated by upregulation of a receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor. Our results indicate that transformation of endothelial cells by KSHV, as well as paracrine mechanisms that are induced by this virus, may be critical in the pathogenesis of Kaposi's sarcoma.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a human herpesvirus, is strongly linked with two relatively rare forms of B-cell lymphoma and with a much more prevalent epithelial malignancy, undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). The availability of suitable culture systems has allowed detailed analysis of EBV-induced growth transformation in B lymphocytes, but little is known about the virus--epithelial cell interaction or about the possible effector role of viral proteins in the pathogenesis of NPC. Here we describe an experimental system to monitor the effects of introduced viral or cellular genes upon human epithelial cell growth and differentiation. We transfected a human epithelial cell line, which retains several features of normal keratinocyte behaviour in vitro, with the EBV gene encoding latent membrane protein (LMP), one of only two viral proteins known to be expressed in NPC cells in vivo. LMP expression was accompanied by changes in the epithelial cell surface phenotype, mimicking surface changes observed in NPC cells, and by severe impairment of the cellular response to differentiation signals. The ability of LMP to inhibit terminal differentiation indicates a mechanism whereby EBV infection of squamous epithelium could contribute to the multi-step pathogenesis of NPC.
Tracking human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) infection at the cellular level in tissue reservoirs provides opportunities to better understand the pathogenesis of infection and to rationally design and monitor therapy. A quantitative technique was developed to determine viral burden in two important cellular compartments in lymphoid tissues. Image analysis and in situ hybridization were combined to show that in the presymptomatic stages of infection there is a large, relatively stable pool of virions on the surfaces of follicular dendritic cells and a smaller pool of productively infected cells. Despite evidence of constraints on HIV-1 replication in the infected cell population in lymphoid tissues, estimates of the numbers of these cells and the virus they could produce are consistent with the quantities of virus that have been detected in the bloodstream. The cellular sources of virus production and storage in lymphoid tissues can now be studied with this approach over the course of infection and treatment.
Host cell barriers to the early phase of immunodeficiency virus replication explain the current distribution of these viruses among human and non-human primate species. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), the cause of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in humans, efficiently enters the cells of Old World monkeys but encounters a block before reverse transcription. This species-specific restriction acts on the incoming HIV-1 capsid and is mediated by a dominant repressive factor. Here we identify TRIM5alpha, a component of cytoplasmic bodies, as the blocking factor. HIV-1 infection is restricted more efficiently by rhesus monkey TRIM5alpha than by human TRIM5alpha. The simian immunodeficiency virus, which naturally infects Old World monkeys, is less susceptible to the TRIM5alpha-mediated block than is HIV-1, and this difference in susceptibility is due to the viral capsid. The early block to HIV-1 infection in monkey cells is relieved by interference with TRIM5alpha expression. Our studies identify TRIM5alpha as a species-specific mediator of innate cellular resistance to HIV-1 and reveal host cell components that modulate the uncoating of a retroviral capsid.
Infection of tobacco plants with tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) results in an increase in the activities of several enzymes and induces the de novo synthesis of about 10 proteins that are protease-resistant and soluble at pH 3. These proteins accumulate in the intracellular leaf space. The appearance of pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins is closely associated with the phenomenon of 'systemic acquired resistance' and it has been suggested that such proteins have an antiviral function. Previously, we cloned complementary DNAs to the messenger RNAs for the three smallest PR proteins, PR-1a, -1b and -1c, and these clones were used to show that there is an increase of more than 100-fold in the concentration of PR-1 mRNAs following TMV infection of tobacco. Here, we describe the cDNA cloning of another mRNA whose synthesis is induced by TMV infection. Sequencing of the cDNA showed that the encoded protein is highly homologous to thaumatin, the intensely sweet-tasting protein from the fruits of the monocot Thaumatococcus daniellii Benth, a West African rainforest shrub. The conservation of a gene encoding a thaumatin-like protein in tobacco suggests that the encoded protein may have a more general function than that of being sweet-tasting.
Proviruses of avian leukosis virus (ALV) are located in the vicinity of a putative cellular oncogene (c-myc) in ALV-induced bursal lymphomas. Enhanced expression of c-myc occurs in association with proviruses found in any of three configurations: (I) on the 5' side ('upstream') of c-myc in the same transcriptional orientation; (II) on the 3' side ('downstream') of c-myc in the same orientation; (III) upstream, in the transcriptional orientation opposite to that of c-myc. Thus, activation of adjacent cellular genes by retroviral DNA can involve mechanisms other than provision of a transcriptional promoter.
Several human viruses are able to latently infect specific target cell populations in vivo. Analysis of the replication cycles of herpes simplex virus, Epstein-Barr virus, and human immunodeficiency virus suggests that the latent infections established by these human pathogens primarily result from a lack of host factors critical for the expression of viral early gene products. The subsequent activation of specific cellular transcription factors in response to extracellular stimuli can induce the expression of these viral regulatory proteins and lead to a burst of lytic viral replication. Latency in these eukaryotic viruses therefore contrasts with latency in bacteriophage, which is maintained primarily by the expression of virally encoded repressors of lytic replication.
A search for compounds which have previously unrecognized antiviral activity led to the discovery that rhodanine inhibits the multiplication of echovirus 12 and also the development of virus-induced morphologic changes. Eighteen derivatives and analogs of rhodanine were synthesized and tested against echovirus 12. These compounds were considerably less active than rhodanine or were inactive, and some of them were more toxic to the host cells than rhodanine.
The long terminal repeats (LTRs) of retroviruses contain sequences necessary for the initiation and termination of retroviral transcription. These sequences include promoter elements, transcriptional termination signals and transcriptional enhancer elements. The enhancer elements of Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV) are localized in a tandemly repeated region (approximately 75 base pairs (bp) long), which lies 5' to the CAT and TATA promoter elements in the U3 region of the LTR (see Fig. 1). We have shown that the tandem repeats are required both for LTR promoter activity, as measured by transient expression assays, and for biological activity, as measured by production of infectious virus. Furthermore, they can be replaced by transcriptional enhancers from the F101 host-range mutant of polyoma virus without loss of function. We report here that the addition of the polyoma (PyF101) enhancers to the M-MuLV LTRs (either with or without the M-MuLV tandem repeats) results in complete loss of viral leukaemogenicity, even though the virus can replicate to high titres in tissue culture fibroblasts and can establish infection in animals.
Retroviruses have the potential to acquire host cell-derived genetic material during reverse transcription and can integrate into the genomes of larger, more complex DNA viruses. In contrast, RNA viruses were believed not to integrate into the host's genome under any circumstances. We found that illegitimate recombination between an exogenous nonretroviral RNA virus, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, and the endogenous intracisternal A-type particle (IAP) retrotransposon occurred and led to reverse transcription of exogenous viral RNA. The resulting complementary DNA was integrated into the host's genome with an IAP element. Thus, RNA viruses should be closely scrutinized for any capacity to interact with endogenous retroviral elements before their approval for therapeutic use in humans.
RNA interference (RNAi) is the process by which double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) directs sequence-specific degradation of messenger RNA in animal and plant cells. In mammalian cells, RNAi can be triggered by 21-nucleotide duplexes of small interfering RNA (siRNA). Here we describe inhibition of early and late steps of HIV-1 replication in human cell lines and primary lymphocytes by siRNAs targeted to various regions of the HIV-1 genome. We demonstrate that synthetic siRNA duplexes or plasmid-derived siRNAs inhibit HIV-1 infection by specifically degrading genomic HIV-1 RNA, thereby preventing formation of viral complementary-DNA intermediates. These results demonstrate the utility of RNAi for modulating the HIV replication cycle and provide evidence that genomic HIV-1 RNA, as it exists within a nucleoprotein reverse-transcription complex, is amenable to siRNA-mediated degradation.
The mechanisms by which hepatitis C virus (HCV) induces chronic infection in the vast majority of infected individuals are unknown. Sequences within the HCV E1 and E2 envelope genes were analyzed during the acute phase of hepatitis C in 12 patients with different clinical outcomes. Acute resolving hepatitis was associated with relative evolutionary stasis of the heterogeneous viral population (quasispecies), whereas progressing hepatitis correlated with genetic evolution of HCV. Consistent with the hypothesis of selective pressure by the host immune system, the sequence changes occurred almost exclusively within the hypervariable region 1 of the E2 gene and were temporally correlated with antibody seroconversion. These data indicate that the evolutionary dynamics of the HCV quasispecies during the acute phase of hepatitis C predict whether the infection will resolve or become chronic.
In the presence of Sendai virus inactivated with ultraviolet light, nucleated chick erythrocytes can be fused with several types of human cells to form heterokaryons. Although chick erythrocytes alone cannot be stimulated by Sendai virus to produce interferon, fusion with a human cell (AH-1) which itself may produce human interferon results in heterokaryons in which the erythrocyte genome is activated and chick interferon is produced. When nucleated chick erythrocytes are fused with another type of human cell (HeLa clone S-3) which does not produce human interferon when stimulated, no chick interferon is detectable, despite morphologic changes suggestive of activation of the erythrocyte nuclei.
All viruses rely on host cell proteins and their associated mechanisms to complete the viral life cycle. Identifying the host molecules that participate in each step of virus replication could provide valuable new targets for antiviral therapy, but this goal may take several decades to achieve with conventional forward genetic screening methods and mammalian cell cultures. Here we describe a novel genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen in Drosophila that can be used to identify host genes important for influenza virus replication. After modifying influenza virus to allow infection of Drosophila cells and detection of influenza virus gene expression, we tested an RNAi library against 13,071 genes (90% of the Drosophila genome), identifying over 100 for which suppression in Drosophila cells significantly inhibited or stimulated reporter gene (Renilla luciferase) expression from an influenza-virus-derived vector. The relevance of these findings to influenza virus infection of mammalian cells is illustrated for a subset of the Drosophila genes identified; that is, for three implicated Drosophila genes, the corresponding human homologues ATP6V0D1, COX6A1 and NXF1 are shown to have key functions in the replication of H5N1 and H1N1 influenza A viruses, but not vesicular stomatitis virus or vaccinia virus, in human HEK 293 cells. Thus, we have demonstrated the feasibility of using genome-wide RNAi screens in Drosophila to identify previously unrecognized host proteins that are required for influenza virus replication. This could accelerate the development of new classes of antiviral drugs for chemoprophylaxis and treatment, which are urgently needed given the obstacles to rapid development of an effective vaccine against pandemic influenza and the probable emergence of strains resistant to available drugs.
Persistent parainfluenza virus shedding in healthy young adults occurred throughout the 8 1/2-month winter isolation period at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station during 1978. Two episodes of respiratory illness were observed after 10 and 29 weeks of complete social isolation. Throat swabs collected both routinely, and during each outbreak of respiratory illness, were directly inoculated into cell cultures. Parainfluenza virus types 1 and 3 were recovered from both symptomatic and asymptomatic subjects throughout the winter. No other viruses were obtained by these efforts. The presence of parainfluenza virus in these subjects long after the accepted incubation period for viral upper respiratory illness, and when the introduction of new virus to this community was impossible, suggests its persistence in man.
Viruses have evolved many distinct strategies to avoid the host's apoptotic response. Here we describe a new family of viral inhibitors (v-FLIPs) which interfere with apoptosis signalled through death receptors and which are present in several gamma-herpesviruses (including Kaposi's-sarcoma-associated human herpesvirus-8), as well as in the tumorigenic human molluscipoxvirus. v-FLIPs contain two death-effector domains which interact with the adaptor protein FADD, and this inhibits the recruitment and activation of the protease FLICE by the CD95 death receptor. Cells expressing v-FLIPs are protected against apoptosis induced by CD95 or by the related death receptors TRAMP and TRAIL-R. The herpesvirus saimiri FLIP is detected late during the lytic viral replication cycle, at a time when host cells are partially protected from CD95-ligand-mediated apoptosis. Protection of virus-infected cells against death-receptor-induced apoptosis may lead to higher virus production and contribute to the persistence and oncogenicity of several FLIP-encoding viruses.
Because stimulation of CD4+ lymphocytes leads to activation of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) replication, viral spread, and cell death, adoptive CD4+ T cell therapy has not been possible. When antigen and CD28 receptors on cultured T cells were stimulated by monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to CD3 and CD28 that had been immobilized, there was an increase in the number of polyclonal CD4+ T cells from HIV-infected donors. Activated cells predominantly secreted cytokines associated with T helper cell type 1 function. The HIV-1 viral load declined in the absence of antiretroviral agents. Moreover, CD28 stimulation of CD4+ T cells from uninfected donors rendered these cells highly resistant to HIV-1 infection. Immobilization of CD28 mAb was crucial to the development of HIV resistance, as cells stimulated with soluble CD28 mAb were highly susceptible to HIV infection. The CD28-mediated antiviral effect occurred early in the viral life cycle, before HIV-1 DNA integration. These data may facilitate immune reconstitution and gene therapy approaches in persons with HIV infection.
All retroviruses specifically package two copies of their genomes during virus assembly, a requirement for strand-transfer-mediated recombination during reverse transcription. Genomic RNA exists in virions as dimers, and the overlap of RNA elements that promote dimerization and encapsidation suggests that these processes may be coupled. Both processes are mediated by the nucleocapsid domain (NC) of the retroviral Gag polyprotein. Here we show that dimerization-induced register shifts in base pairing within the Psi-RNA packaging signal of Moloney murine leukaemia virus (MoMuLV) expose conserved UCUG elements that bind NC with high affinity (dissociation constant = 75 +/- 12 nM). These elements are base-paired and do not bind NC in the monomeric RNA. The structure of the NC complex with a 101-nucleotide 'core encapsidation' segment of the MoMuLV Psi site reveals a network of interactions that promote sequence- and structure-specific binding by NC's single CCHC zinc knuckle. Our findings support a structural RNA switch mechanism for genome encapsidation, in which protein binding sites are sequestered by base pairing in the monomeric RNA and become exposed upon dimerization to promote packaging of a diploid genome.
The Rev protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) facilitates the nuclear export of unspliced and partly spliced viral RNAs. Rev contains an RNA binding domain, required for interaction with HIV-1 RNA, and an effector domain, required for RNA-bound Rev to function. The Rev effector domain is believed to interact with a cellular cofactor required for the Rev response and thus HIV-1 replication. Here we report the use of a yeast two-hybrid screen to clone human Rev interacting protein (hRIP), which specifically interacts with the Rev effector domain. This hRIP protein has homology with nucleoporins, a class of proteins that mediate nucleocytoplasmic transport. These and other properties of hRIP are those expected of a Rev cellular cofactor.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) sequences that pre-date the recognition of AIDS are critical to defining the time of origin and the timescale of virus evolution. A viral sequence from 1959 (ZR59) is the oldest known HIV-1 infection. Other historically documented sequences, important calibration points to convert evolutionary distance into time, are lacking, however; ZR59 is the only one sampled before 1976. Here we report the amplification and characterization of viral sequences from a Bouin's-fixed paraffin-embedded lymph node biopsy specimen obtained in 1960 from an adult female in Leopoldville, Belgian Congo (now Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)), and we use them to conduct the first comparative evolutionary genetic study of early pre-AIDS epidemic HIV-1 group M viruses. Phylogenetic analyses position this viral sequence (DRC60) closest to the ancestral node of subtype A (excluding A2). Relaxed molecular clock analyses incorporating DRC60 and ZR59 date the most recent common ancestor of the M group to near the beginning of the twentieth century. The sizeable genetic distance between DRC60 and ZR59 directly demonstrates that diversification of HIV-1 in west-central Africa occurred long before the recognized AIDS pandemic. The recovery of viral gene sequences from decades-old paraffin-embedded tissues opens the door to a detailed palaeovirological investigation of the evolutionary history of HIV-1 that is not accessible by other methods.
Recent studies have shown that gamma-interferon (IFN-gamma) induces the expression of Ia antigen on astrocytes. This observation is of immunological significance because such activated astrocytes can act as antigen-presenting cells, as demonstrated with myelin basic protein for antigen-specific encephalitogenic T-cell lines. However, the lack of lymphatic drainage in brain and the presence of the so-called blood-brain barrier restricting traffic of cells and macromolecules suggests that IFN-gamma may not be readily available, at least during the initial phases of viral infections. The question therefore arises as to whether astrocytes can be induced to express Ia antigens by other signals directly related to viral infection and possibly independent of IFN-gamma. In the present report we demonstrate that a neurotropic murine hepatitis virus induces expression of Ia antigen on astrocytes in tissue culture without infection, rendering these brain cells competent to participate directly in the immune response to a viral infection.
Virus infection in mammals elicits a variety of defense responses that are initiated by signals from virus-sensing receptors expressed by the host. These receptors include the ubiquitously expressed RIG-I-like receptor (RLR) family of RNA helicases. RLRs are cytoplasmic proteins that act in cell-intrinsic antiviral defense by recognizing RNAs indicative of virus presence. Here, we highlight recent progress in understanding how RLRs discriminate between the RNA content of healthy versus virus-infected cells, functioning as accurate sensors of virus invasion.
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III), the causative agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), was recently isolated and its genomic structure analyzed by DNA cloning methods. In the studies reported here a combined cloning and expression system was used to identify HTLV-III encoded peptides that react immunologically with antibodies in sera from AIDS patients. Cloned HTLV-III DNA was sheared into approximately 500-base-pair fragments and inserted into an "open reading frame" expression vector, pMR100. The inserted DNA was expressed in Escherichia coli transformants as a polypeptide fused to the lambda CI protein at its amino terminus and to beta-galactosidase at its carboxyl terminus. Sera from AIDS patients containing antibodies to HTLV-III were then used to screen for immunoreactive fusion proteins. Twenty clones, each specifying a fusion protein strongly reactive with AIDS serum, were identified. DNA sequence analysis indicated that the HTLV-III fragments were derived from the open reading frame DNA segments corresponding to the gag and pol gene coding regions and also the large open reading frame region (env-lor) located near the 3' end of the viral genome.
Many poxvirus-encoded virulence factors have been identified as proteins that are secreted from infected cells. The major secreted protein (37 kilodaltons) from cells infected with myxoma virus is encoded by the M-T7 open reading frame. This protein has significant sequence similarity to the human and mouse receptors for interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). Furthermore, the myxoma M-T7 protein specifically binds rabbit IFN-gamma and inhibits the biological activity of extracellular IFN-gamma, one of the key regulatory cytokines in the host immune response against viral infections.
Three-dimensional structures of several spherical viruses have been determined by electron microscopy and X-ray crystallography. We report here the first three-dimensional structure of the complex between an intact virus and Fab fragments of a neutralizing monoclonal antibody. The antibody is against VP4, one of the two outer capsid proteins of rotaviruses. These large icosahedral viruses cause gastroenteritis in children and young animals and account for over a million human deaths annually. VP4 in these viruses has been implicated in several important functions such as cell penetration, haemagglutination, neutralization and virulence. Here we demonstrate that the surface spikes on rotavirus particles are made up of VP4. Antigenic sites are located near the distal ends of the spikes and two Fab fragments bind to each of the sixty spikes. The mass of the spike indicates that it is a dimer of VP4. The bilobed structure at the distal end of the spike may be involved in both the attachment to the cell and in viral penetration. A novel feature in the virus-Fab complex is the structural difference between the two chemically equivalent Fab fragments on each spike, which could be indicative of variations in the Fab elbow angles.
The Gram-negative bacterium Yersinia pestis is the causative agent of the systemic invasive infectious disease classically referred to as plague, and has been responsible for three human pandemics: the Justinian plague (sixth to eighth centuries), the Black Death (fourteenth to nineteenth centuries) and modern plague (nineteenth century to the present day). The recent identification of strains resistant to multiple drugs and the potential use of Y. pestis as an agent of biological warfare mean that plague still poses a threat to human health. Here we report the complete genome sequence of Y. pestis strain CO92, consisting of a 4.65-megabase (Mb) chromosome and three plasmids of 96.2 kilobases (kb), 70.3 kb and 9.6 kb. The genome is unusually rich in insertion sequences and displays anomalies in GC base-composition bias, indicating frequent intragenomic recombination. Many genes seem to have been acquired from other bacteria and viruses (including adhesins, secretion systems and insecticidal toxins). The genome contains around 150 pseudogenes, many of which are remnants of a redundant enteropathogenic lifestyle. The evidence of ongoing genome fluidity, expansion and decay suggests Y. pestis is a pathogen that has undergone large-scale genetic flux and provides a unique insight into the ways in which new and highly virulent pathogens evolve.
Based on physical and chemical determinations, the mnolecular weight of the type 4 adeno-satellite virus is 5.4 X 10(6) daltons, and the virion contains 1.4 X 10(6) daltons of DNA. Denaturation and renaturation studies indicate that the viral genome is a single-stranded DNA molecule and that each virion contains either a minus or a plus strand. Upon extraction, the minus and plus strands unite to form double-stranded DNA molecules with no obvious excess of unpaired strands.
Most protein phosphatases have little intrinsic substrate specificity, making selective pharmacological inhibition of specific dephosphorylation reactions a challenging problem. In a screen for small molecules that protect cells from endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, we identified salubrinal, a selective inhibitor of cellular complexes that dephosphorylate eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 subunit alpha (eIF2alpha). Salubrinal also blocks eIF2alpha dephosphorylation mediated by a herpes simplex virus protein and inhibits viral replication. These results suggest that selective chemical inhibitors of eIF2alpha dephosphorylation may be useful in diseases involving ER stress or viral infection. More broadly, salubrinal demonstrates the feasibility of selective pharmacological targeting of cellular dephosphorylation events.
Norwalk virus, a noncultivatable human calicivirus, is the major cause of epidemic gastroenteritis in humans. The first x-ray structure of a calicivirus capsid, which consists of 180 copies of a single protein, has been determined by phase extension from a low-resolution electron microscopy structure. The capsid protein has a protruding (P) domain connected by a flexible hinge to a shell (S) domain that has a classical eight-stranded beta-sandwich motif. The structure of the P domain is unlike that of any other viral protein with a subdomain exhibiting a fold similar to that of the second domain in the eukaryotic translation elongation factor-Tu. This subdomain, located at the exterior of the capsid, has the largest sequence variation among Norwalk-like human caliciviruses and is likely to contain the determinants of strain specificity and cell binding.
A newly identified protein from HTLV-III/LAV, the virus implicated as the etiologic agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome, was studied. This protein, which has a molecular weight of 27,000 (p27), was shown by amino acid sequencing to have a coding origin 3' to the env gene on the HTLV-III genome. The presence of antibodies to p27 in virus-exposed individuals indicated that this gene is functional in the natural host.
The incidence of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) among persons infected with human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III) was evaluated prospectively among 725 persons who were at high risk of AIDS and had enrolled before October 1982 in cohort studies of homosexual men, parenteral drug users, and hemophiliacs. A total of 276 (38.1 percent) of the subjects were either HTLV-III seropositive at enrollment or developed HTLV-III antibodies subsequently. AIDS had developed in 28 (10.1 percent) of the seropositive subjects before August 1985. By actuarial survival calculations, the 3-year incidence of AIDS among all HTLV-III seropositive subjects was 34.2 percent in the cohort of homosexual men in Manhattan, New York, and 14.9 percent (range 8.0 to 17.2 percent) in the four other cohorts. Out of 117 subjects followed for a mean of 31 months after documented seroconversion, five (all hemophiliacs) developed AIDS 28 to 62 months after the estimated date of seroconversion, supporting the hypothesis that there is a long latency between acquisition of viral infection and the development of clinical AIDS. This long latency could account for the significantly higher AIDS incidence in the New York cohort compared with other cohorts if the virus entered the New York homosexual population before it entered the populations from which the other cohorts were drawn. However, risk of AIDS development in different populations may also depend on the presence of as yet unidentified cofactors.
To better understand the dynamics of hepatitis C virus and the antiviral effect of interferon-alpha-2b (IFN), viral decline in 23 patients during therapy was analyzed with a mathematical model. The analysis indicates that the major initial effect of IFN is to block virion production or release, with blocking efficacies of 81, 95, and 96% for daily doses of 5, 10, and 15 million international units, respectively. The estimated virion half-life (t1/2) was, on average, 2.7 hours, with pretreatment production and clearance of 10(12) virions per day. The estimated infected cell death rate exhibited large interpatient variation (corresponding t1/2 = 1.7 to 70 days), was inversely correlated with baseline viral load, and was positively correlated with alanine aminotransferase levels. Fast death rates were predictive of virus being undetectable by polymerase chain reaction at 3 months. These findings show that infection with hepatitis C virus is highly dynamic and that early monitoring of viral load can help guide therapy.
The first experimental immunization of humans against the AIDS retrovirus, HIV-1, was started in a series of HIV seronegative, healthy volunteers in November 1986. For the primary vaccination recombinant vaccinia virus (V25) expressing the complete gp160 env protein of the HTLV-IIIB strain of HIV-1 was introduced by scarification. This elicited a weak primary response which we subsequently attempted to enhance by additional immunizations (boosting), using four different immunization protocols. We report here that intravenous injection of paraformaldehyde-fixed autologous cells infected in vitro with V25 (individual D.Z.) gave the best results. This individual received second and third boosts of intramuscular gp160 derived from an HTLV-IIIB clone using the hybrid vaccinia virus/bacteriophage T7 expression system. An anamnestic humoral and cellular immune reaction was achieved for over one year after the original vaccination, with high levels of antibodies to the viral envelope, and neutralizing antibodies against divergent HIV-1 strains such as HTLV-IIIB and HTLV-IIIRF (also called HTLV-III HAT) after the first boost. In addition, group-specific cell-mediated immunity and cell-mediated cytotoxicity against infected T4 cells were obtained after the primary vaccine and enhanced by the boosts. Finally, skin tests showed both immediate and delayed hypersensitivity to gp160 in vivo. Although this protocol is not practical for a large scale vaccine trial, our results show for the first time that an immune state against HIV can be obtained in man.
The mechanism(s) by which infectious or malignant material is cleared by the host has long been an area of intensive study. We have used the murine model of infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) to look at immune clearance during persistent infection. LCMV was selected because the mouse is its natural host, it easily induces acute or persistent infection in vivo, and the mechanism by which it is cleared in vivo during acute infection is now well understood. Clearance, although associated with several antiviral immune effector mechanisms, is primarily dependent on the activity of virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) restricted by H-2 molecules of the mouse major histocompatibility complex (MHC). If these cells fail to generate or are depleted, progression from acute to persistent infection occurs. Here, using molecular probes, we show that viral nucleic acid sequences, viral proteins and infectious materials can be efficiently and effectively cleared by adoptive transfer of antiviral H-2-restricted lymphocytes bearing the Lyt 2+ phenotype. Viral materials are cleared from a wide variety of tissues and organs where they normally lodge during persistent infection. Unexpectedly, the mode by which viral materials are removed from the central nervous system (CNS) differed markedly from the mechanism of clearance occurring at other sites. These observations indicate the possible use of adoptive lymphocyte therapy for treatment of persistent infections and suggest that immune clearance of products from the CNS probably occurs by a process distinct from those in other organs.
The adenovirus oncoprotein E1A and the simian virus SV40 large T antigen can both reverse the strong growth-inhibitory effect of transforming growth factor(TGF)-beta on mink lung epithelial cells: exposure of TGF-beta causes these cells to arrest late in the G1 phase of the cell cycle (ref. 3). This arrest correlates with an increase in expression of the protein p15Ink4B (ref. 4), inactivation of the cyclin E/A-cdk2 complex by the inhibitory protein p27Kip1 (refs 5-7), and with the accumulation of unphosphorylated retinoblastoma protein. The rescue by E1A of cells from TGF-beta arrest is partly independent of its binding to retinoblastoma protein. Here we show that E1A directly affects the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27Kip1 in TGF-beta-treated cells by binding to it and blocking its inhibitory effect, thereby restoring the activity of the cyclin-cdk2 kinase complex. In this way, E1A can overcome the effect of TGF-beta and modulate the cell cycle. To our knowledge, E1A provides the first example of a viral oncoprotein that can disable a cellular protein whose function is to inhibit the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases.
Enhancers are DNA sequences that stimulate transcription from eukaryotic promoters. This stimulatory effect can be exerted over large distances and from a position either 5' or 3' of a promoter. Enhancers have been found in the genomes of many viruses, and in some cellular genes such as those encoding immunoglobulin heavy chain and kappa light chain. An important feature of both viral and cellular enhancers is the ability of each enhancer to stimulate transcription from many promoters other than the one with which it is found associated. However, the question of whether cellular enhancers stimulate their 'own' promoter more efficiently than other promoters has apparently not been investigated. We show here that the kappa light-chain enhancer stimulates a kappa promoter about 20-fold more than it stimulates either the simian virus 40 (SV40) early promoter or a metallothionein (MT) promoter, two promoters that are very sensitive to other enhancers. Similarly, the heavy-chain enhancer stimulates a heavy-chain promoter much more than it stimulates the SV40 and MT promoters. This synergism between immunoglobulin enhancers and promoters might be due to the action of a protein that binds specifically to each of the regulatory elements.
Viruses are thought to be functionally inactive once they are outside and independent of their host cell. Here we describe an exceptional property of a newly discovered virus that infects a hyperthermophilic archaeon growing in acidic hot springs: the lemon-shaped viral particle develops a very long tail at each of its pointed ends after being released from its host cell. The process occurs only at the temperature of the host's habitat (75-90 degrees C) and it does not require the presence of the host cell, an exogenous energy source or any cofactors. This host-independent morphological development may be a strategy for viral survival in an environment that is unusually harsh and has limited host availability.
The respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is an important human pathogen, yet neither a vaccine nor effective therapies are available to treat infection. To help elucidate the replication mechanism of this RNA virus, we determined the three-dimensional (3D) crystal structure at 3.3 A resolution of a decameric, annular ribonucleoprotein complex of the RSV nucleoprotein (N) bound to RNA. This complex mimics one turn of the viral helical nucleocapsid complex, which serves as template for viral RNA synthesis. The RNA wraps around the protein ring, with seven nucleotides contacting each N subunit, alternating rows of four and three stacked bases that are exposed and buried within a protein groove, respectively. Combined with electron microscopy data, this structure provides a detailed model for the RSV nucleocapsid, in which the bases are accessible for readout by the viral polymerase. Furthermore, the nucleoprotein structure highlights possible key sites for drug targeting.
Retrovirus infection of embryonal carcinoma cells is blocked at the level of provirus transcription. De novo methylation of the input provirus occurs in embryonal carcinoma cells but not in permissive, differentiated teratocarcinoma. The kinetics of proviral methylation in embryonal carcinoma cells, however, suggest that while methylation may have an important maintenance role in controlling gene expression, additional mechanisms are used by the early embryo to initiate negative gene expression.
Retroviral oncogenes (v-onc) are derived from cellular genes (c-onc) which are highly conserved among different species. Retrovirus-transduced oncogenes are most commonly associated with the induction of haematopoietic tumours and sarcomas. The avian retrovirus Mill Hill no. 2 (MH2) was isolated from a spontaneous ovarian tumour of a chicken and is distinguished by the predominant induction of liver and kidney carcinomas in fowl. MH2 also induces transformation of fibroblasts, macrophages and epithelial cells in culture. The genome of MH2 contains two unrelated and independently expressed cell-derived oncogenes, v-mil and v-myc. Three other viral isolates among avian acute transforming retroviruses contain the v-myc oncogene, but only MH2 contains both v-myc and v-mil. Hence, some of the pathogenic specificities of MH2 may be due to the simultaneous expression of two oncogenes. The murine sarcoma virus 3611 (3611-MSV) isolated from a mouse carrying lung carcinoma and peritoneal tumours, induces fibrosarcomas in newborn mice and the transformation of fibroblasts and epithelial cells in culture. The oncogenic properties of 3611-MSV are due to the presence in its genome of a cell-derived oncogene termed v-raf. We report here that the two independently transduced oncogenes v-mil and v-raf are closely related and that they were apparently derived from homologous cellular genes of avian and mammalian species.
The type-I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) response is critical to immunity against viruses and can be triggered in many cell types by cytosolic detection of viral infection, or in differentiated plasmacytoid dendritic cells by the Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) subfamily, which generates signals via the adaptor MyD88 to elicit robust IFN induction. Using mice deficient in the Irf7 gene (Irf7-/- mice), we show that the transcription factor IRF-7 is essential for the induction of IFN-alpha/beta genes via the virus-activated, MyD88-independent pathway and the TLR-activated, MyD88-dependent pathway. Viral induction of MyD88-independent IFN-alpha/beta genes is severely impaired in Irf7-/- fibroblasts. Consistently, Irf7-/- mice are more vulnerable than Myd88-/- mice to viral infection, and this correlates with a marked decrease in serum IFN levels, indicating the importance of the IRF-7-dependent induction of systemic IFN responses for innate antiviral immunity. Furthermore, robust induction of IFN production by activation of the TLR9 subfamily in plasmacytoid dendritic cells is entirely dependent on IRF-7, and this MyD88-IRF-7 pathway governs the induction of CD8+ T-cell responses. Thus, all elements of IFN responses, whether the systemic production of IFN in innate immunity or the local action of IFN from plasmacytoid dendritic cells in adaptive immunity, are under the control of IRF-7.
Human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III) or lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV) is tropic for human T cells with the helper-inducer phenotype, as defined by reactivity with monoclonal antibodies specific for the T4 molecule. Treatment of T4+ T cells with monoclonal antibodies to T4 antigen blocks HTLV-III/LAV binding, syncytia formation, and infectivity. Thus, it has been inferred that the T4 molecule itself is a virus receptor. In the present studies, the surfaces of T4+ T cells were labeled radioactively, and then the cells were exposed to virus. After the cells were lysed, HTLV-III/LAV antibodies were found to precipitate a surface protein with a molecular weight of 58,000 (58K). By blocking and absorption experiments, this 58K protein was identified as the T4 molecule. No cell-surface structures other than the T4 molecule were involved in the antibody-antigen complex formation. Two monoclonal antibodies, each reactive with a separate epitope of the T4 molecule, were tested for their binding capacities in the presence of HTLV-III/LAV. When HTLV-III/LAV was bound to T4+ T cells, the virus blocked the binding of one of the monoclonal antibodies, T4A (OKT4A), but not of the other, T4 (OKT4). When HTLV-III/LAV was internally radiolabeled and bound to T4+ T cells which were then lysed, a viral glycoprotein of 110K (gp110) coprecipitated with the T4 molecule. The binding of gp110 to the T4 molecule may thus be a major factor in HTLV-III/LAV tropism and may prove useful in developing therapeutic or preventive measures for the acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
The DNA of avian sarcoma virus assumes a closed circular configuration before integration into the host cell chromosomal DNA. Ethidium bromide reduces the formation of superhelical viral DNA and concurrently blocks integration of the viral genome. Inhibition of integration of viral DNA results in the inhibition of virus replication.
Secondary sewage effluent and renovated water from four wells at the Flushing Meadows Wastewater Renovation Project near Phoenix, Arizona, in operation since 1967, were assayed approximately every 2 months in 1974 for viruses during flooding periods. Viruses, regularly found in the secondary effluent, were not detected in any renovated water samples. Our results indicated that human viral pathogens do not move through soil into the groundwater, but are apparently absorbed and degraded by the soil and reduced in numbers by a factor of at least 10(4) (99.99 percent removal).
IKKepsilon is an IKK (inhibitor of nuclear factor kappaBkinase)-related kinase implicated in virus induction of interferon-beta (IFNbeta). We report that, although mice lacking IKKepsilon produce normal amounts of IFNbeta, they are hypersusceptible to viral infection because of a defect in the IFN signaling pathway. Specifically, a subset of type I IFN-stimulated genes are not activated in the absence of IKKepsilon because the interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 complex (ISGF3) does not bind to promoter elements of the affected genes. We demonstrate that IKKepsilon is activated by IFNbeta and that IKKepsilon directly phosphorylates signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), a component of ISGF3. We conclude that IKKepsilon plays a critical role in the IFN-inducible antiviral transcriptional response.
Antibodies to conserved epitopes on the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) surface protein gp140 can protect against infection in non-human primates, and some infected individuals show high titres of broadly neutralizing immunoglobulin (Ig)G antibodies in their serum. However, little is known about the specificity and activity of these antibodies. To characterize the memory antibody responses to HIV, we cloned 502 antibodies from HIV envelope-binding memory B cells from six HIV-infected patients with broadly neutralizing antibodies and low to intermediate viral loads. We show that in these patients, the B-cell memory response to gp140 is composed of up to 50 independent clones expressing high affinity neutralizing antibodies to the gp120 variable loops, the CD4-binding site, the co-receptor-binding site, and to a new neutralizing epitope that is in the same region of gp120 as the CD4-binding site. Thus, the IgG memory B-cell compartment in the selected group of patients with broad serum neutralizing activity to HIV is comprised of multiple clonal responses with neutralizing activity directed against several epitopes on gp120.
Several recent reports indicate that the long, clinically latent phase that characterizes human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection of humans is not a period of viral inactivity, but an active process in which cells are being infected and dying at a high rate and in large numbers. These results lead to a simple steady-state model in which infection, cell death, and cell replacement are in balance, and imply that the unique feature of HIV is the extraordinarily large number of replication cycles that occur during infection of a single individual. This turnover drives both the pathogenic process and (even more than mutation rate) the development of genetic variation. This variation includes the inevitable and, in principle, predictable accumulation of mutations such as those conferring resistance to antiviral drugs whose presence before therapy must be considered in the design of therapeutic strategies.
Elevation of glucose transport is an alteration common to most virally induced tumors. Rat fibroblasts transformed with wild-type or a temperature-sensitive Fujinami sarcoma virus (FSV) were studied in order to determine the mechanisms underlying the increased transport. Five- to tenfold increases in total cellular glucose transporter protein in response to transformation were accompanied by similar increases in transporter messenger RNA levels. This, in turn, was preceded by an absolute increase in the rate of glucose transporter gene transcription within 30 minutes after shift of the temperature-sensitive FSV-transformed cells to the permissive temperature. The transporter messenger RNA levels in transformed fibroblasts were higher than those found in proliferating cells maintained at the nonpermissive temperature. The activation of transporter gene transcription by transformation represents one of the earliest known effects of oncogenesis on the expression of a gene encoding a protein of well-defined function.
The amino terminal acid sequences of several mouse leukemia virus phosphoproteins (p12) show definite homology with the amino terminal conserved region of H5 histones, the phosphorylated nuclear proteins of nucleated erythrocytes. Differences in the amino acid compositions of the two groups of proteins seem to rule out the possibility that they evolved from a single common ancestral gene. The finding of sequence homology between viral p12's and cellular histones, however, is consistent with evolution of retrovirus structural proteins by a process of differentiation from preexisting cellular genes. The conserved primary and secondary structure at the amino terminal region, common to both groups of proteins, may be related to their common function of nucleic acid binding modulated by phosphorylation.
Long interspersed element-1 (LINE-1 or L1) retrotransposition continues to affect human genome evolution. L1s can retrotranspose in the germline, during early development and in select somatic cells; however, the host response to L1 retrotransposition remains largely unexplored. Here we show that reporter genes introduced into the genome of various human embryonic carcinoma-derived cell lines (ECs) by L1 retrotransposition are rapidly and efficiently silenced either during or immediately after their integration. Treating ECs with histone deacetylase inhibitors rapidly reverses this silencing, and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that reactivation of the reporter gene was correlated with changes in chromatin status at the L1 integration site. Under our assay conditions, rapid silencing was also observed when reporter genes were delivered into ECs by mouse L1s and a zebrafish LINE-2 element, but not when similar reporter genes were delivered into ECs by Moloney murine leukaemia virus or human immunodeficiency virus, suggesting that these integration events are silenced by distinct mechanisms. Finally, we demonstrate that subjecting ECs to culture conditions that promote differentiation attenuates the silencing of reporter genes delivered by L1 retrotransposition, but that differentiation, in itself, is not sufficient to reactivate previously silenced reporter genes. Thus, our data indicate that ECs differ from many differentiated cells in their ability to silence reporter genes delivered by L1 retrotransposition.
The ability to express the genes of pathogenic human viruses, such as the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) virus (also called human immunodeficiency virus) in bacterial cells affords the opportunity to study proteins that are ordinarily difficult or inconvenient to obtain in amounts sufficient for detailed analysis. A segment of the AIDS virus pol gene was expressed in Escherichia coli. Expression resulted in the appearance of reverse transcriptase activity in the bacterial cell extracts. The extracts contained two virus-related polypeptides that have the same apparent molecular weights as the two processed forms of virion-derived reverse transcriptase (p66 and p51). The formation of these two polypeptides depended on the coexpression of sequences located near the 5' end of the pol gene, a region that is thought to encode a viral protease. This bacterial system appears to generate mature forms of the AIDS virus reverse transcriptase by a proteolytic pathway equivalent to that which occurs during virus infection of human cells.
Variable regions 1 and 2 (V1/V2) of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) gp120 envelope glycoprotein are critical for viral evasion of antibody neutralization, and are themselves protected by extraordinary sequence diversity and N-linked glycosylation. Human antibodies such as PG9 nonetheless engage V1/V2 and neutralize 80% of HIV-1 isolates. Here we report the structure of V1/V2 in complex with PG9. V1/V2 forms a four-stranded b-sheet domain, in which sequence diversity and glycosylation are largely segregated to strand-connecting loops. PG9 recognition involves electrostatic, sequence-independent and glycan interactions: the latter account for over half the interactive surface but are of sufficiently weak affinity to avoid autoreactivity. The structures of V1/V2-directed antibodies CH04 and PGT145 indicate that they share a common mode of glycan penetration by extended anionic loops. In addition to structurally defining V1/V2, the results thus identify a paradigm of antibody recognition for highly glycosylated antigens, which-with PG9-involves a site of vulnerability comprising just two glycans and a strand.
Chronic immunodeficiency virus infections are characterized by dysfunctional cellular and humoral antiviral immune responses. As such, immune modulatory therapies that enhance and/or restore the function of virus-specific immunity may protect from disease progression. Here we investigate the safety and immune restoration potential of blockade of the co-inhibitory receptor programmed death 1 (PD-1) during chronic simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection in macaques. We demonstrate that PD-1 blockade using an antibody to PD-1 is well tolerated and results in rapid expansion of virus-specific CD8 T cells with improved functional quality. This enhanced T-cell immunity was seen in the blood and also in the gut, a major reservoir of SIV infection. PD-1 blockade also resulted in proliferation of memory B cells and increases in SIV envelope-specific antibody. These improved immune responses were associated with significant reductions in plasma viral load and also prolonged the survival of SIV-infected macaques. Blockade was effective during the early (week 10) as well as late ( approximately week 90) phases of chronic infection even under conditions of severe lymphopenia. These results demonstrate enhancement of both cellular and humoral immune responses during a pathogenic immunodeficiency virus infection by blocking a single inhibitory pathway and identify a novel therapeutic approach for control of human immunodeficiency virus infections.
Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is a pathogenic human virus whose RNA genome and replication cycle resemble those of plant viroids. However, viroid genomes contain no open reading frames, whereas HDV RNA encodes a single protein, hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg), which is required for viral replication. A cellular gene whose product interacts with HDAg has now been identified, and this interaction was found to affect viral genomic replication in intact cells. DNA sequence analysis revealed that this protein, termed delta-interacting protein A (DIPA), is a cellular homolog of HDAg. These observations demonstrate that a host gene product can modulate HDV replication and suggest that HDV may have evolved from a primitive viroidlike RNA through capture of a cellular transcript.
Although the CD4 molecule is the principal cellular receptor for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), several CD4-negative cell lines are susceptible to infection with one or more HIV strains. These findings indicate that there are alternate modes of viral entry, perhaps involving one or more receptor molecules. Antibodies against galactosyl ceramide (galactocerebroside, or GalC) inhibited viral internalization and infection in two CD4-negative cell lines derived from the nervous system: U373-MG and SK-N-MC. Furthermore, recombinant HIV surface glycoprotein gp120 bound to GalC but not to other glycolipids. These results suggest a role for GalC or a highly related molecule in HIV entry into neural cells.
Moloney murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV) infection of embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells results in the integration of proviral DNA into the host cell genome, but not in virus production. One suggested explanation for the lack of viral gene expression in EC cells has been methylation of the integrated viral DNA. However, subsequent reports indicated that integration of the M-MuLV DNA occurs soon after infection, but that viral DNA methylation occurs considerably later. Nevertheless, viral gene expression is not observed even at early times. One possible explanation is that certain M-MuLV regulatory sequences do not function in EC cells. We now present evidence which supports this hypothesis.
Infectious and inflammatory diseases have repeatedly shown strong genetic associations within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC); however, the basis for these associations remains elusive. To define host genetic effects on the outcome of a chronic viral infection, we performed genome-wide association analysis in a multiethnic cohort of HIV-1 controllers and progressors, and we analyzed the effects of individual amino acids within the classical human leukocyte antigen (HLA) proteins. We identified >300 genome-wide significant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the MHC and none elsewhere. Specific amino acids in the HLA-B peptide binding groove, as well as an independent HLA-C effect, explain the SNP associations and reconcile both protective and risk HLA alleles. These results implicate the nature of the HLA-viral peptide interaction as the major factor modulating durable control of HIV infection.
Some wild African green monkeys are known to be naturally infected with a retrovirus related to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) without having any apparent symptoms of an AIDS-like disease. This simian immunodeficiency virus, designated SIVAGM, may be helpful in clarifying the evolution and pathogenicity of HIV. Some virus strains that were previously reported to be isolated from African green monkeys were shown to be laboratory contaminations of SIVMAC (SIV from a rhesus macaque) Here we report the complete DNA sequence of authentic SIVAGM, which was isolated from a naturally infected African green monkey of Kenyan origin. Comparison of the genome of SIVAGM with those of known HIV/SIVs indicates that the virus is a new simian lentivirus that is approximately equally distantly related to HIV-1 and HIV-2 in contrast to SIVMAC, which is much closer to HIV-2 than to HIV-1 (refs 5, 9).
Type I interferon (IFN) production is a critical component of the innate defence against viral infections. Viral products induce strong type I IFN responses through the activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and intracellular cytoplasmic receptors such as protein kinase R (PKR). Here we demonstrate that cells lacking TRAF3, a member of the TNF receptor-associated factor family, are defective in type I IFN responses activated by several different TLRs. Furthermore, we show that TRAF3 associates with the TLR adaptors TRIF and IRAK1, as well as downstream IRF3/7 kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon, suggesting that TRAF3 serves as a critical link between TLR adaptors and downstream regulatory kinases important for IRF activation. In addition to TLR stimulation, we also show that TRAF3-deficient fibroblasts are defective in their type I IFN response to direct infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that TRAF3 is also an important component of TLR-independent viral recognition pathways. Our data demonstrate that TRAF3 is a major regulator of type I IFN production and the innate antiviral response.
DNA polymerase III is an enzyme activity in eukaryotic cells which under certain conditions shows strong preference for polyadenylic acid as template when primed by oligodeoxythymidylate. Its first complete separation from other DNA polymerases in human lymphoblasts is reported. This enzyme is biochemically and immunologically distinct from DNA polymerase I and from viral reverse transcriptase from a primtate type C virus.
Chick and mouse cell monolayers treated with interferon were significantly protected from destruction by toxoplasma. The results suggest that fewer numbers of organisms were released from interferon-treated cells. Interferons were uniformly more active in a viral assay than in a toxoplasma assay, and they had the same properties in both assays. The data suggest that interferon activity may be directed against organisms phylogenetically higher than viruses.
Molecular hybridization, monoclonal antibody, and electron microscopic analyses showed lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (strains Armstrong and WE) persistently infecting cells of the islets of Langerhans in BALB/WEHI mice. When monoclonal or monospecific antibody conjugated with two different fluorochrome dyes was used to mark insulin-containing beta cells or viral antigens, viral nucleoprotein was identified predominantly in beta cells. Electron microscopy confirmed these findings by showing virions budding from the beta cells. Persistent infection was associated with chemical evidence of diabetes (hyperglycemia, abnormal glucose tolerance, and normal or low-normal concentrations of insulin). Concentrations of cortisol and insulin-like growth factor in blood were normal, as was the level of growth hormone in the pituitary gland. The virus-infected islet cells showed normal anatomy and cytomorphology. Neither cell lysis nor inflammatory infiltrates were routinely seen. Thus a virus may persistently infect islet cells and provide a biochemical and morphological picture comparable to that of early adult-onset diabetes mellitus in humans.
The development of a safe and effective human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 vaccine is a critically important global health priority. Despite recent advances in our understanding of HIV-1 pathogenesis and immunology, however, major scientific obstacles remain. Prototype HIV-1 vaccine candidates aimed at eliciting humoral and cellular immune responses have so far failed to protect against HIV-1 infection or to reduce viral loads after infection in clinical efficacy studies. A renewed and coordinated commitment to basic discovery research, preclinical studies and clinical trials will therefore be required to overcome the hurdles currently facing the field. Here I review key challenges and future prospects in the quest to develop a prophylactic HIV-1 vaccine.
The completion of the draft sequence of the rhesus macaque genome allowed us to study the genomic composition and evolution of transposable elements in this representative of the Old World monkey lineage, a group of diverse primates closely related to humans. The L1 family of long interspersed elements appears to have evolved as a single lineage, and Alu elements have evolved into four currently active lineages. We also found evidence of elevated horizontal transmissions of retroviruses and the absence of DNA transposon activity in the Old World monkey lineage. In addition, approximately 100 precursors of composite SVA (short interspersed element, variable number of tandem repeat, and Alu) elements were identified, with the majority being shared by the common ancestor of humans and rhesus macaques. Mobile elements compose roughly 50% of primate genomes, and our findings illustrate their diversity and strong influence on genome evolution between closely related species.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a leading cause of liver disease worldwide. The development of much needed specific antiviral therapies and an effective vaccine has been hampered by the lack of a convenient small animal model. The determinants restricting HCV tropism to human and chimpanzee hosts are unknown. Replication of the viral RNA has been demonstrated in mouse cells, but these cells are not infectable with either lentiviral particles bearing HCV glycoproteins (HCVpp) or HCV produced in cell culture (HCVcc) (A.P., M.E. and C.M.R., unpublished observations), suggesting that there is a block at the level of entry. Here we show, using an iterative complementary DNA library screening approach, that human occludin (OCLN) is an essential HCV cell entry factor that is able to render murine cells infectable with HCVpp. Similarly, OCLN is required for the HCV-susceptibility of human cells, because its overexpression in uninfectable cells specifically enhanced HCVpp uptake, whereas its silencing in permissive cells impaired both HCVpp and HCVcc infection. In addition to OCLN, HCVpp infection of murine cells required expression of the previously identified HCV entry factors CD81 (ref. 4), scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI, also known as SCARB1) and claudin-1 (CLDN1). Although the mouse versions of SR-BI and CLDN1 function at least as well as the human proteins in promoting HCV entry, both OCLN and CD81 must be of human origin to allow efficient infection. The species-specific determinants of OCLN were mapped to its second extracellular loop. The identification of OCLN as a new HCV entry factor further highlights the importance of the tight junction complex in the viral entry process, and provides an important advance towards efforts to develop small animal models for HCV.
We recently reported the discovery and preliminary characterization of Mimivirus, the largest known virus, with a 400-nanometer particle size comparable to mycoplasma. Mimivirus is a double-stranded DNA virus growing in amoebae. We now present its 1,181,404-base pair genome sequence, consisting of 1262 putative open reading frames, 10% of which exhibit a similarity to proteins of known functions. In addition to exceptional genome size, Mimivirus exhibits many features that distinguish it from other nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses. The most unexpected is the presence of numerous genes encoding central protein-translation components, including four amino-acyl transfer RNA synthetases, peptide release factor 1, translation elongation factor EF-TU, and translation initiation factor 1. The genome also exhibits six tRNAs. Other notable features include the presence of both type I and type II topoisomerases, components of all DNA repair pathways, many polysaccharide synthesis enzymes, and one intein-containing gene. The size and complexity of the Mimivirus genome challenge the established frontier between viruses and parasitic cellular organisms. This new sequence data might help shed a new light on the origin of DNA viruses and their role in the early evolution of eukaryotes.
When B lymphocytes from normal human peripheral blood were incubated for 1 hour with the retrovirus that causes the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), the B cells showed marked proliferation and differentiation. Proliferative responses to the virus peaked on day 4 and appeared to be independent of accessory cells. This finding was repeated with three separate viral isolates, one of which was from a patient from Zaire. The magnitude of the observed responses was comparable to that seen with standard polyclonal B-cell activators. This phenomenon may be at least partially responsible for the polyclonal B-cell activation seen in patients with AIDS.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is the aetiological agent of infectious mononucleosis and is associated with Burkitt's lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. The virus is harboured for life in all previously infected individuals and is apparently controlled by a population of EBV-specific memory T lymphocytes, specifically activated to recognize the functionally defined lymphocyte-detected membrane antigen. Two types (A and B) of EBV have been identified that show DNA sequence divergence within the BamH1 WYH region of the genome encoding the transformation-associated antigen, Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA 2) (ref. 4). To define the function of EBNA 2 in T-cell recognition, we have compared the ability of EBV-specific cytotoxic T-cell clones to distinguish between autologous B lymphocytes transformed by A- or B-type virus. We have now isolated both CD4 and CD8 cytotoxic T-cell clones that recognize autologous A-type but not B-type transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines, thus providing the first evidence that EBV-specific T-cell recognition can be mediated by EBNA 2. As this antigen is not expressed in Burkitt's lymphoma, this finding explains the failure of EBV-specific T-cell surveillance to eliminate the tumour.
The coding sequences for the transforming (src) protein (p21) of Harvey murine sarcoma virus have been localized to a 1.3 kilobase pair segment near the 5' end of the viral genome. Ligation of the viral terminal repeat DNA to the left end of the src region DNA markedly enhanced the low transforming efficiency of the src region DNA.
The rapid and extensive spread of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) epidemic provides a rare opportunity to witness host-pathogen co-evolution involving humans. A focal point is the interaction between genes encoding human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and those encoding HIV proteins. HLA molecules present fragments (epitopes) of HIV proteins on the surface of infected cells to enable immune recognition and killing by CD8(+) T cells; particular HLA molecules, such as HLA-B*57, HLA-B*27 and HLA-B*51, are more likely to mediate successful control of HIV infection. Mutation within these epitopes can allow viral escape from CD8(+) T-cell recognition. Here we analysed viral sequences and HLA alleles from >2,800 subjects, drawn from 9 distinct study cohorts spanning 5 continents. Initial analysis of the HLA-B*51-restricted epitope, TAFTIPSI (reverse transcriptase residues 128-135), showed a strong correlation between the frequency of the escape mutation I135X and HLA-B*51 prevalence in the 9 study cohorts (P = 0.0001). Extending these analyses to incorporate other well-defined CD8(+) T-cell epitopes, including those restricted by HLA-B*57 and HLA-B*27, showed that the frequency of these epitope variants (n = 14) was consistently correlated with the prevalence of the restricting HLA allele in the different cohorts (together, P < 0.0001), demonstrating strong evidence of HIV adaptation to HLA at a population level. This process of viral adaptation may dismantle the well-established HLA associations with control of HIV infection that are linked to the availability of key epitopes, and highlights the challenge for a vaccine to keep pace with the changing immunological landscape presented by HIV.
Viruses are the most abundant biological organisms of the world's oceans. Viral infections are a substantial source of mortality in a range of organisms-including autotrophic and heterotrophic plankton-but their impact on the deep ocean and benthic biosphere is completely unknown. Here we report that viral production in deep-sea benthic ecosystems worldwide is extremely high, and that viral infections are responsible for the abatement of 80% of prokaryotic heterotrophic production. Virus-induced prokaryotic mortality increases with increasing water depth, and beneath a depth of 1,000 m nearly all of the prokaryotic heterotrophic production is transformed into organic detritus. The viral shunt, releasing on a global scale approximately 0.37-0.63 gigatonnes of carbon per year, is an essential source of labile organic detritus in the deep-sea ecosystems. This process sustains a high prokaryotic biomass and provides an important contribution to prokaryotic metabolism, allowing the system to cope with the severe organic resource limitation of deep-sea ecosystems. Our results indicate that viruses have an important role in global biogeochemical cycles, in deep-sea metabolism and the overall functioning of the largest ecosystem of our biosphere.
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) has been implicated in several nuclear processes including transcription, DNA replication, double-stranded DNA break repair, and V(D)J recombination. Linkage of kinase and substrate on DNA in cis is required for efficient phosphorylation. Recruitment of DNA-PK to DNA is by Ku autoantigen, a DNA-end-binding protein required for DNA-PK catalytic activity. Although Ku is known to translocate along naked DNA, how DNA-end binding by Ku might lead to DNA-PK-mediated phosphorylation of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins in vivo has not been obvious. Here we report the identification of Ku as a transcription factor that recruits DNA-PK directly to specific DNA sequences. NRE1 (negative regulatory element 1) is a DNA sequence element (-394/ -381) in the long terminal repeat of mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) that is important for repressing inappropriate viral expression. We show that direct binding of Ku/DNA-PK to NRE1 represses glucocorticoid-induced MMTV transcription.
Data from the advanced very high resolution radiometer on board the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's polar-orbiting meteorological satellites have been used to infer ecological parameters associated with Rift Valley fever (RVF) viral activity in Kenya. An indicator of potential viral activity was produced from satellite data for two different ecological regions in Kenya, where RVF is enzootic. The correlation between the satellite-derived green vegetation index and the ecological parameters associated with RVF virus suggested that satellite data may become a forecasting tool for RVF in Kenya and, perhaps, in other areas of sub-Saharan Africa.
Canine parvovirus was first recognized during 1978. Analysis of isolates collected since its emergence revealed that viruses circulating after 1980 were antigenically different from earlier isolates. Monoclonal antibodies clearly distinguished the two strains, some being specific for either the old or the new viruses. Restriction enzyme analysis of viral DNA's showed that the post-1980 viruses were similar to earlier isolates, but some restriction site differences were present in the new strain. These results suggest that the canine parvoviruses infecting dogs in the seven areas of the United States that were sampled derive from a variant virus that replaced the original strain during 1980.
In evaluating current combination drug regimens for treatment of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease, it is important to determine the existence of viral reservoirs. After depletion of CD8 cells from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of both patients and normal donors, activation of patient CD4 lymphocytes with immobilized antibodies to CD3 and CD28 enabled the isolation of virus from PBMCs of six patients despite the suppression of their plasma HIV RNA to fewer than 50 copies per milliliter for up to 2 years. Partial sequencing of HIV pol revealed no new drug resistance mutations or discernible evolution, providing evidence for viral latency rather than drug failure.
Transformed plants expressing the 3' two-thirds of the cowpea chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV) capsid gene were inoculated with a CCMV deletion mutant lacking the 3' one-third of the capsid gene. Although the deletion inoculum replicates in inoculated cells, systemic infections occur only if recombination restores a functional capsid gene. Four of 125 inoculated transgenic plants, representing three different transgenic lines, became systemically infected. Analysis of viral RNA confirmed that RNA recombination had united the transgenic messenger RNA and the challenging virus through aberrant homologous recombination.
We have determined a major antigenic site for virus neutralization on the capsid protein VP1 of poliovirus type 3. Antigenic mutant viruses selected for resistance to individual monoclonal antibodies had point mutations concentrated in a region 277-294 bases downstream from the start of the region of viral RNA coding for VP1. These findings provide the basis for an improved understanding of the molecular basis of virus neutralization.
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) Us11 protein, a true late gene product packaged within the virion, is delivered into cells after infection, exhibits a nucleocytoplasmic localization at early times, and later accumulates in the nucleoli. This RNA-binding basic phosphoprotein, capable of oligomerization, is supposed to be involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression after HSV-1 infection. Expression of human T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma virus type-I (HTLV-I) and of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is post-transcriptionally regulated by Rex and Rev, respectively. These proteins are required for the cytoplasmic expression of unspliced gag-pol and singly spliced env transcripts. Here we show that HSV-1 Us11 protein is able to bind Rex- and Rev-responsive elements and to transactivate envelope retroviral glycoprotein expression.
A small replicating RNA, encapsidated with and dependent on, but not part of the viral genome, modifies disease expression depending on the host. In tomato plants, it causes a lethal necrotic disease which is probably the same as that which, in 1972, destroyed most of the field tomato crop in large regions of the French Alsace.
High mutation rates have driven RNA viruses to shorten their genomes to the minimum possible size. Mammalian (+)-strand RNA viruses and retroviruses have responded by reducing the number of cis-acting regulatory elements, a constraint that has led to the emergence of the polyprotein. Poliovirus is a (+)-stranded picornavirus whose polyprotein, encoded by an open reading frame spanning most of the viral RNA, is processed by virus-encoded proteinases. Despite their genetic austerity, picornaviruses have retained long 5' untranslated regions, which harbour cis-acting elements that promote initiation of translation independently of the uncapped 5' end of the viral messenger RNA. These elements are termed 'internal ribosomal entry sites' and are formed from highly structured RNA segments of at least 400 nucleotides. How these elements function is not known, but special RNA-binding proteins may be involved. The ribosome or its 40S subunit probably binds at or near a YnXmAUG motif (where Y is a pyrimidine and X is a purine) at the 3' border of the internal ribosomal entry site, which either provides the initiating codon or enables the ribosome to translocate to one downstream (E.W. et al., submitted). Initiation from most eukaryotic messenger RNAs usually occurs by ribosomal recognition of the 5' and subsequent scanning to the AUG codon. Here we describe a genetic strategy for the dissection of polyproteins which proves that an internal ribosomal entry site element can initiate translation independently of the 5' end.
Epidemiological studies of the human T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma virus type I (HTLV-I), a type-C retrovirus of the human T-lymphotropic virus family, have used serological surveys to identify population subgroups possessing a high prevalence of naturally occurring HTLV-I-specific antibodies. Studies carried out to delineate the global distribution of the virus have demonstrated natural antibodies to HTLV-I in the serum of healthy donors from specific geographical areas, and have defined viral endemic areas in Japan, the Caribbean basin, Africa and the southeastern United States. Such studies have suggested that the prevalence of HTLV-I antibodies is directly correlated with age, is associated with the clinical syndrome of adult T-cell lymphoma, and is associated with transmission from mother to child. A separate subtype of the human retrovirus, HTLV-II (refs 21, 22), has also been identified. The population of Israel in part comprises groups of immigrants of various ethnic and geographical origins. Because of this, and the fact that Israel has a highly developed public health system, we surmised that the ethnic groups in Israel could be used in a seroepidemiological survey of HTLV infection. The serological survey reported here demonstrates a high prevalence of HTLV-I antibodies in new immigrants from Ethiopia. This previously ethnically and geographically isolated group, the 'Black Jews' or 'Falashas', from the Gondar region in the northern rural highlands of Ethiopia, has the highest endemic rate of HTLV-I yet reported outside Japan.
The simian virus 40 (SV40) transcriptional enhancer is composed of multiple cis-acting DNA sequence motifs, each individually having a two- to fourfold effect on the efficiency of transcription. When various distinct cis-elements act in combination, however, a dramatic enhancement of transcription initiation often results. SV40-enhancer A-domain sequences were previously shown to be important for early and late transcription in vivo. Here we report the isolation of the enhancer binding factor AP-4, which recognizes a motif in this domain. Purified AP-4 activates SV40 late transcription in vitro, and this stimulation is augmented by the addition of transcription factor AP-1 which binds to adjacent sequences in the A-domain, suggesting coordinate action of the two factors for transcriptional enhancement. AP-1 also represses late transcription from a major in vitro start site which is poorly used in vivo, indicating that AP-1 can act as both a positive and negative regulator of SV40 late transcription. Thus by manipulating the levels of different trans-acting factors in vitro, we can recreate the pattern of SV40 late initiation observed during the viral lytic cycle in vivo.
Simian acquired immune deficiency syndrome (SAIDS) in the macaque genus of monkeys at the California Primate Research Center is apparently caused by infection by a type D retrovirus. The complete nucleotide sequence (8173 base pairs) of a molecular clone of the prototype SAIDS virus isolate, SRV-1, reveals a typical retrovirus structure with long terminal repeats (346 base pairs) and open reading frames for the gag (663 codons), pol (867 codons), and env (605 codons) genes. SRV-1 also has a separate open reading frame of 314 codons between the gag and pol genes that defines the viral protease gene (prt) and a short open reading frame of unknown significance downstream from the env gene. The SRV-1 protease region shows a high degree of homology to its counterpart in the hamster intracisternal A-type particle genome; both these protease genes are about twice as long as the analogous region of other retroviruses. SRV-1 has no notable similarity in either genetic organization or sequence to the human AIDS retroviruses.
The ribonucleocapsids of many plant viruses are extremely stable. The protein coat protects the RNA genome against degradation during the accumulation and spread of progeny virions. Chimeric single-stranded RNA molecules were transcribed in vitro from recombinant plasmids and later encapsidated, in vitro, into ribonucleoprotein particles (pseudoviruses) 60 nanometers long that resembled tobacco mosaic virus. Transcripts encoding an assayable enzyme, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT), were packaged into pseudovirus particles to assess the utility of this single-stranded RNA delivery system in a wide range of cell types. In all cases, packaged CAT messenger RNA was uncoated and transiently expressed. Significantly higher levels of CAT activity were detected with packaged than with naked CAT messenger RNA after inoculation of plant protoplasts in the presence of polyethylene glycol or abrasive inoculation of intact leaf surfaces. Structural events that lead to the uncoating and expression of CAT messenger RNA showed no cell specificity. This observation may support the view that the comparatively restricted host range of a true plant virus results from events that occur later during the infection cycle.
A portion of Moloney murine sarcoma virus DNA which is repeated at both ends of the provirus has been sequences. The nucleotide sequence, together with hybridization data obtained with in vitro pulse-labelled nascent viral RNA, indicate that initiation and termination of RNA synthesis occur within that region of the proviral DNA. A model for transcriptional readthrough of termination signals during RNA synthesis in this system is suggested.
Rotavirus, the major cause of life-threatening infantile gastroenteritis, is a member of the Reoviridae. Although the structures of rotavirus and other members of the Reoviridae have been extensively studied, little is known about the structures of virus-encoded non-structural proteins that are essential for genome replication and packaging. The non-structural protein NSP2 of rotavirus, which exhibits nucleoside triphosphatase, single-stranded RNA binding, and nucleic-acid helix-destabilizing activities, is a major component of viral replicase complexes. We present here the X-ray structure of the functional octamer of NSP2 determined to a resolution of 2.6 A. The NSP2 monomer has two distinct domains. The amino-terminal domain has a new fold. The carboxy-terminal domain resembles the ubiquitous cellular histidine triad (HIT) group of nucleotidyl hydrolases. This structural similarity suggests that the nucleotide-binding site is located inside the cleft between the two domains. Prominent grooves that run diagonally across the doughnut-shaped octamer are probable locations for RNA binding. Several RNA binding sites, resulting from the quaternary organization of NSP2 monomers, may be required for the helix destabilizing activity of NSP2 and its function during genome replication and packaging.
Direct in situ introduction of exogenous genes into proliferating tumors could provide an effective therapeutic approach for treatment of localized tumors. Rats with a cerebral glioma were given an intratumoral stereotaxic injection of murine fibroblasts that were producing a retroviral vector in which the herpes simplex thymidine kinase (HS-tk) gene had been inserted. After 5 days during which the HS-tk retroviral vectors that were produced in situ transduced the neighboring proliferating glioma cells, the rats were treated with the anti-herpes drug ganciclovir. Gliomas in the ganciclovir- and vector-treated rats regressed completely both macroscopically and microscopically. This technique exploits what was previously considered to be a disadvantage of retroviral vectors--that is, their inability to transfer genes into nondividing cells. Instead, this feature of retroviruses is used to target gene delivery to dividing tumor cells and to spare nondividing neural tissue.
Biological variability of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) is involved in the pathogenesis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Syncytium-inducing (SI) HIV-1 variants emerge in 50 percent of infected individuals during infection, preceding accelerated CD4+ T cell loss and rapid progression to AIDS. The V1 to V2 and V3 region of the viral envelope glycoprotein gp120 contained the major determinants of SI capacity. The configuration of a hypervariable locus in the V2 domain appeared to be predictive for non-SI to SI phenotype conversion. Early prediction of HIV-1 phenotype evolution may be useful for clinical monitoring and treatment of asymptomatic infection.
Chronic viral infection is often associated with the dysfunction of virus-specific T cells. Our studies using Il21r-deficient (Il21r-/-) mice now suggest that interleukin-21 (IL-21) is critical for the long-term maintenance and functionality of CD8+ T cells and the control of chronic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection in mice. Cell-autonomous IL-21 receptor (IL-21R)-dependent signaling by CD8+ T cells was required for sustained cell proliferation and cytokine production during chronic infection. Il21r-/- mice showed normal CD8+ T cell expansion, effector function, memory homeostasis, and recall responses during acute and after resolved infection with several other nonpersistent viruses. These data suggest that IL-21R signaling is required for the maintenance of polyfunctional T cells during chronic viral infections and have implications for understanding the immune response to other persisting antigens, such as tumors.
Evidence is provided for the existence of a seventh gene in the genome of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus. The gene is necessary for replication and acts post-transcriptionally to relieve negative regulation of the messenger RNA for the virion capsid and envelope proteins. These observations suggest mechanisms for regulating both the latent and lytic phases of the virus life cycle.
Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) Vif is essential for viral evasion of host antiviral factor CEM15/APOBEC3G. We report that Vif interacts with cellular proteins Cul5, elongins B and C, and Rbx1 to form an Skp1-cullin-F-box (SCF)-like complex. The ability of Vif to suppress antiviral activity of APOBEC3G was specifically dependent on Cul5-SCF function, allowing Vif to interact with APOBEC3G and induce its ubiquitination and degradation. A Vif mutant that interacted with APOBEC3G but not with Cul5-SCF was functionally inactive. The Cul5-SCF was also required for Vif function in distantly related simian immunodeficiency virus mac. These results indicate that the conserved Cul5-SCF pathway used by Vif is a potential target for antiviral development.
Old World monkeys and apes, including man, possess, as a normal component of their cellular DNA, gene sequences (virogenes) related to the RNA of a virus isolated from baboons. A comparison of the viral gene sequences and the other cellular sequences distinguishes those Old World monkeys and apes that have evolved in Africa from those that have evolved in Asia. Among the apes, only gorilla and chimpanzee seem by these criteria to be African, whereas gibbon, orang-utan and man are identified as Asian, leading us to conclude that most of man's evolution has occurred outside Africa.
Measles virus has been suggested to cause subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE), a slow central nervous system disease of children. However, several questions remain about the pathogenesis of SSPE. For example, it is not known whether alteration of the measles virus genome has a role in the initiation and persistence of the disease. Several studies have compared the RNA and protein composition of wild-type (wt) and SSPE strains of measles virus in a search for markers characteristic of the latter. All the studies used SSPE strains that had reverted to the budding, virion-producing form, similar to wt. We have shown, however, that only cell-associated non-budding strains of SSPE virus cause an SSPE-like persistent infection in young ferrets. Strong cell association and cell-fusing activity were essential for the virulence of measles virus in the brains of experimental animals and possibly humans. We have, therefore, compared the protein composition of virulent SSPE strains to that of the budding, non-virulent SSPE and wt strains. We report here that the M protein was not detectable in non-budding SSPE strains D.R., Biken and IP-3, and strain D.R. contained very little H protein.
Successful viral infection requires viruses to redirect host biochemistry to replicate the viral genome, and produce and assemble progeny virions. Cellular heat-shock responses, which are characterized as elevation and relocalization of heat-shock proteins, occur during replication of many viruses. Such responses might be host reactions to the synthesis of foreign protein, or might be irrelevant consequences of the viral need to activate transcription. Alternatively, as heat-shock proteins can facilitate protein folding, activating a heat-shock response might be a specific virus function ensuring proper synthesis of viral proteins and virions. It is not possible to determine whether heat-shock response is essential for virus replication, because the implicated viral genes (such as Ad5 EIA, ref. 10) also control other essential replication steps. Here we report that expression of Gam1, a protein encoded by the avian virus CELO (ref. 11), elevates and relocalizes hsp70 and hsp40. Gam1-negative CELO is replication-defective; however, Gam1 function can be partially replaced by either heat shock or forced hsp40 expression. Thus, an essential function of Gam1 during virus replication is to activate host heat-shock responses with hsp40 as a primary target.
Closed-circular proviral DNA of Moloney leukemia virus has been purified from a 10(7) excess of cellular and mitochondrial DNA. The DNA can be visualized in the electron microscope and has the contour length of a molecule with a moleculecular weight of about 5.5 + 10(6). Electron microscopic observation of a hybrid between viral RNA and this circular DNA confirms the viral origin of this molecule.
Recognition of virus-infected cells by CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes requires that the viral proteins be processed into peptides, the derived peptides transported into the endoplasmic reticulum and inserted into the binding groove of a major histocompatibility complex class I molecule, and the antigenic complex exported to the cell surface. However, viral pathogens can disrupt this process and interfere with immune recognition. These mechanisms may be vital to large viruses such as human cytomegalovirus (CMV), which causes persistent infection despite producing over 200 potentially antigenic proteins during the sequential immediate-early, early and late phases of viral gene expression. Products of CMV early-phase gene expression can globally block class I presentation and prevent recognition of infected cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes, but an essential viral transcription factor, the 72K principal immediate-early protein, is abundantly expressed before this blockade. However, only a few host CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes specific for immediate-early protein are present in seropositive individuals, and these lyse CMV-infected cells poorly. Here we demonstrate selective abrogation of immediate-early peptide presentation by a CMV matrix protein with associated kinase activity and suggest that modification of a viral protein can result in limiting access to the processing machinery and evasion of cytotoxic-T-cell recognition.
Suspensions from the central nervous system of rhesus monkeys inhibited the infection of monkey kidney cell cultures by types 1, 2, and 3 poliovirus, whereas inhibition of Coxsackie A9 and ECHO 12 viruses could not be readily demonstrated. Failure of suspensions of tissues of the central nervous system to irreversibly neutralize poliovirus indicated that the inhibition was not directed against the virus but affected viral multiplication by altering the host cells.
The transfer of the human gene for hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) into human bone marrow cells was accomplished by use of a retroviral vector. The cells were infected in vitro with a replication-incompetent murine retroviral vector that carried and expressed a mutant HPRT complementary DNA. The infected cells were superinfected with a helper virus and maintained in long-term culture. The production of progeny HPRT virus by the bone marrow cells was demonstrated with a colony formation assay on cultured HPRT-deficient, ouabain-resistant murine fibroblasts. Hematopoietic progenitor cells able to form colonies of granulocytes or macrophages (or both) in semisolid medium in the presence of colony stimulating factor were present in the nonadherent cell population. Colony forming units cloned in agar and subsequently cultured in liquid medium produced progeny HPRT virus, indicating infection of this class of hematopoietic progenitor cell.
Freshwater blue-green algae of the genera Lyngbya, Plectonema, and Phormidium are susceptible to a virus recently isolated from a waste-stabilization pond. Electron micrographs of a partially purified preparation show that the viral particle has an icosahedral structure about 66 mmicro in diameter.
More than 1% of the world's population is chronically infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). HCV infection can result in acute hepatitis, chronic hepatitis, and cirrhosis, which is strongly associated with development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Genetic studies of HCV replication have been hampered by lack of a bona fide infectious molecular clone. Full-length functional clones of HCV complementary DNA were constructed. RNA transcripts from the clones were found to be infectious and to cause disease in chimpanzees after direct intrahepatic inoculation. This work defines the structure of a functional HCV genome RNA and proves that HCV alone is sufficient to cause disease.
Human fibroblast cells produce beta-type interferon only in response to viral infection or treatment with an inducer such as poly(rI) X poly(rC); this event is most probably controlled at the transcriptional level (for review see ref. 1). To study the induction process, we inserted the human fibroblast interferon (IFN-beta) gene, with or without its promoter region, into recombinant simian virus 40 (SV40) plasmid vectors which subsequently were transfected into monkey AP-8 cells. We report here that upon induction with poly(rI) X poly(rC) there was a 10-30-fold increase in IFN-beta synthesis. This inducer had no effect on interferon production when the coding region only was inserted into the vector plasmid, which indicates that the promoter region is required for inducibility of this gene. Deletion mapping implicates the region between nucleotides -144 and -186 from the mRNA initiation site in the specific regulation of the IFN-beta gene. This region contains a sequence that is remarkably homologous with a consensus sequence found in the 5' flanking region of steroid hormone responsive genes, which might be involved in binding the progesterone-receptor complex.
The complete nucleotide sequence of a mammalian transforming retrovirus. Moloney murine sarcoma virus, has been determined. MSV, recombinant virus derived of helper viral and cellular sequences, possesses termini resembling prokaryotic transposable elements. The viral genome has the coding capacity for the Moloney murine leukemia virus gag gene product and contains large deletions in pol and env genes. A large open reading frame encompassing its cell-derived sequences codes for its putative transforming protein. The nature of some of the important domains in the viral genome has been established, and their structure is discussed in relation to their function.
RhoA signaling plays a critical role in many cellular processes, including cell migration. Here we show that the vaccinia F11L protein interacts directly with RhoA, inhibiting its signaling by blocking the interaction with its downstream effectors Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) and mDia. RNA interference-mediated depletion of F11L during infection resulted in an absence of vaccinia-induced cell motility and inhibition of viral morphogenesis. Disruption of the RhoA binding site in F11L, which resembles that of ROCK, led to an identical phenotype. Thus, inhibition of RhoA signaling is required for both vaccinia morphogenesis and virus-induced cell motility.
The inhibitory effects of interferon on virus multiplication and cell growth are significantly enhanced by treatment with tunicamycin. Potentiation of antiviral activity was found only with enveloped viruses and not with nonbudding viruses. Changes in the plasma membrane of treated cells may account for this effect, since enveloped viruses bud from the cell surface as a terminal step.
Repeat tracts of guanine bases found in DNA and RNA can form tetraplex structures in the presence of a variety of monovalent cations. Evidence suggests that guanine tetraplexes assume important functions within chromosomal telomeres, immunoglobulin switch regions, and the human immunodeficiency virus genome. The structure of a parallel-stranded tetraplex formed by the hexanucleotide d(TG4T) and stabilized by sodium cations was determined by x-ray crystallography to 1.2 angstroms resolution. Sharply resolved sodium cations were found between and within planes of hydrogen-bonded guanine quartets, and an ordered groove hydration was observed. Distinct intra- and intermolecular stacking arrangements were adopted by the guanine quartets. Thymine bases were exclusively involved in making extensive lattice contacts.
In many viral infections the host cell carries the viral genome without producing viral particles, a phenomenon known as viral latency. The cellular mechanisms by which viral latency is maintained or viral replication is induced are not known. The modulation of intracellular calcium concentrations by calcium ionophores induced Epstein-Barr viral antigens in lymphoblastoid cell lines that carry the virus. When calcium ionophores were used in conjunction with direct activators of protein kinase C (12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate and a synthetic diacylglycerol), a greater induction of viral antigens was observed than with either agent alone. Activation of protein kinase C may be required for the expression of the viral genome.
The adenovirus E1a protein (E1a), a potent transcription activator, contains a transcriptional activating region. Compared with previously described cellular and viral activators, E1a's activating region has unusual structural properties. It seems that E1a's activating region interacts with a cellular target not required for the function of transcriptional activators with 'acidic' activating regions. By contrast, the target of an acidic activating region is required both by acidic activators and by E1a. It is proposed that the cellular target of E1a's activating region is an 'adaptor' that allows E1a to interact with the basic transcriptional machinery.
The adenovirus E1A and SV40 large-T-antigen oncoproteins bind to members of the p300/CBP transcriptional coactivator family. Binding of p300/CBP is implicated in the transforming mechanisms of E1A and T-antigen oncoproteins. A common region of the T antigen is critical for binding both p300/CBP and the tumour suppressor p53, suggesting a link between the functions of p53 and p300. Here we report that p300/CBP binds to p53 in the absence of viral oncoproteins, and that p300 and p53 colocalize within the nucleus and coexist in a stable DNA-binding complex. Consistent with its ability to bind to p300, E1A disrupted functions mediated by p53. It reduced p53-mediated activation of the p21 and bax promoters, and suppressed p53-induced cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. We conclude that members of the p300/CBP family are transcriptional adaptors for p53, modulating its checkpoint function in the G1 phase of the cell cycle and its induction of apoptosis. Disruption of p300/p53-dependent growth control may be part of the mechanism by which E1A induces cell transformation. These results help to explain how p53 mediates growth and checkpoint control, and how members of the p300/CBP family affect progression from G1 to the S phase of the cell cycle.
Human hepatitis delta (delta) virus (HDV) is a form of defective virus, which infects humans only in the presence of a co-infecting hepatitis B virus (HBV). HDV superinfection in a chronic HBV carrier often results in severe chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis, whereas acute HDV and HBV co-infection is frequently associated with fulminant hepatitis. HDV consists of a 36-nm particle, which contains an envelope with HBV surface antigen, and a nucleocapsid containing the hepatitis delta-antigen (HDAg) and an RNA genome of 1.75 kilobases (kb). Recently, the genomic RNA from an HDV serially passaged in chimpanzees has been cloned and sequenced in a study which showed that the HDV RNA is a single-stranded circular molecule with properties similar to those of viroid or virusoid. However, it is not known whether serial passages in chimpanzees had altered the properties of human HDV. Here we report the cloning and sequencing of an HDV RNA isolated directly from a patient with acute delta-hepatitis. The sequence showed considerable divergence (11%) from that of the chimpanzee-adapted HDV. Five open reading frames (ORFs) of more than 100 amino acids in both genomic and anti-genomic sense were found. The largest ORF in antigenomic sense, which can code for 214 amino acids, may correspond to the HDAg.
The CD4 (T4) antigen was originally described as a phenotypic marker specific for helper T cells, and has recently been shown to be the receptor for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Functional studies using monoclonal antibodies directed at CD4 and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules led to the suggestion that CD4 binds to the MHC class II molecules expressed on stimulator cells, enhancing T-cell responsiveness by increasing the avidity of T cell-stimulator cell interaction and/or by transmitting a positive intracellular signal. But recent evidence that antibodies to CD4 inhibit T-cell responsiveness in the absence of any putative ligand for CD4 has been interpreted as suggesting that antibody-mediated inhibition may involve the transmission of a negative signal via the CD4 molecule instead. We have infected a murine T-cell hybridoma that produces interleukin 2 (IL-2) in response to human class II HLA-DR antigens with a retroviral vector containing CD4 cDNA. The resulting CD4-expressing hybridoma cell lines produce 6- to 20-fold more IL-2 in response to HLA-DR antigens than control cell lines. Furthermore, when antigen levels are suboptimal, the response of the cell lines is entirely CD4-dependent. The data presented here clearly demonstrate that CD4 can enhance T-cell responsiveness and may be crucial in the response to suboptimal levels of antigen.
It has recently been demonstrated both emperically and mathematically that transposable elements may spread rapidly throughout a population once introduced even when they dramatically reduce the fitness of individuals that carry them. Such events result in pronounced differences in the phylogenetic distribution of genetic elements capable of rapid genome invasion. Using a simple and general procedure to screen the genome of the white-footed mouse Peromyscus leucopus, we have isolated a family of retrovirus-like elements which is apparently absent from the genome of the house mouse Mus domesticus. Here, we report this procedure and an analysis of the organization, phylogenetic distribution and sequence of this family of transposable elements.
The most common sites of integration of the leukosis virus (ALV) long terminal repeat (LTR) in bursal lymphomas and derivative cell lines correspond to a region encompassed by two major hypersensitive sites in the 5' flanking region of the pre-integration, unrearranged c-myc gene. After integration of the ALV LTR, the major hypersensitive site within the avian c-myc oncogene region is within the proviral LTR, and the major hypersensitive sites normally found in uninfected cells 5' to the first c-myc coding exon are no longer detectable.
Human cytomegalovirus infects vascular tissues and has been associated with atherogenesis and coronary restenosis. Although established laboratory strains of human cytomegalovirus have lost the ability to grow on vascular endothelial cells, laboratory strains of murine cytomegalovirus retain this ability. With the use of a forward-genetic procedure involving random transposon mutagenesis and rapid phenotypic screening, we identified a murine cytomegalovirus gene governing endothelial cell tropism. This gene, M45, shares sequence homology to ribonucleotide reductase genes. Endothelial cells infected with M45-mutant viruses rapidly undergo apoptosis, suggesting that a viral strategy to evade destruction by cellular apoptosis is indispensable for viral growth in endothelial cells.
The innate immune system senses viral infection by recognizing a variety of viral components (including double-stranded (ds)RNA) and triggers antiviral responses. The cytoplasmic helicase proteins RIG-I (retinoic-acid-inducible protein I, also known as Ddx58) and MDA5 (melanoma-differentiation-associated gene 5, also known as Ifih1 or Helicard) have been implicated in viral dsRNA recognition. In vitro studies suggest that both RIG-I and MDA5 detect RNA viruses and polyinosine-polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)), a synthetic dsRNA analogue. Although a critical role for RIG-I in the recognition of several RNA viruses has been clarified, the functional role of MDA5 and the relationship between these dsRNA detectors in vivo are yet to be determined. Here we use mice deficient in MDA5 (MDA5-/-) to show that MDA5 and RIG-I recognize different types of dsRNAs: MDA5 recognizes poly(I:C), and RIG-I detects in vitro transcribed dsRNAs. RNA viruses are also differentially recognized by RIG-I and MDA5. We find that RIG-I is essential for the production of interferons in response to RNA viruses including paramyxoviruses, influenza virus and Japanese encephalitis virus, whereas MDA5 is critical for picornavirus detection. Furthermore, RIG-I-/- and MDA5-/- mice are highly susceptible to infection with these respective RNA viruses compared to control mice. Together, our data show that RIG-I and MDA5 distinguish different RNA viruses and are critical for host antiviral responses.
The human beta-chemokine receptor CCR5 is an important cofactor for entry of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1). The murine form of CCR5, despite its 82 percent identity to the human form, was not functional as an HIV-1 coreceptor. HIV-1 entry function could be reconstituted by fusion of various individual elements derived from the extracellular region of human CCR5 onto murine CCR5. Analysis of chimeras containing elements from human CCR5 and human CCR2B suggested that a complex structure rather than single contact sites is responsible for facilitation of viral entry. Further, certain chimeras lacking the domains necessary to signal in response to their natural chemokine ligands retained vigorous HIV-1 coreceptor activity.
Genomic evolution has been profoundly influenced by DNA transposition, a process whereby defined DNA segments move freely about the genome. Transposition is mediated by transposases, and similar events are catalyzed by retroviral integrases such as human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) integrase. Understanding how these proteins interact with DNA is central to understanding the molecular basis of transposition. We report the three-dimensional structure of prokaryotic Tn5 transposase complexed with Tn5 transposon end DNA determined to 2.3 angstrom resolution. The molecular assembly is dimeric, where each double-stranded DNA molecule is bound by both protein subunits, orienting the transposon ends into the active sites. This structure provides a molecular framework for understanding many aspects of transposition, including the binding of transposon end DNA by one subunit and cleavage by a second, cleavage of two strands of DNA by a single active site via a hairpin intermediate, and strand transfer into target DNA.
Viruses have been hypothesized to control blooms of Aureococcus anophagefferens gen. et sp. nov. (Chrysophyceae), a marine phytoplankton that since 1985 has caused devastating summer blooms called "brown tide." By means of ultrafiltration methods, viruses specific to this alga were isolated from both the Great South Bay and Peconic Bay systems of Long Island, New York, during the summer bloom period of 1992. Cell lysis of healthy algal cultures was demonstrated, as well as continuing reinfection with serial transfers of cultures. Electron microscope surveys yielded images of phage-like virus particles with tails that could attach to A. anophagefferens cells within minutes of exposure. The isolation and cultivation of this virus highlights the need for further study of viral infection of eukaryotic algae and the potential for a better understanding of algal bloom control by viral infection.
In an adaptive immune response, naive T cells proliferate during infection and generate long-lived memory cells that undergo secondary expansion after a repeat encounter with the same pathogen. Although natural killer (NK) cells have traditionally been classified as cells of the innate immune system, they share many similarities with cytotoxic T lymphocytes. We use a mouse model of cytomegalovirus infection to show that, like T cells, NK cells bearing the virus-specific Ly49H receptor proliferate 100-fold in the spleen and 1,000-fold in the liver after infection. After a contraction phase, Ly49H-positive NK cells reside in lymphoid and non-lymphoid organs for several months. These self-renewing 'memory' NK cells rapidly degranulate and produce cytokines on reactivation. Adoptive transfer of these NK cells into naive animals followed by viral challenge results in a robust secondary expansion and protective immunity. These findings reveal properties of NK cells that were previously attributed only to cells of the adaptive immune system.
Immunoglobulin-binding factors are known to regulate the synthesis of B-cell-derived immunoglobulin heavy-chain isotypes. Cloning and nucleotide sequence determination of complementary DNA encoding rodent IgE-binding factors (IgE-BF) revealed that messenger RNA encodes a glycoprotein of 557 amino acids which is expressed as a precursor of relative molecular mass (Mr) 60,000 (60K) in COS7 monkey cells. We report here that the 3' two-thirds of the IgE-BF coding sequence shows a surprising homology (72%) at the DNA level with coding sequences of the gag and pol (DNA endonuclease) genes of the Syrian hamster intracisternal A particle (IAP H18), an endogenous retrovirus. This marked homology demonstrates that the rodent gene encoding IgE-BF is a hybrid gene which evolved very recently by integrating genes of viral origin, and that the encoded polypeptide comprises three separate domains: an IgE-BF domain and retrovirus-derived gag and DNA endonuclease-like domains. This may represent the first report of a cellular gene containing a virus-derived coding sequence.
Retroviruses are involved in several human neurological diseases with varying pathological features. Whether these diseases are due to a direct effect of the virus on nervous system cells is unknown. To gain insight into the pathogenesis of one retroviral neurological disease, we are studying the murine neurotropic retrovirus, Cas-Br-E, which causes lower motor neuron disease associated with spongiform degenerative changes in brain and spinal cord. Central nervous system (CNS) injury seems to be due to direct viral action, but the precise target cells of the virus are uncertain. After blood-borne virus enters the CNS it is found in capillary endothelial cells. No microscopic evidence for virus within glia or neurons has been found in some studies, whereas virus or incomplete particles have been observed in CNS cells in other studies. Here we identify the neuron as a major target for Cas-Br-E in the CNS, suggesting that this disease may be a direct result of viral infection of neurons. We also show that envelope protein (Env, encoded by the env gene), a major determinant of neurovirulence, cannot be detected in neurons but is present in non-neuronal cells, although spliced env messenger RNA is synthesized in CNS tissue. This suggests that a post-transcriptional step in Cas-Br-E Env protein synthesis is impaired and that the neurological disease may be a consequence of abortive replication of virus in neurons. This may explain the failure to find neuronal infection in other neurological diseases by conventional methods of virus detection.
One particular class of DNA regulatory elements, the enhancers or activators, can, relatively independently of distance and orientation, dramatically increase the transcriptional activity of homologous and heterologous promoters located in cis (see refs 1-3 for reviews, also refs 4-6). Sequence differences between various heterologous enhancers may explain their apparent host- and/or tissue-specific action. Furthermore, differences in the transcriptional control elements may contribute to viral tropism. At least for murine leukaemia virus isolates, thymotropism and leukaemogenicity have been attributed to alterations within the viral long terminal repeat, which harbours their enhancers and other transcriptional control elements. We report here the identification of a viral enhancer element possessing a very restricted tissue range. The enhancer is active in all human cells of the haematopoetic system tested, but not in cells of fibroblast or epithelial origin.
Retinoic-acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I; also called DDX58) is a cytosolic viral RNA receptor that interacts with MAVS (also called VISA, IPS-1 or Cardif) to induce type I interferon-mediated host protective innate immunity against viral infection. Furthermore, members of the tripartite motif (TRIM) protein family, which contain a cluster of a RING-finger domain, a B box/coiled-coil domain and a SPRY domain, are involved in various cellular processes, including cell proliferation and antiviral activity. Here we report that the amino-terminal caspase recruitment domains (CARDs) of RIG-I undergo robust ubiquitination induced by TRIM25 in mammalian cells. The carboxy-terminal SPRY domain of TRIM25 interacts with the N-terminal CARDs of RIG-I; this interaction effectively delivers the Lys 63-linked ubiquitin moiety to the N-terminal CARDs of RIG-I, resulting in a marked increase in RIG-I downstream signalling activity. The Lys 172 residue of RIG-I is critical for efficient TRIM25-mediated ubiquitination and for MAVS binding, as well as the ability of RIG-I to induce antiviral signal transduction. Furthermore, gene targeting demonstrates that TRIM25 is essential not only for RIG-I ubiquitination but also for RIG-I-mediated interferon- production and antiviral activity in response to RNA virus infection. Thus, we demonstrate that TRIM25 E3 ubiquitin ligase induces the Lys 63-linked ubiquitination of RIG-I, which is crucial for the cytosolic RIG-I signalling pathway to elicit host antiviral innate immunity.
A genomic clone consisting of the Moloney leukemia proviral genome with moderately repetitive mouse sequences was microinjected into the pronucleus of a mouse zygote. An animal was derived that carried multiple copies of proviral DNA in a tandem array. No evidence for homologous recombination was obtained. The viral genome was expressed in this animal and was transmitted as a single unit to its offspring. Subsequent breeding studies revealed that the proviral DNA had integrated on an X chromosome.
Recent reports on the isolation of type C viruses from human cells have generated considerable controversy because of the close relationship of the viruses to the type C viruses of subhuman primates. These findings have been interpreted as evidence for contamination despite the repeated isolation of some type C viruses from separate clinical specimens or from separate frozen primary cell stocks of the same donor. Our laboratory has described a type C virus which is released from the HEL-12 strain of normal human embryonic lung fibroblasts. The HEL-12 virus is related immunologically to simian sarcoma (woolly monkey fibrosarcoma) virus (SiSV) and the endogenous type C viruses of baboons and domestic cats. To demonstrate that the HEL-12 virus is not an adventitious contaminant, fresh human tissues were examined for antigenic cross-reactivity with HEL-12 virus antigens. Some patients with myelogenous leukemia contain circulating immunoglobulins which specifically inhibit the reverse transcriptases of HEL-12 virus and primate type C viruses. In addition, the glomerular immune complexes in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus contain antigens related to HEL-12 virus proteins. Using the techniques of molecular hybridisation, we demonstrate here that HEL-12 cells contain proviral DNA sequences before antigen expression or spontaneous virus release can be detected. We also present evidence for the existence of nucleic acid sequences homologous to HEL-12 viral RNA in the DNAs from certain cancer patients.
The downstream (3') long terminal repeat (LTR) of an avian retroviral provirus is unable to act as an efficient promoter of transcription when a transcriptionally active upstream (5') LTR is present. This transcriptional interference may explain the observation that only deleted proviruses have been observed inserted adjacent to c-myc in avian leukosis virus induced lymphomas of chickens.
The gag and pol genes of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) (ref. 1) are translated as two polyproteins, Pr55gag and Pr160gag-pol (refs 2-6), which are subsequently cleaved by the action of a virus-encoded protease into the four structural gag proteins of the virion core (p17, p24, p7 and p6) and the pol-encoded enzymes essential for retrovirus replication (protease, reverse transcriptase, ribonuclease H, and endonuclease). Mutational inactivation of the proteases of HIV-1 and other retroviruses results in immature, non-infectious virions, indicating that exogenous inhibition of the protease may represent an attractive approach to anti-AIDS therapy. Here we demonstrate that synthetic peptide analogues, which are potent inhibitors of purified HIV-1 protease, inhibit the processing of the viral polyproteins in cultures of HIV-1-infected T lymphocytes and attenuate viral infectivity.
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and other primitive stem cells of mice have been known for more than 30 years to potently block retrovirus replication. Infection of ESCs by the murine leukaemia viruses (MLVs) results in the normal establishment of integrated proviral DNA, but this DNA is then transcriptionally silenced, preventing further viral spread. The repression is largely mediated by trans-acting factors that recognize a conserved sequence element termed the primer binding site, an 18-base pair sequence complementary to the 3' end of a cellular transfer RNA. A specific tRNA is annealed to the primer binding site sequence of the viral genomic RNA, and is used to prime DNA synthesis. This same sequence in the context of the integrated proviral DNA is targeted for silencing in ESCs. We have recently shown that a large protein complex binding to the primer binding site in ESCs contains TRIM28 (refs 8, 9), a well-characterized transcriptional co-repressor. An important question remains as to the identity of the factor that directly recognizes integrated retroviral DNAs and recruits TRIM28 to mediate their specific silencing. Here we identify the zinc finger protein ZFP809 as the recognition molecule that bridges the integrated proviral DNA and TRIM28. We show that expression of ZFP809 is sufficient to render even differentiated cells highly resistant to MLV infection. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ZFP809 is able to potently block transcription from DNA constructs of human T-cell lymphotropic virus-1 (HTLV-1), which use the same primer tRNA. These results identify ZFP809 as a DNA-binding factor that specifically recognizes a large subset of mammalian retroviruses and retroelements, targeting them for transcriptional silencing. We propose that ZFP809 evolved as a stem-cell-specific retroviral restriction factor, and therefore constitutes a new component of the intrinsic immune system of stem cells.
The activation, clonal expansion and terminal differentiation of small resting B lymphocytes primed by an antigen (or antibodies to its receptors) appear to follow an orderly developmental sequence triggered at each stage by distinct soluble cytokines, primarily produced by T lymphocytes. For man, the only known B-cell mitogen independent of accessory cells for its action is the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Lymphocytes transformed by EBV are released from the usual constraints on B-cell growth, proliferating continuously in the absence of any exogenous cytokine. The resultant cell lines are of special interest as they possess certain features compatible with a preneoplastic state of Burkitt's lymphoma, one of two human cancers with which the virus is intimately associated. We report here that following EBV-transformation, B lymphoblasts release a soluble factor which mimics the B-cell stimulatory product(s) of mitogen-conditioned T lymphocytes. Furthermore, the virally-transformed cells utilize this activity to sustain their own growth. The ectopic production of an otherwise normal growth factor may represent a critical event in the malignant evolution of human lymphomas harbouring the EBV genome.
Coronaviruses, like many animal viruses, are characterized by a restricted host range and tissue tropism. Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), a major pathogen causing a fatal diarrhoea in newborn pig, replicates selectively in the differentiated enterocytes covering the villi of the small intestine. To investigate the molecular determinants of the infection, we characterized the surface molecule used by the virus for binding and entry into host cells. Here we report that aminopeptidase N, an ectoenzyme abundantly expressed at the apical membrane of the enterocytes, serves as a receptor for TGEV. Monoclonal antibodies were selected for their ability to block infection by TGEV of porcine cell lines. They recognized a brush-border membrane protein of M(r) 150K, which was identified as aminopeptidase N by amino-terminal sequencing. Two lines of evidence supported the view that the peptidase itself acts as a receptor. First, virions bound specifically to aminopeptidase N that was purified to homogeneity. Second, recombinant expression of aminopeptidase N conferred infectivity by TGEV to an otherwise non-permissive cell line.
Dissection and reconstitution of the adenovirus DNA replication machinery has led to the discovery of two HeLa nuclear proteins which are required in conjunction with three viral proteins. One of these, nuclear factor I (NF-I), recognizes an internal region of the origin between nucleotides 25 and 40 and by binding to one side of the helix stimulates the initiation reaction up to 30-fold. NFI-binding sites have been observed upstream of several cellular genes, such as chicken lysozyme, human IgM and human c-myc, and coincide in most cases with DNase I hypersensitive regions. Here we report the identification of a novel DNA-binding protein from HeLa nuclei, designated NF-III, that recognizes a sequence in the adenovirus origin very close to the NFI-binding site, between nucleotides 36 and 54. This sequence includes the partially conserved nucleotides TATGATAATGAG. NF-III stimulates DNA replication four- to sixfold by increasing the initiation efficiency. Potential cellular binding sites include promoter elements of the histone H2B gene, the human interferon beta gene, the human and mouse immunoglobulin VK and VH genes and the mammal/chicken/Xenopus laevis U1 and U2 small nuclear RNA genes. Furthermore, a subset of the herpes simplex virus immediate early promoter specific TAATGARAT elements is homologous with the adenovirus 2 (Ad-2) NFIII-binding site.
An adeno-associated virus vector encoding an antisense RNA was used to transduce stable intracellular resistance to human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) in human hemopoietic and non-hemopoietic cell lines. The antisense targets are present in all HIV-1 transcripts and include the TAR sequence, which is critical for transcription and virus replication, and the polyadenylation signal. Cell lines expressing antisense RNA showed up to 95 percent inhibition of gene expression directed by the HIV-1 long terminal repeat and greater than 99 percent reduction in infectious HIV-1 production, with no detectable cellular toxicity. Because of their efficient transcription and inability to recombine with HIV-1, adeno-associated virus vectors represent a promising form of anti-retroviral gene therapy.
Virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) which kill virus-infected cells are thought to be a major host defence against viral infections. Here we report the existence of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-specific CTL in persons infected with this virus, the aetiological agent of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). Recombinant HIV-vaccinia viruses were used to express HIV antigens in B-cell lines established from subjects seropositive for HIV and seronegative controls. Circulating lymphocytes capable of killing HIV env-expressing autologous B cells were detected in eight of eight seropositive subjects; in addition, at least three seropositive subjects demonstrated gag-specific cytotoxic responses. No HIV-specific cytotoxicity was observed in seronegative subjects. Selective inhibition of the env-specific cytotoxicity by a CD3-specific monoclonal antibody indicates that the effectors are T cells. This demonstration of a cytotoxic T-cell immune response to HIV in infected individuals should prove useful in investigating the immunopathogenesis of HIV infection further and in evaluating AIDS vaccine strategies.
Picorna-like viruses are a loosely defined group of positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses that are major pathogens of animals, plants and insects. They include viruses that are of enormous economic and public-health concern and are responsible for animal diseases (such as poliomyelitis), plant diseases (such as sharka) and insect diseases (such as sacbrood). Viruses from the six divergent families (the Picornaviridae, Caliciviridae, Comoviridae, Sequiviridae, Dicistroviridae and Potyviridae) that comprise the picorna-like virus superfamily have the following features in common: a genome with a protein attached to the 5' end and no overlapping open reading frames, all the RNAs are translated into a polyprotein before processing, and a conserved RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) protein. Analyses of RdRp sequences from these viruses produce phylogenies that are congruent with established picorna-like virus family assignments; hence, this gene is an excellent molecular marker for examining the diversity of picorna-like viruses in nature. Here we report, on the basis of analysis of RdRp sequences amplified from marine virus communities, that a diverse array of picorna-like viruses exists in the ocean. All of the sequences amplified were divergent from known picorna-like viruses, and fell within four monophyletic groups that probably belong to at least two new families. Moreover, we show that an isolate belonging to one of these groups is a lytic pathogen of Heterosigma akashiwo, a toxic-bloom-forming alga responsible for severe economic losses to the finfish aquaculture industry, suggesting that picorna-like viruses are important pathogens of marine phytoplankton.
The mitogenic or antigenic stimulation of T lymphocytes in the presence of accessory cells results in the synthesis of interleukin-2 (IL-2), which, on interacting with de novo synthesized receptors on the membrane, induces the proliferation and differentiation of T cells. T lymphocytes are the preferential target cells of human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I). This virus was isolated from leukaemic cells of patients with adult T-cell leukaemia. No viral transcription was detected in these leukaemic cells, indicating that consistent expression of HTLV-I is not needed for maintenance of the neoplastic state. After a short time in culture, these leukaemic cells produce viral particles which immortalize normal T cells. Hence, HTLV-I might be an important agent not only in the development, but also in the initiation, of this lymphoproliferative disease. This possibility was sustained by our previous observations indicating that normal T lymphocytes incubated with HTLV-I are able to form colonies in soft agar, seven days later, in the absence of exogenous IL-2. These results led us to explore further the immediate effects of viral infection on purified resting T lymphocytes. Here, we present evidence that HTLV-I is able to activate T lymphocytes. Indeed, binding of viral particles to these cells induces IL-2 production and IL-2 receptor expression, and triggers T-cell proliferation. This initial activation, which appears to be independent of accessory cells, may be relevant in understanding the role of HTLV-I in the aetiology of adult T-cell leukaemia.
There is concern that variola virus, the aetiological agent of smallpox, may be used as a biological weapon. For this reason several countries are now stockpiling (vaccinia virus-based) smallpox vaccine. Although the preventive use of smallpox vaccination has been well documented, little is known about its efficacy when used after exposure to the virus. Here we compare the effectiveness of (1) post-exposure smallpox vaccination and (2) antiviral treatment with either cidofovir (also called HPMPC or Vistide) or with a related acyclic nucleoside phosphonate analogue (HPMPO-DAPy) after lethal intratracheal infection of cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) with monkeypox virus (MPXV). MPXV causes a disease similar to human smallpox and this animal model can be used to measure differences in the protective efficacies of classical and new-generation candidate smallpox vaccines. We show that initiation of antiviral treatment 24 h after lethal intratracheal MPXV infection, using either of the antiviral agents and applying various systemic treatment regimens, resulted in significantly reduced mortality and reduced numbers of cutaneous monkeypox lesions. In contrast, when monkeys were vaccinated 24 h after MPXV infection, using a standard human dose of a currently recommended smallpox vaccine (Elstree-RIVM), no significant reduction in mortality was observed. When antiviral therapy was terminated 13 days after infection, all surviving animals had virus-specific serum antibodies and antiviral T lymphocytes. These data show that adequate preparedness for a biological threat involving smallpox should include the possibility of treating exposed individuals with antiviral compounds such as cidofovir or other selective anti-poxvirus drugs.
DNA extracted from hepatitis B virus Dane particles has been cloned in bacteria using a plasmid vector. A full-length clone has been examined by restriction endonuclease analysis, and the nucleotide sequence of an 892-base pair fragment from cloned hepatitis B viral DNA encoding the surface antigen gene is reported. The amino acid sequence deduced from the DNA indicates that the surface antigens is a protein consisting of 226 amino acids and with a molecular weight of 25,398. The portion of the gene coding for this protein apparently contains no intervening sequences.
Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) DNA and messenger RNA sequences in both cell lines and blood obtained directly from HIV-1-infected patients were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and hybridized to fluorescein-labeled probes in situ, and the individually labeled cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. After flow cytometric analysis, heterogeneous cell populations were reproducibly resolved into HIV-1-positive and -negative distributions. Fluorescence microscopy showed that the cellular morphology was preserved and intracellular localization of amplified product DNA was maintained. Retention of nonspecific probe was not observed. Analysis of proviral DNA and viral messenger RNA in cells in the blood of HIV-1-infected patients showed that the HIV-1 genome persists in a large reservoir of latently infected cells. With the use of this technique it is now possible to detect single-copy DNA or low-abundance messenger RNA rapidly and reproducibly in a minor subpopulation of cells in suspension at single-cell resolution and to sort those cells for further characterization.
Viruses are the most abundant biological entities and can control microbial communities, but their identity in terrestrial and freshwater Antarctic ecosystems is unknown. The genetic structure of an Antarctic lake viral community revealed unexpected genetic richness distributed across the highest number of viral families that have been found to date in aquatic viral metagenomes. In contrast to other known aquatic viromes, which are dominated by bacteriophage sequences, this Antarctic virus assemblage had a large proportion of sequences related to eukaryotic viruses, including phycodnaviruses and single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) viruses not previously identified in aquatic environments. We also observed that the transition from an ice-covered lake in spring to an open-water lake in summer led to a change from a ssDNA- to a double-stranded DNA-virus-dominated assemblage, possibly reflecting a seasonal shift in host organisms.
Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) exerts pleiotropic effects, including antiviral activity, stimulation of macrophages and natural killer cells, and increased expression of major histocompatibility complex antigens. Mice without the IFN-gamma receptor had no overt anomalies, and their immune system appeared to develop normally. However, mutant mice had a defective natural resistance, they had increased susceptibility to infection by Listeria monocytogenes and vaccinia virus despite normal cytotoxic and T helper cell responses. Immunoglobulin isotype analysis revealed that IFN-gamma is necessary for a normal antigen-specific immunoglobulin G2a response. These mutant mice offer the possibility for the further elucidation of IFN-gamma-mediated functions by transgenic cell- or tissue-specific reconstitution of a functional receptor.
The exact role of hepatitis B virus in the development of liver cancer is not known. The recent identification of a viral regulatory gene HBx suggests a possible direct involvement of the virus whereby the HBx protein, acting as a transcriptional transactivator of viral genes, may alter host gene expression and lead to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. We have tested this possibility of placing the entire HBx gene under its own regulatory elements directly into the germline of mice. Transgenic animals harbouring this viral gene succumbed to progressive histopathological changes specifically in the liver, beginning with multifocal areas of altered hepatocytes, followed by the appearance of benign adenomas, and proceeding to the development of malignant carcinomas. Male mice developed disease and died much earlier than females. This transgenic animal model appears ideal for defining the molecular events that follow the expression of the viral HBx gene and are responsible for the development of liver cancer.
The SCID-hu mouse, engrafted with human hematolymphoid organs, is permissive for infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This mouse model was used to test compounds for antiviral efficacy. Two weeks after infection with HIV, 100 percent (40/40) of SCID-hu mice were positive for HIV by the polymerase chain reaction. When first treated with 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT), none (0/17) were HIV-positive by this assay. However, AZT-treated SCID-hu mice did have a few infected cells; after AZT treatment was stopped, viral spread was detected by polymerase chain reaction in such mice. Thus, the SCID-hu mouse provides a means to directly compare new antiviral compounds with AZT and to further improve antiviral efficacy.
The classical transplantation antigens (the major histocompatibility complex class I antigens) play a key role in host defense against cells expressing foreign antigens. Several naturally occurring tumors and virally transformed cells show an overall suppression of these surface antigens. Since the class I molecules are required in the presentation of neoantigens on tumor cells to the cytotoxic T lymphocytes, their absence from the cell surface may lead to the escape of these tumors from immunosurveillance. To test this possibility, a functional class I gene was transfected into human adenovirus 12-transformed mouse cells that do not express detectable levels of class I antigens; the transformants were tested for expression of the transfected gene and for changes in oncogenicity. The expression of a single class I gene, introduced by DNA-mediated gene transfer into highly tumorigenic adenovirus 12-transformed cells, was sufficient to abrogate the oncogenicity of these cells. This finding has important implications for the regulation of the malignant phenotype in certain tumors and for the potential modulation of oncogenicity through derepression of the endogenous class I genes.
H5N1 influenza A viruses have spread to numerous countries in Asia, Europe and Africa, infecting not only large numbers of poultry, but also an increasing number of humans, often with lethal effects. Human and avian influenza A viruses differ in their recognition of host cell receptors: the former preferentially recognize receptors with saccharides terminating in sialic acid-alpha2,6-galactose (SAalpha2,6Gal), whereas the latter prefer those ending in SAalpha2,3Gal (refs 3-6). A conversion from SAalpha2,3Gal to SAalpha2,6Gal recognition is thought to be one of the changes that must occur before avian influenza viruses can replicate efficiently in humans and acquire the potential to cause a pandemic. By identifying mutations in the receptor-binding haemagglutinin (HA) molecule that would enable avian H5N1 viruses to recognize human-type host cell receptors, it may be possible to predict (and thus to increase preparedness for) the emergence of pandemic viruses. Here we show that some H5N1 viruses isolated from humans can bind to both human and avian receptors, in contrast to those isolated from chickens and ducks, which recognize the avian receptors exclusively. Mutations at positions 182 and 192 independently convert the HAs of H5N1 viruses known to recognize the avian receptor to ones that recognize the human receptor. Analysis of the crystal structure of the HA from an H5N1 virus used in our genetic experiments shows that the locations of these amino acids in the HA molecule are compatible with an effect on receptor binding. The amino acid changes that we identify might serve as molecular markers for assessing the pandemic potential of H5N1 field isolates.
Actinomycin D inhibits the synthesis of ribonucleic acid in L cells and the yield of vaccinia virus containing deoxyribonucleic acid, but it does not inhibit cellular deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis or the multiplication of Mengo virus containing ribonucleic acid. These observations serve to distinguish the replication of viral ribonucleic from ribonucleic acid synthesis which is controlled by viral or cellular deoxyribonucleic acid.
The T antigen proteins encoded by DNA tumor virus early genes are involved in the transformation of normal cells to immortalized neoplastic cells that may or may not be tumorigenic in immunocompetent animals. Studies have been made of the tumorigenicity of DNA virus-transformed cells and the interactions of these cells in vivo and in vitro with immunologically nonspecific host effector cells such as natural killer cells and macrophages. The results imply that the T proteins determine the capacity of transformed cells to induce tumors by governing the level of susceptibility that transformed cells express to destruction by such host cellular defenses.
The T-cell surface glycoprotein, CD4 (T4), acts as the cellular receptor for human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1), the first member of the family of viruses that cause acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. HIV recognition of CD4 is probably mediated through the virus envelope glycoprotein (gp120) as shown by co-immunoprecipitation of CD4 and gp120 (ref.5) and by experiments using recombinant gp120 as a binding probe. Here we demonstrate that recombinant soluble CD4(rsT4) purified from the conditioned medium of a stably transfected Chinese hamster ovary cell line is a potent inhibitor of both virus replication and virus-induced cell fusion (syncytium formation). These results suggest that rsT4 is sufficient to bind HIV, and that it represents a potential anti-viral therapy for HIV infection.
Reiterated gene sequences related to the RNA of feline leukemia virus (FeLV) are detected in all tissues of domestic cats and their close Felis relatives but not in more distantly related Felis species. Partially homologous viral gene sequences are found in rodent, and particularly rat, DNA. Together with the immunologic relationships observed between FeLV and endogenous rodent type C viruses, the results lead to the conclusion that FeLV-related genes were transmitted from a rodent to cat ancestor and have been perpetuated in the germ line of cats.
The regulation of natural populations of invertebrate hosts by viral, bacterial, protozoan, or helminth infections is discussed, using models that combine elements of conventional epidemiology (where the host population is assumed constant) with dynamic elements drawn from predator-prey studies; the apparent absence of acquired immunity in invertebrates simplifies the analysis. Highly pathogenic infections, with long-lived infective stages, tend to produce cyclic behavior in their host populations. The models give an explanation of the 9- to 10-year population cycles of the larch bud moth (Zeiraphera diniana) in the European Alps and suggest that microsporidian protozoan and baculovirus infections may be responsible for the 5- to 12-year population cycles observed in many temperate forest insects.
Accumulation of vascular smooth muscle cells as a consequence of arterial injury is a major feature of vascular proliferative disorders. Molecular approaches to the inhibition of smooth muscle cell proliferation in these settings could potentially limit intimal expansion. This problem was approached by introducing adenoviral vectors encoding the herpesvirus thymidine kinase (tk) into porcine arteries that had been injured by a balloon on a catheter. These smooth muscle cells were shown to be infectable with adenoviral vectors, and introduction of the tk gene rendered them sensitive to the nucleoside analog ganciclovir. When this vector was introduced into porcine arteries immediately after a balloon injury, intimal hyperplasia decreased after a course of ganciclovir treatment. No major local or systemic toxicities were observed. These data suggest that transient expression of an enzyme that catalyzes the formation of a cytotoxic drug locally may limit smooth muscle cell proliferation in response to balloon injury.
Point mutations were introduced into the overlapping trans-regulatory genes (tat-III and trs) of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), and the mutants were evaluated for virus expression. The results showed that tat-III has a positive transacting role and is required for transcriptional activation. A chain terminating mutation early in the trs gene resulted in an increase in transcription of viral messenger RNA as measured by nuclear transcription experiments, but only one major species of viral messenger RNA (1.8 kilobases) was detected, and little or no viral structural proteins were made. Thus, the trs gene product is essential for expression of virus structural proteins but, at the same time, may have a negative trans-regulatory role in transcription. Cotransfection of the point mutant proviruses defective in tat or trs with each other or with a complementary DNA clone containing tat and trs sequences restored the normal transcription pattern and subsequent virus production.
Viruses that are non- or poorly cytopathic have developed various strategies to avoid elimination by the immune system and to persist in the host. Acute infection of adult mice with the noncytopathic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) normally induces a protective cytotoxic T-cell response that also causes immunopathology. But some LCMV strains (such as DOCILE (LCMV-D) or Cl-13 Armstrong (Cl-13)) derived from virus carrier mice tend to persist after acute infection of adult mice without causing lethal immunopathological disease. Tendency to persist correlates with tropism, rapidity of virus spread and virus mutations. We report here that these LCMV isolates may persist because they induce most of the specific antiviral CD8+ cytotoxic T cells so completely that they all disappear within a few days and therefore neither eliminate the virus nor cause lethal immunopathology. The results illustrate that partially and sequentially induced (protective) immunity or complete exhaustion of T-cell immunity (high zone tolerance) are quantitatively different points on the scale of immunity; some viruses exploit the latter possibility to persist in an immunocompetent host.
A protein designated p14 was purified from a simian immunodeficiency virus (SIVMne) and was shown by amino acid sequence analysis to be nearly identical to the predicted translational product of a unique open reading frame (X-ORF) in the nucleotide sequences of SIVmac and human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2). Thus the X-ORF is proven to be a new retroviral gene. The p14 is present in SIVMne in molar amounts equivalent to those of the gag proteins. This is the first example of a retrovirus that contains a substantial quantity of a viral protein that is not a product of the gag, pro, pol, or env genes. SIV p14 and its homolog in HIV-2 may function as nucleic acid binding proteins since purified p14 binds to single-stranded nucleic acids in vitro. Antisera to the purified protein detected p14 in SIVMne, SIVmac, and a homologous protein (16 kilodaltons) in HIV-2 but did not react with HIV-1. Diagnostic procedures based on this novel protein will distinguish between HIV-1 and HIV-2.
The infection of cultured human cells with baboon endogenous virus (BEV) frequently leads to an association of viral DNA with a specific genetic locus (termed BEVI, for baboon endogenous virus infection) on chromosome 6. Restriction endonuclease digestion of DNA from BEV-infected human cells and their derived somatic cell clones frequently revealed a common cellular DNA sequence in the proximity of one of the junctions between cellular DNA and the integrated virus. We propose that a short cellular DNA sequence, repeated on chromosome 6 and separated by unique DNA sequences, presents a high-affinity target for the integration of BEV in human cells.
The recent emergence of highly pathogenic avian (H5N1) influenza viruses, their epizootic and panzootic nature, and their association with lethal human infections have raised significant global health concerns. Several studies have underlined the importance of non-structural protein NS1 in the increased pathogenicity and virulence of these strains. NS1, which consists of two domains-a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) binding domain and the effector domain, separated through a linker-is an antagonist of antiviral type-I interferon response in the host. Here we report the X-ray structure of the full-length NS1 from an H5N1 strain (A/Vietnam/1203/2004) that was associated with 60% of human deaths in an outbreak in Vietnam. Compared to the individually determined structures of the RNA binding domain and the effector domain from non-H5N1 strains, the RNA binding domain within H5N1 NS1 exhibits modest structural changes, while the H5N1 effector domain shows significant alteration, particularly in the dimeric interface. Although both domains in the full-length NS1 individually participate in dimeric interactions, an unexpected finding is that these interactions result in the formation of a chain of NS1 molecules instead of distinct dimeric units. Three such chains in the crystal interact with one another extensively to form a tubular organization of similar dimensions to that observed in the cryo-electron microscopy images of NS1 in the presence of dsRNA. The tubular oligomeric organization of NS1, in which residues implicated in dsRNA binding face a 20-A-wide central tunnel, provides a plausible mechanism for how NS1 sequesters varying lengths of dsRNA, to counter cellular antiviral dsRNA response pathways, while simultaneously interacting with other cellular ligands during an infection.
The v-abl oncogene of the Abelson murine leukemia virus (A-MuLV) is known to efficiently transform NIH/3T3 fibroblasts in vitro and to cause an acute lymphosarcoma in susceptible murine hosts. The role of its relative, the bcr/abl gene product, in the etiology of human chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) remains speculative. To assess the transforming properties of the bcr/abl gene product, complementary DNA clones encoding the CML-specific P210 bcr/abl protein were expressed in NIH/3T3 fibroblasts. In contrast to the v-abl oncogene product P160, the P210 bcr/abl gene product did not transform NIH/3T3 cells. Cell lines were isolated that expressed high levels of the P210 bcr/abl protein but were morphologically normal. During the course of these experiments, a transforming recombinant of bcr/abl was isolated which fuses gag determinants derived from helper virus to the NH2-terminus of the bcr/abl protein. This suggests that a property of viral gag sequences, probably myristylation-dependent membrane localization, must be provided to bcr/abl for it to transform fibroblasts.
A quantitative system has been developed for the study of transformation of human diploid fibroblasts in culture by two oncogenic viruses, SV40 and the E46 strain of adeno 7-SV40 "hybrid" virus. Seven of the eleven cell strains derived from human skin biopsies when infected with SV40 (10(9) tissue culture infective doses per milliliter) gave rise to transformed colonies with approximately the same frequency (0.03 percent). Two strains derived from patients with Fanconi's anemia, an autosomal recessive disease associated with a high incidence of chromosome abnormalities and spontaneous neoplasms, gave values more than ten times higher. Two strains from persons heterozygous for this gene were also considerably more susceptible to viral transformation.
In an attempt to establish a model of the healthy carrier state in hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections, transgenic mice expressing HBV genes were produced. Fertilized one-cell eggs were microinjected with subgenomic fragments of HBV DNA containing the coding regions for the HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) and pre-S and X antigens. Either the normal (HBV) or metallothionein promoters were used to obtain expression of the HBV genes. There was no evidence of viral replication or tissue pathology. The integrated HBV DNA sequences were inherited in a normal Mendelian fashion. Three of 16 transgenic mice expressed HBV-encoded gene products to which they were immunologically tolerant. Expression was not tissue specific and may be influenced by the genomic integration site and cellular factors. Both HBsAg and pre-S antigen were detectable within the cytoplasm of hepatocytes and renal tubular epithelial cells. High serum concentrations of HBsAg were detectable and the secreted product appeared authentic as judged by mean density, morphology, mean particle diameter, polypeptide composition, and antigenicity. The absence of tissue pathology in these immunologically tolerant animals supports the hypothesis that cellular injury under these conditions is not a direct consequence of expression of the pre-S or HBs regions of the HBV genome.
Amino acid sequence homology was found between viral and host encephalitogenic protein. Immune responses were then generated in rabbits by using the viral peptide that cross-reacts with the self protein. Mononuclear cell infiltration was observed in the central nervous systems of animals immunized with the viral peptide. Myelin basic protein (MBP) is a host protein whose encephalitogenic site of ten amino acids induces experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. By computer analysis, hepatitis B virus polymerase (HBVP) was found to share six consecutive amino acids with the encephalitogenic site of rabbit MBP. Rabbits given injections of a selected eight- or ten-amino acid peptide from HBVP made antibody that reacted with the predetermined sequences of HBVP and also with native MBP. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from the immunized rabbits proliferated when incubated with either MBP or HBVP. Central nervous system tissue taken from these rabbits had a histologic picture reminiscent of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. Thus, viral infection may trigger the production of antibodies and mononuclear cells that cross-react with self proteins by a mechanism termed molecular mimicry. Tissue injury from the resultant autoallergic event can take place in the absence of the infectious virus that initiated the immune response.
Dengue virus enters a host cell when the viral envelope glycoprotein, E, binds to a receptor and responds by conformational rearrangement to the reduced pH of an endosome. The conformational change induces fusion of viral and host-cell membranes. A three-dimensional structure of the soluble E ectodomain (sE) in its trimeric, postfusion state reveals striking differences from the dimeric, prefusion form. The elongated trimer bears three 'fusion loops' at one end, to insert into the host-cell membrane. Their structure allows us to model directly how these fusion loops interact with a lipid bilayer. The protein folds back on itself, directing its carboxy terminus towards the fusion loops. We propose a fusion mechanism driven by essentially irreversible conformational changes in E and facilitated by fusion-loop insertion into the outer bilayer leaflet. Specific features of the folded-back structure suggest strategies for inhibiting flavivirus entry.
Selective destruction of small lymphocytes in the thymusdependent areas of lymph nodes and thymocytes was observed in mice infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. These changes were clearly evident in lymphoid and splenic tissue 3 days after infection and in the thymus by day 7. The destructive changes paralleled growth of the virus in these organs. The findings show that infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus can temporarily cause the equivalent effect of neonatal thymectomy, that is, a "viral thymectomy," which appears to be related to the ability of this virus to cause persistent infection.
Primary cultures of epithelial cells were grown from the tonsils and adenoids of patients with diseases not related to Epstein-Barr virus. The cells could not be infected by Epstein-Barr virus. Fluorescein-labeled Epstein-Barr virus and a cytofluorograph were then used to show that the epithelial cells do not have detectable receptors for the virus. However, implantation with Epstein-Barr virus receptors gave the cells the ability to bind the labeled virus. One to 5 percent of receptor-implanted cells exposed to the transforming B95-8 substrain of the virus expressed Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen. The early and viral capsid Epstein-Barr virus-determined antigens were not detected in the virus-infected cultures. The results show that normal human epithelial cells from the nasopharynx become susceptible to infection by Epstein-Barr virus when the membrane barrier resulting from the lack of viral receptors is overcome by receptor implantation.
Studies of the mutagenic action required for specific chemicals to produce benign or malignant tumours suggest that in mouse skin at least two genetic events occur before carcinoma formation. The isolation of an activated form of the c-rasH gene from skin papillomas has provided evidence that this gene may be a target for the first mutation, which could constitute the initiating mutation in skin carcinogenesis. In vitro studies indicate that the v-rasH gene of Harvey murine sarcoma virus (Ha-MSV), a replication-defective transforming retrovirus, could impart a conditional initiated phenotype on cultured keratinocytes by blocking their ability to differentiate terminally and arresting them in a late basal cell stage of maturation. We now show that when the Ha-MSV v-rasH gene is introduced into cultured keratinocytes by a defective retroviral vector, skin grafts constructed with cells carrying the mutated ras oncogene produce papillomas on athymic nude mouse recipients. Furthermore, the expression of the exogenous oncogene seems to be regulated at the transcriptional level in the differentiated portions of the benign tumour.
The recent discovery of natural immunity to the hepatitis C virus and vaccine efficacy in the chimpanzee challenge model has allowed optimism about the development of at least a partly effective vaccine against this heterogeneous pathogen that is responsible for much of the chronic liver disease around the world. The immune systems of some infected individuals can spontaneously clear the virus, whereas other people need treatment with antivirals that work partly by stimulating humoral and cellular immune responses. Therefore, therapeutic vaccine strategies are also being pursued to improve treatment outcome.
The avian sarcoma virus 16 (ASV 16) is a retrovirus that induces hemangiosarcomas in chickens. Analysis of the ASV 16 genome revealed that it encodes an oncogene that is derived from the cellular gene for the catalytic subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase). The gene is referred to as v-p3k, and like its cellular counterpart c-p3k, it is a potent transforming gene in cultured chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEFs). The products of the viral and cellular p3k genes have PI 3-kinase activity. CEFs transformed with either gene showed elevated levels of phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate and activation of Akt kinase.
Transgenic expression of just four defined transcription factors (c-Myc, Klf4, Oct4 and Sox2) is sufficient to reprogram somatic cells to a pluripotent state. The resulting induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells resemble embryonic stem cells in their properties and potential to differentiate into a spectrum of adult cell types. Current reprogramming strategies involve retroviral, lentiviral, adenoviral and plasmid transfection to deliver reprogramming factor transgenes. Although the latter two methods are transient and minimize the potential for insertion mutagenesis, they are currently limited by diminished reprogramming efficiencies. piggyBac (PB) transposition is host-factor independent, and has recently been demonstrated to be functional in various human and mouse cell lines. The PB transposon/transposase system requires only the inverted terminal repeats flanking a transgene and transient expression of the transposase enzyme to catalyse insertion or excision events. Here we demonstrate successful and efficient reprogramming of murine and human embryonic fibroblasts using doxycycline-inducible transcription factors delivered by PB transposition. Stable iPS cells thus generated express characteristic pluripotency markers and succeed in a series of rigorous differentiation assays. By taking advantage of the natural propensity of the PB system for seamless excision, we show that the individual PB insertions can be removed from established iPS cell lines, providing an invaluable tool for discovery. In addition, we have demonstrated the traceless removal of reprogramming factors joined with viral 2A sequences delivered by a single transposon from murine iPS lines. We anticipate that the unique properties of this virus-independent simplification of iPS cell production will accelerate this field further towards full exploration of the reprogramming process and future cell-based therapies.
The Tax transactivator of the human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) exhibits oncogenic properties. A screen for proteins interacting with Tax yielded a complementary DNA (cDNA) encoding the human Int-6 protein. In mice, the Int-6 gene can be converted into a putative dominant negative oncogene after retroviral insertion. Here, Int-6 was localized in the cell nucleus to give a speckled staining pattern superposed to that of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein. The binding of Tax to Int-6 caused its redistribution from the nuclear domains to the cytoplasm. Thus, Int-6 is a component of the PML nuclear bodies and Tax disrupts its normal cellular localization by binding to it.
Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) manipulates fundamental host cell processes in sophisticated ways to achieve optimum replicative efficiency. Recent studies have provided new details on the molecular interactions of HIV-1 with its host cell. For example, HIV-1 encodes a protein that regulates transcriptional elongation by interacting with a cellular cyclin-dependent kinase, another that activates the specific nuclear export of viral RNA, and several others that affect the intracellular trafficking of viral and host cell proteins. Detailed analysis of the interplay between these viral proteins and normal cellular activities has provided new insights into central questions of virology and host cell biology.
Particles of complete polyoma virus are produced in competent Bacillus subtilis incubated with DNA isolated from purified, conventionally grown polyoma virus. The virus grown in B. subtilis is biologically identical to polyoma virus produced by animal cells. Quantitative parameters of the system have been established, and fluctuation tests indicate that viral replication occurs within the infected bacteria.
Retroviral vectors containing CD4 and an appropriate chemokine receptor were evaluated for the ability to transduce cells infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). These CD4-chemokine receptor pseudotypes were able to target HIV- and SIV-infected cell lines and monocyte-derived macrophages in a manner that corresponded to the specificity of the viral envelope glycoprotein for its CD4-chemokine receptor complex. This approach could offer a way to deliver antiviral genes directly to HIV-infected cells in vivo and could provide an additional treatment strategy in conjunction with existing antiviral therapies.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae contains a protein which is functionally similar to the mammalian TATA element-binding transcription factor, TFIID. The yeast factor substitutes for TFIID in a mammalian RNA polymerase II in vitro transcription system, forms a stable preinitiation complex on the Adenovirus-2 major late promoter, and binds specifically to the TATA boxes of the viral promoter and the yeast CYC1 promoter. Interestingly, the yeast factor promotes initiation at a distance from the TATA element typical of a mammalian system.
The human T-lymphotropic viruses types I and II (HTLV-I and -II) have been etiologically linked with certain T-cell leukemias and lymphomas that characteristically display membrane receptors for interleukin-2. The relation of these viruses to this growth factor receptor has remained unexplained. It is demonstrated here that introduction of the trans-activator (tat) gene of HTLV-II into the Jurkat T-lymphoid cell line results in the induction of both interleukin-2 receptor and interleukin-2 gene expression. The coexpression of these cellular genes may play a role in the altering T-cell growth following retroviral infection.
The translation product of the gag gene of mammalian type-c- RNA viruses is a 65,000-68,000 molecular weight precursor polypeptide (Pr65) whose cleavage leads to the formation of four virion proteins, p30, p15, p12 and p10. An immunological approach has been used to establish the arrangement of the sequences coding for these proteins within the viral genome as (5') p15-p12-p30-p10 (3').
A recombinant beta-galactosidase gene has been expressed in a specific arterial segment in vivo by direct infection with a murine amphotropic retroviral vector or by DNA transfection with the use of liposomes. Several cell types in the vessel wall were transduced, including endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells. After retroviral infection, a recombinant reporter gene was expressed for at least 5 months, and no helper virus was detected. Recombinant gene expression achieved by direct retroviral infection or liposome-mediated DNA transfection was limited to the site of infection and was absent from liver, lung, kidney, and spleen. These results demonstrate that site-specific gene expression can be achieved by direct gene transfer in vivo and could be applied to the treatment of such human diseases as atherosclerosis or cancer.
Nearly 200 million individuals worldwide are currently infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). Combination therapy with pegylated interferon and ribavirin, the latest treatment for HCV infection, elicits long-term responses in only about 50% of patients treated. No effective alternative treatments exist for non-responders. Consequently, significant efforts are continuing to maximize response to combination therapy. However, rational therapy optimization is precluded by the poor understanding of the mechanism(s) of ribavirin action against HCV. Ribavirin alone induces either a transient early decline or no decrease in HCV viral load, but in combination with interferon it significantly improves long-term response rates. Here we present a model of HCV dynamics in which, on the basis of growing evidence, we assume that ribavirin decreases HCV infectivity in an infected individual in a dose-dependent manner. The model quantitatively predicts long-term response rates to interferon monotherapy and combination therapy, fits observed patterns of HCV RNA decline in patients undergoing therapy, reconciles conflicting observations of the influence of ribavirin on HCV RNA decline, provides key insights into the mechanism of ribavirin action against HCV, and establishes a framework for rational therapy optimization.
A common cellular sequence was independently transduced by avian carcinoma virus MH2 (v-mht) and murine sarcoma virus (MSV) 3611 (v-raf). Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of v-mht and v-raf revealed a region of homology that extends over 969 nucleotides. The homology between the corresponding amino acids was about 95 percent with only 19 of 323 amino acids being different. With this example, 5 of the 19 known different viral onc genes have been observed in viruses of different taxonomic groups. These data indicate that (i) the number of cellular proto-onc genes is limited because, like other viruses of different taxonomic groups, MH2 and MSV 3611 have transduced the same onc gene-specific sequences from different cell species and (ii) that specific deletion and linkage of the same proto-onc sequences to different viral vector elements affect the oncogenic potential of the resulting viruses. The difference in transformation capabilities of MH2 and MSV 3611 serves as an example.
Simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen, a multifunctional protein necessary for lytic growth and cell transformation, is located mainly in the nucleus and in small amounts on the cell surface (surface T). Surface T may have a passive role in SV40 tumour rejection by cytotoxic T cells as a component of SV40-TSTA (tumour-specific transplantation antigen). The unusual induction of this immune response by immunizing mice with soluble T antigen led us to investigate the in vitro binding of T antigen to the surface of living cells in more detail. Our results show that native surface T and a minor subset of large T antigen having a high cell surface binding affinity in vitro, behave like integral membrane proteins. Several viral proteins including SV40 T antigen and cellular proteins seem to be linked to fatty acids (acylation). To analyse whether this mechanism is involved in the stable attachment of in vitro-bound T antigen to the plasma membrane of living target cells, we determined the degree of labelling of this molecule by using target cells prelabelled with 3H-fatty acid. Here we report that T antigen extracted from unlabelled SV40-transformed cells (SV80) becomes 3H-labelled after in vitro binding to the cell surface of 3H-palmitate-prelabelled HeLa cells. These results suggest that T antigen attached externally to living cells, may be anchored by tightly linked lipids.
Reovirus type 3, passaged in pancreatic beta-cell cultures, produced an insulitis when inoculated into 1- to 2-week-old mice. By means of a double-label antibody technique, in which we used fluorescein-labeled antibody to reovirus and rhodamine-labeled antibody to insulin, reovirus antigens were found in beta cells. By electron microscopy, viral particles in different stages of morphogenesis were observed in insulin-containing beta cells but not glucagon-containing alpha cells. The infection resulted in destruction of beta cells, reduction in the insulin content of the pancreas, and alteration in the host's capacity to respond normally to a glucose tolerance test.
The genetic and molecular mechanisms that determine the capacity of a virus to utilize distinct pathways of spread in an infected host were examined by using reoviruses. Both reovirus type 1 and reovirus type 3 spread to the spinal cord following inoculation into the hindlimb or forelimb footpad of newborn mice. For type 3 this spread is through nerves and occurs via the microtubule-associated system of fast axonal transport. By contrast, type 1 spreads to the spinal cord through the bloodstream. With the use of reassortant viruses containing various combinations of double-stranded RNA segments (genes) derived from type 1 and type 3, the viral S1 double-stranded RNA segment was shown to be responsible for determining the capacity of reoviruses to spread to the central nervous system through these distinct pathways.
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a debilitating disease of unknown etiology that is estimated to affect 17 million people worldwide. Studying peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from CFS patients, we identified DNA from a human gammaretrovirus, xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus (XMRV), in 68 of 101 patients (67%) as compared to 8 of 218 (3.7%) healthy controls. Cell culture experiments revealed that patient-derived XMRV is infectious and that both cell-associated and cell-free transmission of the virus are possible. Secondary viral infections were established in uninfected primary lymphocytes and indicator cell lines after their exposure to activated PBMCs, B cells, T cells, or plasma derived from CFS patients. These findings raise the possibility that XMRV may be a contributing factor in the pathogenesis of CFS.
Bluetongue virus (BTV), a representative of the orbivirus genus of the Reoviridae, is considerably larger (at 80 nm across), and structurally more complex, than any virus for which we have comprehensive structural information. Orbiviruses infect mammalian hosts through insect vectors and cause economically important diseases of domesticated animals. They possess a segmented double-stranded RNA genome within a capsid composed of four major types of polypeptide chains. An outer layer of VP2 and VP5 is removed as the virus enters the target cell, to leave an intact core within the cell. This core is 70 nm across and composed of 780 copies of VP7 (M(r) 38K) that, as trimers, form 260 'bristly' capsomeres clothing an inner scaffold constructed from VP3 (M(r) 103K). We report here the crystal structure of VP7 from BTV serotype 10, which reveals a molecular architecture not seen previously in viral structural proteins. Each subunit consists of two domains, one a beta-sandwich, the other a bundle of alpha-helices, and a short carboxy-terminal arm which might tie trimers together during capsid formation. A concentration of methionine residues at the core of the molecule could provide plasticity, relieving structural mismatches during assembly.
The genome of adenoviruses is a double-stranded linear DNA molecule with inverted terminal repeats about 100 base pairs (bp) in length and a terminal protein covalently linked to the 5' nucleotide of each strand. Both of these features permit the formation of DNA circles, the inverted repeats allowing the circularization of single-stranded DNA and the terminal protein the joining of one or more molecules to yield double-stranded circles or concatemers. However, although the existence of covalently closed circles has been postulated, double-stranded viral DNA purified from virions or infected cells by conventional methods (that is, using proteases and phenol or chloroform) has always been obtained in a linear form. Here, we present evidence for the existence in adenovirus 5 (Ad5) infected cells of novel structures resulting from covalent head-to-tail joining of viral DNA molecules and show that these structures are due at least in part to the formation of covalently closed circles.
Transcription factor DRTF1/E2F coordinates events in the cell cycle with transcription by its cyclical interactions with important regulators of cellular proliferation like the retinoblastoma tumour-suppressor gene product (Rb) and the Rb-related protein, p107 (refs 1-8). DRTF1/E2F binding sites occur in the control regions of genes involved in proliferation, and both Rb and p107 repress the capacity of DRTF1/E2F to activate transcription (refs 11, 12; M. Zamanian and N.B.L.T., manuscript submitted). Mutant Rb proteins isolated from tumour cells are unable to bind DRTF1/E2F (refs 11-13), and certain viral oncoproteins, such as adenovirus E1A, sequester Rb and p107 in order to free active DRTF1/E2F (refs 5, 11, 12, 14, 15). Here we report the isolation of a complementary DNA encoding DRTF1-polypeptide-1 (DP-1), a major sequence-specific binding protein that is present in DRTF1/E2F, including Rb- and p107-associated DRTF1/E2F. The DNA-binding domain of DP-1 contains a region that resembles that of E2F-1 (refs 16, 17), and recognizes the same sequence. DRTF1/E2F thus appears to contain at least two sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins.
RNA silencing processes are guided by small RNAs that are derived from double-stranded RNA. To probe for function of RNA silencing during infection of human cells by a DNA virus, we recorded the small RNA profile of cells infected by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). We show that EBV expresses several microRNA (miRNA) genes. Given that miRNAs function in RNA silencing pathways either by targeting messenger RNAs for degradation or by repressing translation, we identified viral regulators of host and/or viral gene expression.
The antigenic evolution of influenza A (H3N2) virus was quantified and visualized from its introduction into humans in 1968 to 2003. Although there was remarkable correspondence between antigenic and genetic evolution, significant differences were observed: Antigenic evolution was more punctuated than genetic evolution, and genetic change sometimes had a disproportionately large antigenic effect. The method readily allows monitoring of antigenic differences among vaccine and circulating strains and thus estimation of the effects of vaccination. Further, this approach offers a route to predicting the relative success of emerging strains, which could be achieved by quantifying the combined effects of population level immune escape and viral fitness on strain evolution.
Escape from T cell-mediated immune responses affects the ongoing evolution of rapidly evolving viruses such as HIV. By applying statistical approaches that account for phylogenetic relationships among viral sequences, we show that viral lineage effects rather than immune escape often explain apparent human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-mediated immune-escape mutations defined by older analysis methods. Phylogenetically informed methods identified immune-susceptible locations with greatly improved accuracy, and the associations we identified with these methods were experimentally validated. This approach has practical implications for understanding the impact of host immunity on pathogen evolution and for defining relevant variants for inclusion in vaccine antigens.
Borna virus replicated persistently in the brains of rats, causing frenzied and apathetic behavioral states in sequence but no mortality. The transient frenzied behavior was caused by an immune-mediated, cytolytic, encephalitic response that was unexpectedly self-limiting. Cessation of active pathological processes coincided with the onset of the passive phase of the disease. This study thus demonstrates suppression of virus-specific inflammation despite continuous viral replication and describes a new mechanism by which chronic encephalitis may become established.
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) shows extensive genetic variation and undergoes rapid evolution. The fidelity of purified HIV-1 reverse transcriptase was measured during DNA polymerization in vitro by means of three different assays. Reverse transcriptase from HIV-1 introduced base-substitution errors in DNA from the bacteriophage phi X174 amber3 at estimated frequencies of 1/2000 to 1/4000. Analyses of misincorporation rates opposite a single template adenine residue showed that HIV-1 reverse transcriptase catalyzed nucleotide mismatches with a specificity of A:C much greater than A:G greater than A:A. The high error rate of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase in vitro translates to approximately five to ten errors per HIV-1 genome per round of replication in vivo. This high error rate suggests that misincorporation by HIV-1 reverse transcriptase is, at least in part, responsible for the hypermutability of the AIDS virus. The specificity of misincorporation may provide a basis for the systematic construction of antiviral nucleosides.
Double-stranded RNA, made as an intermediary substance in the replication of most, if not all, viruses, may play a much more important role in the pathogenesis and the recovery from virus infections than has hitherto been suspected. Apparently, dsRNA is used by both the challenge virus and the host cell in an attempt to gain "molecular control." Double-stranded RNA exerts a set of effects, which may be well balanced, not only at the level of the individual cell but also at the complex assemblage of these cells termed the organism (Fig. 1). In the cell, interferon synthesis is triggered, although interferon mRNA translation may not occur if dsRNA shuts off protein synthesis too quickly. In the whole organism, the disease severity will depend on how certain toxic reactions evoked by infection (such as cell necrosis and fever) are counterbalanced by an increase in the host defense mechanisms (for example, immune responsiveness and interferon production). Many aspects of the response, relating to either progress of, or recovery from, the disease, can be explained on the basis of a dsRNA. In addition to drawing attention to the biodynamic role of dsRNA, our hypothesis suggests specific experimental vectors designed to enhance our information on the molecular basis of the morbid process which occurs with viral infection. Finally, we suggest that, although the dsRNA molecule may be viewed as a rather simple unit structure, the opportunity for further diversity in the biological activity of a given dsRNA molecule always exists. Namely, each deviation from a perfectly double-helical arrangement introduces the possibility for emphasizing one biological reactivity at the expense of another. This latter structure-activity property may partially account for the extreme apparent diversity, commonly encountered, in the presentations of virologic illness. Appendix note added in proof. Subsequent to submission of this text, we have found that the potent mitogen effect of dsRNA for lymphocytes (murine and human) is also exquisitively sensitive to the fidelity in base pairing of the input polymer pair (59). For example, infrequent "loops" (one nucleotide per 20 base pairs) in an otherwise perfectly helical rI(n) (.) rC(n) molecule [for example, rI(n) (.) r(C(19,)U)(n)] strongly changes its mitogenic properties. This observation, which supports our thesis that a "fine structure" term can be developed for other reactions triggered by dsRNA's in biological systems, emphasizes that diverse biological effects may be encountered with an ostensibly uniform family of dsRNA's.
Results from several experimental systems suggest that cells from one tissue type can form other tissue types after transplantation. This could be due to the presence of multipotential or several types of adult stem cells in donor tissues, or alternatively, to fusion of donor and recipient cells. In a model of tyrosinaemia type I, mice with mutations in the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase gene (Fah-/-) regain normal liver function after transplantation of Fah+/+ bone marrow cells, and form regenerating liver nodules with normal histology that express Fah. Here we show that these hepatic nodules contain more mutant than wild-type Fah alleles, and that their hepatocytes express both donor and host genes, consistent with polyploid genome formation by fusion of host and donor cells. Using bone marrow cells marked with integrated foamy virus vectors that express green fluorescent protein, we identify common proviral junctions in hepatic nodules and haematopoietic cells. We also show that the haematopoietic donor genome adopts a more hepatocyte-specific expression profile after cell fusion, as the wild-type Fah gene was activated and the pan-haematopoietic CD45 marker was no longer expressed.
Chronic immunodeficiency virus infections are characterized by dysfunctional cellular and humoral antiviral immune responses. As such, immune modulatory therapies that enhance and/or restore the function of virus-specific immunity may protect from disease progression. Here we investigate the safety and immune restoration potential of blockade of the co-inhibitory receptor programmed death 1 (PD-1) during chronic simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection in macaques. We demonstrate that PD-1 blockade using an antibody to PD-1 is well tolerated and results in rapid expansion of virus-specific CD8 T cells with improved functional quality. This enhanced T-cell immunity was seen in the blood and also in the gut, a major reservoir of SIV infection. PD-1 blockade also resulted in proliferation of memory B cells and increases in SIV envelope-specific antibody. These improved immune responses were associated with significant reductions in plasma viral load and also prolonged the survival of SIV-infected macaques. Blockade was effective during the early (week 10) as well as late ( approximately week 90) phases of chronic infection even under conditions of severe lymphopenia. These results demonstrate enhancement of both cellular and humoral immune responses during a pathogenic immunodeficiency virus infection by blocking a single inhibitory pathway and identify a novel therapeutic approach for control of human immunodeficiency virus infections.
The myelocytomatosis viruses are a family of replication-defective avian retroviruses that cause a variety of tumours in chickens and transform both fibroblasts and macrophages in culture through the activity of their oncogene v-myc. A closely related gene (c-myc) is found in vertebrate animals and is thought to be the progenitor of v-myc. Changes in the expression and perhaps the structure of c-myc have been implicated in the genesis of avian, murine and human tumours (for a review, see ref. 15). Elucidation of the mechanisms by which v-myc and c-myc might elicit tumorigenesis requires identification of the proteins encoded by these genes. To this end, we have expressed a portion of v-myc in a bacterial host and used the resulting protein to raise antisera that react with myc proteins. We report here that v-myc and c-myc encode closely related proteins with molecular weights (MWs) of approximately 58,000. Integration of retroviral DNA near or within c-myc in avian lymphomas apparently enhances expression of the gene. Here we have used cells from one such tumour to identify the protein encoded by c-myc and find that the coding domain for the gene is probably intact.
The chromosomal location of one of the two murine leukemia virus-inducing loci of AKR mice has been determined. The locus, which appears to be the integrated genome of the virus, is designated Akv-1, and is on linkage group 1, 12 map units from Gpi-1, with gene order c-Gpi-1-Akv-1. This identification of a closely linked gene whose phenotype is independent of virus expression should facilitate analysis of the biologic importance of the Akv-1 locus.
Reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotency, thereby creating induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, promises to transform regenerative medicine. Most instances of direct reprogramming have been achieved by forced expression of defined factors using multiple viral vectors. However, such iPS cells contain a large number of viral vector integrations, any one of which could cause unpredictable genetic dysfunction. Whereas c-Myc is dispensable for reprogramming, complete elimination of the other exogenous factors is also desired because ectopic expression of either Oct4 (also known as Pou5f1) or Klf4 can induce dysplasia. Two transient transfection-reprogramming methods have been published to address this issue. However, the efficiency of both approaches is extremely low, and neither has been applied successfully to human cells so far. Here we show that non-viral transfection of a single multiprotein expression vector, which comprises the coding sequences of c-Myc, Klf4, Oct4 and Sox2 linked with 2A peptides, can reprogram both mouse and human fibroblasts. Moreover, the transgene can be removed once reprogramming has been achieved. iPS cells produced with this non-viral vector show robust expression of pluripotency markers, indicating a reprogrammed state confirmed functionally by in vitro differentiation assays and formation of adult chimaeric mice. When the single-vector reprogramming system was combined with a piggyBac transposon, we succeeded in establishing reprogrammed human cell lines from embryonic fibroblasts with robust expression of pluripotency markers. This system minimizes genome modification in iPS cells and enables complete elimination of exogenous reprogramming factors, efficiently providing iPS cells that are applicable to regenerative medicine, drug screening and the establishment of disease models.
Pseudoknot formation folds the 3' ends of many plant viral genomic RNAs into structures that resemble transfer RNA in global folding and in their reactivity to transfer RNA-specific proteins. The solution structure of the pseudoknotted T arm and acceptor arm of the transfer RNA-like structure of turnip yellow mosaic virus (TYMV) was determined by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The molecule is stabilized by the hairpin formed by the 5' end of the RNA, and by the intricate interactions related to the loops of the pseudoknot. Loop 1 spans the major groove of the helix with only two of its four nucleotides. Loop 2, which crosses the minor groove, interacts closely with its opposing helix, in particular through hydrogen bonds with a highly conserved adenine. The structure resulting from this interaction between the minor groove and single-stranded RNA at helical junctions displays internal mobility, which may be a general feature of RNA pseudoknots that regulates their interaction with proteins or other RNA molecules.
Like other viruses that infect primate cells, the human T lymphotropic virus-I (HTLV-I) stimulates production of some host cell proteins. In particular, HTLV-I infected T cells synthesize interleukin-2 receptor alpha (IL-2R alpha) chain, which is probably induced through the mediation of the tat-I gene product of the virus. Activated T cells contain a trascription factor called NF-kappa B, which stimulates the expression of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) by binding to an 11-base-pair enhancer sequence called kappa B. We have now found evidence that a similar transcription factor is involved in the induction of IL-2R alpha expression by tat-I. We have identified a sequence upstream of IL-2R alpha which is the same as the kappa B site at 9 of 11 base pairs, competes for binding to the kappa B sequence, and serves as a tat-I responsive element when multiple copies are inserted upstream of a heterologous promoter. The tat-I product also induces kappa B and the IL-2R alpha kappa B binding activity in transfected Jurkat T lymphoid leukaemia cells. Both HTLV-I and HIV-1 thus interact with NF-kappa B-like transcription factors which might normally regulate expression of a growth factor receptor gene.
Somatic cell hybrids of Burkitt lymphoblastoid cells, from which Epstein-Barr virus can be recovered, were examined for the presence of virus DNA by DNA-RNA hybridization. Four clones of hybrid cells, each negative for virus antigens by immunofluorescence, contained virus DNA in varying genomic equivalents. The number of virus genome equivalents increased in the hybrid cells after induction of virus with iododeoxyuridine.
Lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV) is a human retrovirus first isolated from a homosexual patient with lymphadenopathy syndrome, frequently a prodrome or a benign form of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Other LAV isolates have subsequently been recovered from patients with AIDS or pre-AIDS and all available data are consistent with the virus being the causative agent of AIDS. The virus is propagated on activated T lymphocytes and has a tropism for the T-cell subset OKT4 (ref. 6), in which it induces a cytopathic effect. The major core protein of LAV is antigenically unrelated to other known retroviral antigens. LAV-like viruses have more recently been independently isolated from patients with AIDS and pre-AIDS. These viruses, called human T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma virus type III (HTLV-III) and AIDS-associated retrovirus (ARV), seem to have many characteristics in common with LAV and probably represent independent isolates of the LAV prototype. We have sought to characterize LAV by the molecular cloning of its genome. A cloned LAV complementary DNA was used to screen a library of recombinant phages constructed from the genomic DNA of LAV-infected T lymphocytes. Two families of clones were characterized which differ in a restriction site. The viral genome is longer than any other human retroviral genome (9.1-9.2 kilobases).
Apart from the retroviral gag, pol and env the HIV genome contains the F (3' orf) gene which encodes a polypeptide of 206 amino acids which is myristylated at the N-terminal and whose function is unknown. We have expressed the F gene in Escherichia coli and from a recombinant vaccinia virus, VVTGfHIV. The F-protein produced in VVTGfHIV-infected mammalian cells is myristilated, and is phosphorylated by protein kinase C at a residue close to the N-terminus like pp60-src (ref. 5). Purified bacterial F-protein also shows the GTPase, autophosphorylation and GTP-binding activities reported for the ras gene product. Furthermore, we show that expression of F in a CD4+ cell line down-regulates the CD4(T4) antigen. These results suggest that F is important in the pathophysiology of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).
Ribonucleotide reductase, an essential enzyme for the synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides, is formed by the association of two nonidentical subunits in almost all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. The same model probably holds for the herpes simplex virus (HSV)-encoded ribonucleotide reductase; two polypeptides of relative molecular mass 136,000 (136K; H1) and 40K (H2) (referred to elsewhere as RR1 and RR2; see for example, Dutia et al.) have been associated with the viral enzyme by both genetic and immunological studies. Furthermore, DNA sequence analyses have shown significant stretches of amino-acid homology between these viral polypeptides and those of, respectively, subunit 1 (ref. 12) and subunit 2 (ref. 13) of the Escherichia coli and mammalian enzymes. To assess the involvement of the 40K polypeptide in reductase activity, we synthesized a nonapeptide corresponding to the sequence of its carboxy terminus with the intention of raising neutralizing antibodies specific for the viral activity (E.A.C. et al., in preparation). We report here the unexpected finding that the nonapeptide itself specifically inhibits the HSV ribonucleotide reductase activity in a reversible, non-competitive manner, and we suggest that it does this by impairment of the correct association of the two subunits. This phenomenon emphasizes the potential usefulness of synthetic peptides in probing critical sites involved in macromolecular interactions.
Human T cell leukemia virus type-I (HTLV-I) is the etiologic agent of adult T cell leukemia and has also been suggested to be involved in other diseases such as chronic arthritis or myelopathy. To elucidate pathological roles of the virus in disease, transgenic mice were produced that carry the HTLV-I genome. At 2 to 3 months of age, many of the mice developed chronic arthritis resembling rheumatoid arthritis. Synovial and periarticular inflammation with articular erosion caused by invasion of granulation tissues were marked. These observations suggest a possibility that HTLV-I is one of the etiologic agents of chronic arthritis in humans.
Better characterization of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) in patients with primary infection has important implications for the development of an acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) vaccine because vaccine strategies should target viral isolates with the properties of transmitted viruses. In five HIV-1 seroconverters, the viral phenotype was found to be uniformly macrophage-tropic and non-syncytium-inducing. Furthermore, the viruses were genotypically homogeneous within each patient, but a common signature sequence was not discernible among transmitted viruses. In the two cases where the sexual partners were also studied, the sequences of the transmitted viruses matched best with minor variants in the blood of the transmitters. There was also a stronger pressure to conserve sequences in gp120 than in gp41, nef, and p17, suggesting that a selective mechanism is involved in transmission.
Double-stranded RNA viruses have an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity associated with the viral particles which is indispensable for their replication cycle. Using the yeast L-A double-stranded RNA virus we have investigated the mechanism by which the virus encapsidates its genomic RNA and RNA polymerase. The L-A gag gene encodes the principal viral coat protein and the overlapping pol gene is expressed as a gag-pol fusion protein which is formed by a -1 ribosomal frameshift. Here we show that Gag alone is sufficient for virus particle formation, but that it fails to package the viral single-stranded RNA genome. Encapsidation of the viral RNA requires only a part of the Pol region (the N-terminal quarter), which is presumably distinct from the RNA polymerase domain. Given that the Pol region has single-stranded RNA-binding activity, these results are consistent with our L-A virus encapsidation model: the Pol region of the fusion protein binds specifically to the viral genome (+) strand, and the N-terminal gag-encoded region primes polymerization of Gag to form the capsid, thus ensuring the packaging of both the viral genome and the RNA polymerase.
The liver-expressed microRNA-122 (miR-122) is essential for hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA accumulation in cultured liver cells, but its potential as a target for antiviral intervention has not been assessed. We found that treatment of chronically infected chimpanzees with a locked nucleic acid (LNA)-modified oligonucleotide (SPC3649) complementary to miR-122 leads to long-lasting suppression of HCV viremia, with no evidence of viral resistance or side effects in the treated animals. Furthermore, transcriptome and histological analyses of liver biopsies demonstrated derepression of target mRNAs with miR-122 seed sites, down-regulation of interferon-regulated genes, and improvement of HCV-induced liver pathology. The prolonged virological response to SPC3649 treatment without HCV rebound holds promise of a new antiviral therapy with a high barrier to resistance.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small RNA molecules that regulate the stability or the translational efficiency of target messenger RNAs (mRNAs). The latency-associated transcript (LAT) of herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) is the only viral gene expressed during latent infection in neurons. LAT inhibits apoptosis and maintains latency by promoting the survival of infected neurons. No protein product has been attributed to the LAT gene and the mechanism by which LAT protects cells from apoptosis is not yet known. Here we show that a miRNA encoded by the HSV-1 LAT gene confers resistance to apoptosis. Neuroblastoma cells transfected with a fragment of the LAT gene show reduced susceptibility to cell death. The anti-apoptotic function of LAT has been mapped to a region within the first exon. We have identified and characterized a microRNA (miR-LAT) generated from the exon 1 region of the HSV-1 LAT gene. The LAT miRNA was found to accumulate in cells transiently transfected with the LAT gene fragment or infected with a wild-type strain of HSV-1. A mutant virus in which a 372-nucleotide fragment encompassing the mature miRNA was deleted neither protected the infected cells from apoptosis nor generated an miRNA. miR-LAT exerts its anti-apoptotic effect by downregulation of transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1 and SMAD3 expression, both of which are functionally linked in the TGF-beta pathway. Our results suggest that the miRNA encoded by the HSV-1 LAT gene regulates the induction of apoptosis in infected cells by modulation of TGF-beta signalling and thus contributes to the persistence of HSV in a latent form in sensory neurons.
In eukaryotes, 21- to 24-nucleotide-long RNAs engage in sequence-specific interactions that inhibit gene expression by RNA silencing. This process has regulatory roles involving microRNAs and, in plants and insects, it also forms the basis of a defense mechanism directed by small interfering RNAs that derive from replicative or integrated viral genomes. We show that a cellular microRNA effectively restricts the accumulation of the retrovirus primate foamy virus type 1 (PFV-1) in human cells. PFV-1 also encodes a protein, Tas, that suppresses microRNA-directed functions in mammalian cells and displays cross-kingdom antisilencing activities. Therefore, through fortuitous recognition of foreign nucleic acids, cellular microRNAs have direct antiviral effects in addition to their regulatory functions.
The three-dimensional structure of intact human rhinovirus 14 (HRV-14) complexed with Fab fragments (Fab17-IA) from a strongly neutralizing antibody that binds bivalently to the virion has been determined to 4.0 angstrom resolution by a combination of X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy. In contradiction to the most commonly held model of antibody-mediated neutralization, Fab17-IA does not induce a conformational change in the HRV-14 capsid. Instead, the paratope of the antibody undergoes a large conformational change to accommodate the epitope. Unlike any previously described antibody-antigen structure, the conserved framework region of the antibody makes extensive contact with the viral surface. Fab17-IA penetrates deep within the canyon in which the cellular receptor for HRV-14 binds. Hence, it is unlikely that viral quaternary structure evolves merely to evade immune recognition. Instead, the shape and position of the receptor-binding region on a virus probably dictates receptor binding and subsequent uncoating events and has little or no influence on concealing the virus from the immune system.
The respiratory epithelium is a potential site for somatic gene therapy for the common hereditary disorders alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1AT) deficiency and cystic fibrosis. A replication-deficient adenoviral vector (Ad-alpha 1AT) containing an adenovirus major late promoter and a recombinant human alpha 1AT gene was used to infect epithelial cells of the cotton rat respiratory tract in vitro and in vivo. Freshly isolated tracheobronchial epithelial cells infected with Ad-alpha 1AT contained human alpha 1AT messenger RNA transcripts and synthesized and secreted human alpha 1AT. After in vivo intratracheal administration of Ad-alpha 1AT to these rats, human alpha 1AT messenger RNA was observed in the respiratory epithelium, human alpha 1AT was synthesized and secreted by lung tissue, and human alpha 1AT was detected in the epithelial lining fluid for at least 1 week.
The Ty element of yeast represents a class of eukaryotic transposons that show remarkable structural similarity to retroviral proviruses. Recently, these comparisons have been strengthened by a series of observations on the yeast Ty element: Ty transposes via an RNA intermediate; it contains a sequence (Fig. 1) which, when translated, is homologous to a conserved region found in all reverse transcriptases; a fusion protein encoded by Ty is produced by a frameshift event that is directly analogous to the production of Pr180gag-pol in a retrovirus such as Rous sarcoma virus. Here we identify the reverse transcriptase activity that, until now, has been presumed to mediate Ty transposition and show that it is sequestered in virus-like particles that also contain Ty RNA.
Viruses have always been classified according to whether their genome is composed of DNA or RNA. That may be set to change with the discovery that human cytomegalovirus has both a DNA genome and four mRNA transcripts that are produced before the DNA genome is transcribed after infection of the host cell (Bresnahan and Shenk). As Roizman points out in a lively Perspective, finding out what the proteins encoded by these four mRNAs do, and whether other DNA viruses show this sneaky partnering of DNA and RNA, will keep virologists busy for many years to come.
All primate lentiviruses (HIV-1, HIV-2, SIV) encode Nef proteins, which are important for viral replication and pathogenicity in vivo. It is not known how Nef regulates these processes. It has been suggested that Nef protects infected cells from apoptosis and recognition by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Other studies suggest that Nef influences the activation state of the infected cell, thereby enhancing the ability of that cell to support viral replication. Here we show that macrophages that express Nef or are stimulated through the CD40 receptor release a paracrine factor that renders T lymphocytes permissive to HIV-1 infection. This activity requires the upregulation of B-cell receptors involved in the alternative pathway of T-lymphocyte stimulation. T lymphocytes stimulated through this pathway become susceptible to viral infection without progressing through the cell cycle. We identify two proteins, soluble CD23 and soluble ICAM, that are induced from macrophages by Nef and CD40L, and which mediate their effects on lymphocyte permissivity. Our results reveal a mechanism by which Nef expands the cellular reservoir of HIV-1 by permitting the infection of resting T lymphocytes.
The human adenovirus E1B gene encodes a 55-kilodalton protein that inactivates the cellular tumor suppressor protein p53. Here it is shown that a mutant adenovirus that does not express this viral protein can replicate in and lyse p53-deficient human tumor cells but not cells with functional p53. Ectopic expression of the 55-kilodalton EIB protein in the latter cells rendered them sensitive to infection with the mutant virus. Injection of the mutant virus into p53-deficient human cervical carcinomas grown in nude mice caused a significant reduction in tumor size and caused complete regression of 60 percent of the tumors. These data raise the possibility that mutant adenoviruses can be used to treat certain human tumors.
Mathematical models, which are based on a firm understanding of biological interactions, can provide nonintuitive insights into the dynamics of host responses to infectious agents and can suggest new avenues for experimentation. Here, a simple mathematical approach is developed to explore the relation between antiviral immune responses, virus load, and virus diversity. The model results are compared to data on cytotoxic T cell responses and viral diversity in infections with the human T cell leukemia virus (HTLV-1) and the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1).
The crystallographically determined structure of simian virus 40 shows that the 72 pentamers of viral protein VP1, which form the outer shell, have identical conformations except for the C-terminal arms of their subunits. Five arms emerge from each pentamer and insert into neighbouring pentamers. This tying together of standard building blocks allows for the required variability in packing geometry without sacrificing specificity.
A recombinant adenovirus serotype 5 (rAd5) vector-based vaccine for HIV-1 has recently failed in a phase 2b efficacy study in humans. Consistent with these results, preclinical studies have demonstrated that rAd5 vectors expressing simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) Gag failed to reduce peak or setpoint viral loads after SIV challenge of rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) that lacked the protective MHC class I allele Mamu-A*01 (ref. 3). Here we show that an improved T-cell-based vaccine regimen using two serologically distinct adenovirus vectors afforded substantially improved protective efficacy in this challenge model. In particular, a heterologous rAd26 prime/rAd5 boost vaccine regimen expressing SIV Gag elicited cellular immune responses with augmented magnitude, breadth and polyfunctionality as compared with the homologous rAd5 regimen. After SIV(MAC251) challenge, monkeys vaccinated with the rAd26/rAd5 regimen showed a 1.4 log reduction of peak and a 2.4 log reduction of setpoint viral loads as well as decreased AIDS-related mortality as compared with control animals. These data demonstrate that durable partial immune control of a pathogenic SIV challenge for more than 500 days can be achieved by a T-cell-based vaccine in Mamu-A*01-negative rhesus monkeys in the absence of a homologous Env antigen. These findings have important implications for the development of next-generation T-cell-based vaccine candidates for HIV-1.
SAMHD1, an analogue of the murine interferon (IFN)-g-induced gene Mg11 (ref. 1), has recently been identified as a human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) restriction factor that blocks early-stage virus replication in dendritic and other myeloid cells and is the target of the lentiviral protein Vpx, which can relieve HIV-1 restriction. SAMHD1 is also associated with Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome (AGS), an inflammatory encephalopathy characterized by chronic cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis and elevated levels of the antiviral cytokine IFN-a. The pathology associated with AGS resembles congenital viral infection, such as transplacentally acquired HIV. Here we show that human SAMHD1 is a potent dGTP-stimulated triphosphohydrolase that converts deoxynucleoside triphosphates to the constituent deoxynucleoside and inorganic triphosphate. The crystal structure of the catalytic core of SAMHD1 reveals that the protein is dimeric and indicates a molecular basis for dGTP stimulation of catalytic activity against dNTPs. We propose that SAMHD1, which is highly expressed in dendritic cells, restricts HIV-1 replication by hydrolysing the majority of cellular dNTPs, thus inhibiting reverse transcription and viral complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis.
Visna viruses isolated from persistently infected sheep were antigenically distinct from the plaque-purified virus used for inoculation. The selection of antigenic variants under antibody pressure, thought to occur in vivo, was reproduced in sheep cell cultures inoculated with plaque-purified visna virus and maintained in antibody. Antigenic shift may be a mechanism for persistence of virus in slow or recurrent viral infections.
Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) gene expression is controlled by cellular transcription factors and by virally encoded trans-activation proteins of the HIV-1 tat and art/trs genes, which are essential for viral replication. Tat trans-activates HIV-1 gene expression by interacting with the trans-acting response element (TAR) located within the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) (ref. 2). In transient expression assays, tat mediates its effects largely by increasing the steady-state levels of messenger RNA species that contain the TAR sequence at or near their 5' ends, suggesting a function for tat either in transcription or in subsequent RNA processing. The tat gene could also facilitate translation of mRNA containing the TAR sequence. To determine the mechanism of trans-activation by tat, we analysed the structure and rate of synthesis of RNA species directed by the HIV-1 LTR in transient expression assays both in the presence and absence of tat. Although the rate of HIV-1 transcription initiation was not affected by tat, transcriptional elongation beyond position +59 was seen only in the presence of tat. Thus, tat trans-activates HIV-1 transcription by relieving a specific block to transcriptional elongation within the TAR sequence.
Because of the growing incidence of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), the need for studies on animal models is urgent. Infection of chimpanzees with the retroviral agent of human AIDS, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), will have only limited usefulness because chimpanzees are in short supply and do not develop the disease. Among non-human primates, both type D retroviruses and lentiviruses can be responsible for immune deficiencies. The D-type retroviruses, although important pathogens in macaque monkey colonies, are not satisfactory as a model because they differ in genetic structure and pathophysiological properties from the human AIDS viruses. The simian lentivirus, previously referred to as simian T-cell lymphotropic virus type III (STLV-III), now termed simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) is related to HIV by the antigenicity of its proteins and in its main biological properties, such as cytopathic effect and tropism for CD4-bearing cells. Most importantly, SIV induces a disease with remarkable similarity to human AIDS in the common rhesus macaques, which therefore constitute the best animal model currently available. Natural or experimental infection of other monkeys such as African green monkeys or sooty mangabeys has not yet been associated with disease. Molecular approaches of the SIV system will be needed for biological studies and development of vaccines that could be tested in animals. We have cloned and sequenced the complete genome of SIV isolated from a naturally infected macaque that died of AIDS. This SIVMAC appears genetically close to the agent of AIDS in West Africa, HIV-2, but the divergence of the sequences of SIV and HIV-2 is greater than that previously observed between HIV-1 isolates.
The sustained effort towards developing an antibody vaccine against HIV/AIDS has provided much of our understanding of viral immunology. It is generally accepted that one of the main barriers to antibody neutralization of HIV is the array of protective structural carbohydrates that covers the antigens on the virus's surface. Intriguingly, however, recent findings suggest that these carbohydrates, which have evolved to protect HIV and promote its transmission, are also attractive therapeutic targets.
Most cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) not only recognize epitopes of viral or other foreign proteins in association with class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, but also recognize target cells sensitized with short synthetic peptides representing the epitopes. There is increasing evidence that these synthetic peptides associate with the class I molecule both at the cell surface and intracellularly. We have now investigated the effect of a monoclonal antibody specific for HLA-A2 and HLA-B17 (B57/58) molecules (antibody MA2.1)3 on the sensitization of target cells with peptide for lysis by HLA-A2-restricted CTL. Previously, anti-HLA class I monoclonal antibodies have been shown to inhibit the recognition of target cells, infected with influenza A virus, by virus-specific CTL. We find, however, that target cells treated with MA2.1 antibody can be sensitized with peptide for CTL lysis much more rapidly than untreated cells, or at greater than 100-fold lower peptide concentration than that required for sensitization of untreated cells. This implies that the antibody, which is believed to bind to one side of the peptide-binding groove, directly affects the binding of peptide to the HLA-A2 molecule at the cell surface.
B cells can function as antigen-presenting cells and accessory cells for T cell responses. This study evaluated the role of B cells in the induction of protective T cell immunity to a Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV)-induced leukemia (FBL). B cell-deficient mice exhibited significantly reduced tumor-specific CD4+ helper and CD8+ cytotoxic T cell responses after priming with FBL or a recombinant vaccinia virus containing F-MuLV antigens. Moreover, these mice had diminished T cell responses to the vaccinia viral antigens. Tumor-primed T cells transferred into B cell-deficient mice effectively eradicated disseminated FBL. Thus, B cells appear necessary for efficient priming but not expression of tumor and viral T cell immunity.
The incidence of 3-methylcholanthrene-induced subcutaneous tumors was significantly reduced by a single injection of inactivated type C RNA viral vaccine. Rauscher leukemia virus vaccine reduced the incidence of sarcomas from 78 to 50 percent in the BALB/cCr mouse. Radiation leukemia virus vaccine and a vaccine from a wild murine leukemia virus derived from a 3-methylcholanthrene tumor reduced the incidence of sarcoma from 86 percent to 33 and 37 percents, respectively, in the C57BL/6 mouse. These reductions in tumor incidence by virus vaccines help support the concept that type C RNA viruses serve as determinants of chemically induced cancer; additional studies of vaccines made with more purified virus preparations are necessary.
Noninfectious, cytoplasmically transmissible viral double-stranded RNAs of the genus Hypovirus cause reduced virulence (hypovirulence) in the chestnut blight fungus Cryphonectria parasitica, providing the basis for virus-mediated biological control of a fungal disease. Synthetic transcripts corresponding to a full-length hypovirus RNA coding strand are infectious when introduced into fungal spheroplasts by electroporation. Hypovirus infections were readily established in Cryphonectria parasitica and in related fungal species not previously reported to harbor viruses. These results demonstrate the use of a synthetic mycovirus transcript to expand fungal host range, thereby broadening the potential application of virus-mediated hypovirulence to control fungal pathogenesis.
Despite the development of vaccines, the hepatitis B virus remains a major cause of human liver disease. The virion consists of a lipoprotein envelope surrounding an icosahedral capsid composed of dimers of a 183-residue protein, 'core antigen' (HBcAg). Knowledge of its structure is important for the design of antiviral drugs, but it has yet to be determined. Residues 150-183 are known to form a protamine-like domain required for packaging RNA, and residues 1-149 form the 'assembly domain' that polymerizes into capsids and, unusually for a capsid protein, is highly alpha-helical. Density maps calculated from cryo-electron micrographs show that the assembly domain dimer is T-shaped: its stem constitutes the dimer interface and the tips of its arms make the polymerization contacts. By refining the procedures used to calculate the map, we have extended the resolution to 9 A, revealing major elements of secondary structure. In particular, the stem, which protrudes as a spike on the capsid's outer surface, is a 4-helix bundle, formed by the pairing of alpha-helical hairpins from both subunits.
The frequent trisomy of murine chromosome 15 in T lymphomas suggests that it bears one or more genes conducive to T-cell neoplasia. One such gene seems to be c-myc, the oncogene frequently activated in B-lymphoid tumours either by retroviral insertion, as in the avian bursal lymphomas, or by a translocation to the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus, as in the predominant t(12; 15) of murine plasmacytomas and the analogous t(14; 8) of human Burkitt lymphomas. The c-myc gene was strongly implicated in T-cell neoplasia when 15-25% of T lymphomas arising in AKR mice, a strain prone to leukaemia, were found to have retroviral inserts near c-myc. Proviruses near c-myc were also found in several T lymphomas induced by murine leukaemia viruses (MuLV) in both mice and rats, but many of the rat thymomas bear an insert instead at one of several other common sites, at least two of which have murine homologues on chromosome 15. We show here that some murine T lymphomas contain proviral inserts in the recently identified chromosome 15 locus for plasmacytoma variant (6; 15) translocations, which we have denoted pvt-1. Although 6; 15 breakpoints map cytogenetically to the same chromosome band as c-myc, the alterations of pvt-1 in tumours occur at least 72 kilobases (kb) from the c-myc promoters. The insertions in T lymphomas suggest that an altered pvt-1 locus is conducive to neoplasia in T cells as well as B cells, possibly via long-range effects on c-myc expression.
Certain protozoa, bacteria, and viruses when phagocytosed by host cells become surrounded by an intracytoplasmic boundary. This membrane prevents the fluorescent antibiotic tetracycline from entering the parasites when it is added to the medium, since they show no fluorescence, whereas extracellular parasites are immediately visible. As soon as the host cell dies, the intracellular parasites also become visible. This indicates that the boundary probably is of host origin. This phenomenon provides a means for selective permeability studies of such boundaries. A similar exclusion of tetracycline from certain extracellular parasites is seen in the presence of whole serum.
The liver-expressed microRNA-122 (miR-122) is essential for hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA accumulation in cultured liver cells, but its potential as a target for antiviral intervention has not been assessed. We found that treatment of chronically infected chimpanzees with a locked nucleic acid (LNA)-modified oligonucleotide (SPC3649) complementary to miR-122 leads to long-lasting suppression of HCV viremia, with no evidence of viral resistance or side effects in the treated animals. Furthermore, transcriptome and histological analyses of liver biopsies demonstrated derepression of target mRNAs with miR-122 seed sites, down-regulation of interferon-regulated genes, and improvement of HCV-induced liver pathology. The prolonged virological response to SPC3649 treatment without HCV rebound holds promise of a new antiviral therapy with a high barrier to resistance.
Interferon inhibits expression of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) through unknown mechanisms. A gene inducible by interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) was isolated by screening of a human complementary DNA library for proteins binding to the Rev-responsive element (RRE) of HIV-1. The product of this gene, RBP9-27, was shown to bind RNA in vitro and to inhibit HIV-1 expression after transfection into human cells. RBP9-27 primarily inhibited Rev-dependent posttranscriptional steps of viral gene expression. Thus, RBP9-27 is a cellular factor that antagonizes Rev function. These results suggest an interferon-induced antiviral mechanism operating through the induction of RNA binding proteins such as RBP9-27. Elucidation of RBP9-27 function may lead to a better understanding of the mechanism of interferon action during HIV-1 infection.
A lymphotropic virus HTLV-III/LAV was recently identified as the etiologic agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). In a study of concomitant hepatitis B infections in patients with AIDS or the AIDS-related complex, DNA sequences of hepatitis B virus (HBV) were found in fresh and cultured lymphocytes from patients with AIDS even in the absence of conventional HBV serological markers. Furthermore, the restriction DNA pattern was consistent with the integration of the viral DNA. These results should prompt additional studies to reevaluate a possible role of HBV as a cofactor in AIDS in addition to the HTLV-III/LAV causal agent.
The influenza virus polymerase, a heterotrimer composed of three subunits, PA, PB1 and PB2, is responsible for replication and transcription of the eight separate segments of the viral RNA genome in the nuclei of infected cells. The polymerase synthesizes viral messenger RNAs using short capped primers derived from cellular transcripts by a unique 'cap-snatching' mechanism. The PB2 subunit binds the 5' cap of host pre-mRNAs, which are subsequently cleaved after 10-13 nucleotides by the viral endonuclease, hitherto thought to reside in the PB2 (ref. 5) or PB1 (ref. 2) subunits. Here we describe biochemical and structural studies showing that the amino-terminal 209 residues of the PA subunit contain the endonuclease active site. We show that this domain has intrinsic RNA and DNA endonuclease activity that is strongly activated by manganese ions, matching observations reported for the endonuclease activity of the intact trimeric polymerase. Furthermore, this activity is inhibited by 2,4-dioxo-4-phenylbutanoic acid, a known inhibitor of the influenza endonuclease. The crystal structure of the domain reveals a structural core closely resembling resolvases and type II restriction endonucleases. The active site comprises a histidine and a cluster of three acidic residues, conserved in all influenza viruses, which bind two manganese ions in a configuration similar to other two-metal-dependent endonucleases. Two active site residues have previously been shown to specifically eliminate the polymerase endonuclease activity when mutated. These results will facilitate the optimisation of endonuclease inhibitors as potential new anti-influenza drugs.
The near identity of the partial amino acid sequence of human platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and that predicted for p28sis, the putative transforming protein of the simian sarcoma virus (SSV), suggests expression of a growth factor activity may be central for transformation by SSV. It is now reported that SSV-transformed cells but not control cells contain a growth factor activity that is identical to PDGF in immunoassay, in mitogenic dose response, and in specific mitogenic activity. The protein immunoprecipitated by antiserum to human PDGF has an apparent molecular weight of 20,000, identical to that of p20sis, the putative intracellular degradation product of p28sis. The results support the concept that expression of a PDGF-like molecule, which appears to be the product of the viral-sis gene, is responsible for the abnormal regulation of growth is SSV-transformed cells.
Fragments of hepatitis B virus DNA isolated from Dane particles have been inserted into the Escherichia coli plasmid pBR322 and cloned. Cells carrying the hybrid plasmid synthesise antigenic material that reacts specifically with antisera to hepatitis B viral antigens.
Tyrosine phosphorylation seems to be a key event in the control of cellular growth. Several viral transforming proteins, including the src protein of Rous sarcoma virus, the p120 protein of Abelson leukaemia virus and the middle T antigen of polyoma virus, are phosphorylated by associated tyrosine kinases. The levels of kinase activity correlate with the transforming efficiency of the virus. The receptors for epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and insulin are also phosphorylated by associated tyrosine kinase activities, which are stimulated by EGF, PDGF and insulin, respectively. The EGF-stimulated kinase and the src protein share similar substrate specificity for tyrosines immediately C-terminal to a sequence of acidic amino acids. Such a sequence is also found adjacent to the phosphotyrosine of middle T antigen, and in the homologous region of the hormone gastrin, adjacent to a tyrosine which is sulphated in approximately half the gastrin isolated from gastric mucosa. Reports that gastrin acts as a growth factor for cells of the gastrointestinal tract suggested that phosphorylation of this tyrosine might be physiologically more relevant than sulphation. We report here that synthetic human gastrin 17 is phosphorylated by the EGF-stimulated tyrosine kinase of A431 cell membranes. The Km values of 53-87 and 223-547 microM obtained in the presence and absence of EGF, respectively, are the lowest reported so far for this enzyme.
Glucocorticoids are known to induce the transcription of integrated proviral mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) genes in a variety of cell lines derived from mouse mammary tumours. Chimaeric genes in which selectable markers are linked to the long terminal repeat (LTR) region of MMTV can be induced by the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone after introduction into mouse fibroblasts. This suggests that the regulatory elements required for hormonal induction are located within the cloned LTR fragments. The idea is supported by the observation that glucocorticoid receptors bind to certain cloned fragments of MMTV DNA in vitro. Using filter binding studies and monoclonal antibodies to the glucocorticoid receptor we have now delimited the receptor binding region to a DNA segment of 152 base pairs (bp) that has been shown to be relevant for hormonal induction. In nuclease protection experiments we have identified partially homologous receptor binding sequences located in this region, all of which share the hexanucleotide 5'-TGTTCT-3'.
Site-specific DNA recombination is important for basic cellular functions including viral integration, control of gene expression, production of genetic diversity and segregation of newly replicated chromosomes, and is used by bacteriophage lambda to integrate or excise its genome into and out of the host chromosome. lambda recombination is carried out by the bacteriophage-encoded integrase protein (lambda-int) together with accessory DNA sites and associated bending proteins that allow regulation in response to cell physiology. Here we report the crystal structures of lambda-int in higher-order complexes with substrates and regulatory DNAs representing different intermediates along the reaction pathway. The structures show how the simultaneous binding of two separate domains of lambda-int to DNA facilitates synapsis and can specify the order of DNA strand cleavage and exchange. An intertwined layer of amino-terminal domains bound to accessory (arm) DNAs shapes the recombination complex in a way that suggests how arm binding shifts the reaction equilibrium in favour of recombinant products.
Cotton-top tamarins were inoculated with sufficient Epstein-Barr virus to induce multiple tumors in each animal within 14 to 21 days. The tumors consisted of large-cell lymphomas that contained multiple copies of the Epstein-Barr virus genome and generated Epstein-Barr virus-carrying cell lines showing no detectable consistent chromosomal abnormality. Hybridization of tumor DNA with immunoglobulin gene probes revealed that each lymphoma was oligo- or monoclonal in origin and that individual tumors from the same animal arose from different B-cell clones. Thus the virus induced multiple transformation events in tamarins in vivo to cause malignant tumors resembling the Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphomas of patients with organ transplants.
Viral nucleic acids have been found to be infectious for tissues and animals, yet are nonantigenic and resistant to antibodies against whole virus. Other unique properties, such as their host range and their susceptibility to nuclease action, render them a wholly new dimension to be reckoned with in virology. These properties may explain a number of conditions which at present are considered anomalous. The release from infected tissues of even a small proportion of total virus as free nucleic acid could, in an otherwise immune individual, lead to a low level of infection which would, perhaps, explain permanent immunity. If the proportion of nucleic acid is higher, or if the nucleic acid is resistant to nucleases because of an inert envelope, such conditions as "carrier" states-that is, viremias with or without antibodies-are possible. Note added in proof: The recent article by J. D. Ebert and F. H. Wilt (54) came to my attention after the present article was written. Ebert and Wilt's excellent article indicates the impact of the newer knowledge of viral nucleic acids on the ideas developing in the field of embryology.
Transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) genome is regulated in part by cellular factors and is stimulated by activation of latently infected T cells. T-cell activation also correlates with the induction of the factor NF-kappa B which binds to two adjacent sites in the HIV-1 long terminal repeat. This factor consists of two DNA-binding subunits of relative molecular mass 50,000 (50K) associated with two 65K subunits. It is located in the nucleus in mature B cells, but is present in other cell types as an inactive cytoplasmic complex. External stimuli, including those that activate T cells, result in nuclear translocation of active NF-kappa B. The cloning of the complementary DNA for the 50K subunit helped to identify an exclusively cytoplasmic 105K precursor (p105) (V.B., P.K. and A.I., manuscript submitted). The expression of active NF-kappa B might therefore also be regulated by the extent of processing of p105. Because HIV-1 requires active NF-kappa B for efficient transcription, we tested the effect of HIV-1 infection on the processing of the human 105K precursor. We show here that the HIV-1 protease can process p105 and increases levels of active nuclear NF-kappa B complex.
The evolutionary interaction between influenza A virus and the human immune system, manifest as 'antigenic drift' of the viral haemagglutinin, is one of the best described patterns in molecular evolution. However, little is known about the genome-scale evolutionary dynamics of this pathogen. Similarly, how genomic processes relate to global influenza epidemiology, in which the A/H3N2 and A/H1N1 subtypes co-circulate, is poorly understood. Here through an analysis of 1,302 complete viral genomes sampled from temperate populations in both hemispheres, we show that the genomic evolution of influenza A virus is characterized by a complex interplay between frequent reassortment and periodic selective sweeps. The A/H3N2 and A/H1N1 subtypes exhibit different evolutionary dynamics, with diverse lineages circulating in A/H1N1, indicative of weaker antigenic drift. These results suggest a sink-source model of viral ecology in which new lineages are seeded from a persistent influenza reservoir, which we hypothesize to be located in the tropics, to sink populations in temperate regions.
The human cytomegalovirus encodes a beta-chemokine receptor (US28) that is distantly related to the human chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, which also serve as cofactors for the entry into cells of human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1). Like CCR5, US28 allowed infection of CD4-positive human cell lines by primary isolates of HIV-1 and HIV-2, as well as fusion of these cell lines with cells expressing the viral envelope proteins. In addition, US28 mediated infection by cell line-adapted HIV-1 for which CXCR4 was an entry cofactor.
Interferons produce a variety of biological effects on cells. They induce resistance to virus proliferation, inhibit cell growth, modify cell structure and differentiation, stimulate some immune functions and inhibit others. However, the different interferon (IFN) species may vary in their mechanism of action and, hence, in their relative efficiency for inducing each of the effect. IFN-gamma (type II) appears to show stronger immunoregulatory and growth inhibitory effects than antiviral effects, but this conclusion has been challenged in other reports. The aim of the present work is to compare the action of IFN-gamma and other (type I) interferons on the induction of (2'-5') oligo(A) synthetase which is probably part of the antiviral response and the induction of the histocompatibility HLA-A,-B,-C antigens. We have shown previously that the induction of both proteins is regulated by interferons at the mRNA level, but show here that IFN-gamma from stimulated human lymphocytes and from monkey cells transfected by cloned human IFN-gamma cDNA induced the HLA-A,-B,-C and beta 2-microglobulin mRNAs or proteins at concentrations over 100 times lower than those needed to induce the (2'-5')oligo(A) synthetase and the antiviral state. This difference was not found with IFN-alpha and -beta (type I).
AIDS is an immunoregulatory disorder characterized by depletion of the CD4+, helper/inducer lymphocyte population. The causative agent of this disease is the human immunodeficiency virus, HIV, which infects CD4+ cells and leads to cytopathic effects characterized by syncytia formation and cell death. Recent studies have demonstrated that binding of HIV to its cellular receptor CD4 is necessary for viral entry. We find that binding of HIV to CD4 induces rapid and sustained phosphorylation of CD4 which could involve protein kinase C. HIV-induced CD4 phosphorylation can be blocked by antibody against CD4 and monoclonal antibody against the HIV envelope glycoprotein gp120, indicating that a specific interaction between CD4 and gp120 is required for phosphorylation. Electron microscopy shows that a protein kinase C inhibitor does not impair binding of HIV to CD4+ cells, but causes an apparent accumulation of virus particles at the cell surface, at the same time inhibiting viral infectivity. These results indicate a possible role for HIV-induced CD4 phosphorylation in viral entry and identify a potential target for antiviral therapy.
Enhancement of the replication of unrelated viruses (three RNA viruses and one DNA virus), representative of four major virus groups, occurs in human, rodent, or avian cells treated in vitro with 5-iododeoxyuridine (IdU). The results suggest that the potentiation of viral replication by IdU is a widespread phenomenon.
Virus-specific T-helper cells are considered critical for the control of chronic viral infections. Successful treatment of acute HIV-1 infection leads to augmentation of these responses, but whether this enhances immune control has not been determined. We administered one or two supervised treatment interruptions to eight subjects with treated acute infection, with the plan to restart therapy if viral load exceeded 5,000 copies of HIV-1 RNA per millilitre of plasma (the level at which therapy has been typically recommended) for three consecutive weeks, or 50,000 RNA copies per ml at one time. Here we show that, despite rebound in viraemia, all subjects were able to achieve at least a transient steady state off therapy with viral load below 5,000 RNA copies per ml. At present, five out of eight subjects remain off therapy with viral loads of less than 500 RNA copies per ml plasma after a median 6.5 months (range 5-8.7 months). We observed increased virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes and maintained T-helper-cell responses in all. Our data indicate that functional immune responses can be augmented in a chronic viral infection, and provide rationale for immunotherapy in HIV-1 infection.
By means of a selective DNA amplification technique called polymerase chain reaction, proviral sequences of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) were identified directly in DNA isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of persons seropositive but not in DNA isolated from PBMCs of persons seronegative for the virus. Primer pairs from multiple regions of the HIV-1 genome were used to achieve maximum sensitivity of provirus detection. HIV-1 sequences were detected in 100% of DNA specimens from seropositive, homosexual men from whom the virus was isolated by coculture, but in none of the DNA specimens from a control group of seronegative, virus culture-negative persons. However, HIV-1 sequences were detected in 64% of DNA specimens from seropositive, virus culture-negative homosexual men. This method of DNA amplification made it possible to obtain results within 3 days, whereas virus isolation takes up to 3 to 4 weeks. The method may therefore be used to complement or replace virus isolation as a routine means of determining HIV-1 infection.
Retroviral infection involves continued genetic variation, leading to phenotypic and immunological selection for more fit virus variants in the host. For retroviruses that cause immunodeficiency, pathogenesis is linked to the emergence of T cell-tropic, cytopathic viruses. Here we show that an immunodeficiency-inducing, T cell-tropic feline leukemia virus (FeLV) has evolved such that it cannot infect cells unless both a classic multiple membrane-spanning receptor molecule (Pit1) and a second coreceptor or entry factor are present. This second receptor component, which we call FeLIX, was identified as an endogenously expressed protein that is similar to a portion of the FeLV envelope protein. This cellular protein can function either as a transmembrane protein or as a soluble component to facilitate infection.
The relative proportions of viral gene products (viral proteins) that are synthesized in different types of animal cells infected with the same RNA virus inoculum were compared. The relative rates of synthesis of the various virus proteins late in infection were remarkably constant regardless of cell type infected. This was true in cell lines that produced only small amounts of virus and virus proteins, as well as in those that gave large yields of viruses and virus proteins.
Electron microscopy of heteroduplex DNA molecules, composed of one strand of Escherichia coli phage lambda(+) DNA annealed to the complementary DNA strand of a lambda deletion or substitution mutant, permits visualization, as well as precise measurements and mapping, of the unpaired single-stranded regions of nonhomology in the otherwise double-stranded molecules. In the lambdab2 mutant, the central segment (13 percent) of the lambda(+) DNA molecule is shown to be deleted. In the hybrid phages lambda(i434) and lambda(i21) a segment of the right arm of the lambda(+) genome (5.5 or 7.6 to 9 percent) is replaced by the corresponding immunity regions of phage 434 (3.3 percent or phage 21 (4 percent) DNA. The b5 region in the lambdab5 mutant appears to be identical to the i(21) segment. From these data it is possible to estimate the size and posiion of those lambda genes which are replaced by the i(434) and i(21) segments. The method permits preparing complete physical maps of viral genomes with a precision heretofore unattainable.
Dendritic cell specific intracellular adhesion molecule-3 (ICAM-3) grabbing nonintegrin (DC-SIGN), a C-type lectin present on the surface of dendritic cells, mediates the initial interaction of dendritic cells with T cells by binding to ICAM-3. DC-SIGN and DC-SIGNR, a related receptor found on the endothelium of liver sinusoids, placental capillaries, and lymph nodes, bind to oligosaccharides that are present on the envelope of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), an interaction that strongly promotes viral infection of T cells. Crystal structures of carbohydrate-recognition domains of DC-SIGN and of DC-SIGNR bound to oligosaccharide, in combination with binding studies, reveal that these receptors selectively recognize endogenous high-mannose oligosaccharides and may represent a new avenue for developing HIV prophylactics.
Vertebrate innate immunity provides a first line of defence against pathogens such as viruses and bacteria. Viral infection activates a potent innate immune response, which can be triggered by double-stranded (ds)RNA produced during viral replication. Here, we report that mammalian cells lacking the death-domain-containing protein FADD are defective in intracellular dsRNA-activated gene expression, including production of type I (alpha/beta) interferons, and are thus very susceptible to viral infection. The signalling pathway incorporating FADD is largely independent of Toll-like receptor 3 and the dsRNA-dependent kinase PKR, but seems to require receptor interacting protein 1 as well as Tank-binding kinase 1-mediated activation of the transcription factor IRF-3. The requirement for FADD in mammalian host defence is evocative of innate immune signalling in Drosophila, in which a FADD-dependent pathway responds to bacterial infection by activating the transcription of antimicrobial genes. These data therefore suggest the existence of a conserved pathogen recognition pathway in mammalian cells that is essential for the optimal induction of type I interferons and other genes important for host defence.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is clearly involved in the aetiology of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and the finding of HBV DNA integration into human liver DNA in almost all HCCs studied suggested that these integrated viral sequences may be involved in liver oncogenesis. Several HBV integrations in different HCCs and HCC-derived cell lines have been analysed after molecular cloning without revealing any obvious role for HBV. From a comparison of a HBV integration site present in a particular HCC with the corresponding unoccupied site in the non-tumorous tissue of the same liver, we now report that HBV integration places the viral sequence next to a liver cell sequence which bears a striking resemblance to both an oncogene (v-erb-A) and the supposed DNA-binding domain of the human glucocorticoid receptor and human oestrogen receptor genes. We suggest that this gene, usually silent or transcribed at a very low level in normal hepatocytes, becomes inappropriately expressed as a consequence of HBV integration, thus contributing to the cell transformation.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA frequently integrates into the genome of human primary liver cancer cells, but the significance of this integration in liver carcinogenesis is still unclear. Here we report the cloning of a single HBV integration site in a human hepatocellular carcinoma at an early stage of development, and of its germline counterpart. The normal locus was found to be transcribed into two polyadenylated messenger RNA species of 1.8 and 2.7 kilobases. We have isolated a complementary DNA clone from a normal adult human liver cDNA library which has an open reading frame with a coding capacity for a protein of 432 amino acids and relative molecular mass 48,536. The strong homology of the C-terminal half of the protein to the A-type cyclins of clam and Drosophila identifies it as a human cyclin A. The cyclin A gene has several exons, and the HBV integration occurs within an intron. As cyclins are important in the control of cell division, the disruption of a cyclin A gene by viral insertion might contribute to tumorigenesis.
Influenza A viruses pose a serious threat to world public health, particularly the currently circulating avian H5N1 viruses. The influenza viral nucleoprotein forms the protein scaffold of the helical genomic ribonucleoprotein complexes, and has a critical role in viral RNA replication. Here we report a 3.2 A crystal structure of this nucleoprotein, the overall shape of which resembles a crescent with a head and a body domain, with a protein fold different compared with that of the rhabdovirus nucleoprotein. Oligomerization of the influenza virus nucleoprotein is mediated by a flexible tail loop that is inserted inside a neighbouring molecule. This flexibility in the tail loop enables the nucleoprotein to form loose polymers as well as rigid helices, both of which are important for nucleoprotein functions. Single residue mutations in the tail loop result in the complete loss of nucleoprotein oligomerization. An RNA-binding groove, which is found between the head and body domains at the exterior of the nucleoprotein oligomer, is lined with highly conserved basic residues widely distributed in the primary sequence. The nucleoprotein structure shows that only one of two proposed nuclear localization signals are accessible, and suggests that the body domain of nucleoprotein contains the binding site for the viral polymerase. Our results identify the tail loop binding pocket as a potential target for antiviral development.
Retroviral insertional mutagenesis has been proposed as an efficient mechanism to turn on or to increase the expression of oncogenes in several avian or mammal models. Integration site studies of avian leukosis virus, murine leukaemia and murine mammary tumour viruses led to the coleutification of highly conserved genes whose expression is induced or increased during leukaemogenesis, probably through enhancer elements present in the retroviral long terminal repeats. This is reminiscent of the activation of cellular proto-oncogenes or putative oncogenes in numerous human tumours and leukaemias as a result of chromosomal translocations or DNA rearrangements. Here we report the characterization of a new putative oncogene isolated from a murine erythroleukaemia induced by the acute leukaemogenic retrovirus spleen focus forming virus (SFFV). An important and unusual feature of this genomic locus Spi-1 (for SFFV proviral integration) is that rearrangements due to SFFV integration were found in 95% of the erythroid tumours studied. A 4.0-kilobase messenger RNA was detected in rearranged tumours. No Spi-1 rearrangement was detected in other virally induced myeloid, lymphoid or erythroid tumours tested.
Readthrough viral transcripts are present at relatively high levels in cells infected with avian leukosis virus. It has been proposed that they can function as intermediates in the transduction of proto-oncogenes by retroviruses. It is shown here, by the analysis of viruses containing a mutation in the AAUAAA polyadenylation signal, that readthrough RNAs have the requisite properties to function as transduction intermediates: readthrough RNAs were polyadenylated and packaged as efficiently as normal viral RNA, RNAs nearly 11.2 kilobases (3.5 kilobases larger than wild-type avian leukosis virus genomes) were present in virions of the mutant virus, and virus particles containing both readthrough and normal genomes were most likely infectious.
Cytosine residues in the sequence 5'CpG (cytosine-guanine) are often postsynthetically methylated in animal genomes. CpG methylation is involved in long-term silencing of certain genes during mammalian development and in repression of viral genomes. The methyl-CpG-binding proteins MeCP1 and MeCP2 interact specifically with methylated DNA and mediate transcriptional repression. Here we study the mechanism of repression by MeCP2, an abundant nuclear protein that is essential for mouse embryogenesis. MeCP2 binds tightly to chromosomes in a methylation-dependent manner. It contains a transcriptional-repression domain (TRD) that can function at a distance in vitro and in vivo. We show that a region of MeCP2 that localizes with the TRD associates with a corepressor complex containing the transcriptional repressor mSin3A and histone deacetylases. Transcriptional repression in vivo is relieved by the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A, indicating that deacetylation of histones (and/or of other proteins) is an essential component of this repression mechanism. The data suggest that two global mechanisms of gene regulation, DNA methylation and histone deacetylation, can be linked by MeCP2.
The three-dimensional atomic structure of a single-stranded DNA virus has been determined. Infectious virions of canine parvovirus contain 60 protein subunits that are predominantly VP-2. The central structural motif of VP-2 has the same topology (an eight-stranded antiparallel beta barrel) as has been found in many other icosahedral viruses but represents only about one-third of the capsid protein. There is a 22 angstrom (A) long protrusion on the threefold axes, a 15 A deep canyon circulating about each of the five cylindrical structures at the fivefold axes, and a 15 A deep depression at the twofold axes. By analogy with rhinoviruses, the canyon may be the site of receptor attachment. Residues related to the antigenic properties of the virus are found on the threefold protrusions. Some of the amino termini of VP-2 run to the exterior in full but not empty virions, which is consistent with the observation that some VP-2 polypeptides in full particles can be cleaved by trypsin. Eleven nucleotides are seen in each of 60 symmetry-related pockets on the interior surface of the capsid and together account for 13 percent of the genome.
Given the propensity of viruses to co-opt cellular pathways and activities for their benefit, it is perhaps not surprising that several viruses have now been shown to reshape the cellular environment by reprogramming the host's RNA-interference machinery. In particular, microRNAs are produced by the various members of the herpesvirus family during both the latent stage of the viral life cycle and the lytic (or productive) stage. Emerging data suggest that viral microRNAs are particularly important for regulating the transition from latent to lytic replication and for attenuating antiviral immune responses.
Viral clearance during hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection has been thought to reflect the destruction of infected hepatocytes by CD8(+) T lymphocytes. However, in this study, HBV DNA was shown to largely disappear from the liver and the blood of acutely infected chimpanzees long before the peak of T cell infiltration and most of the liver disease. These results demonstrate that noncytopathic antiviral mechanisms contribute to viral clearance during acute viral hepatitis by purging HBV replicative intermediates from the cytoplasm and covalently closed circular viral DNA from the nucleus of infected cells.
Infection of adult mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), a non-cytopathic segmented RNA virus, leads initially to generalized infection, followed by clearance and subsequent life-long immunity. Indirect evidence has suggested that viral antigens may persist in lymphoid tissues during the phase of immunological memory, but viral genomic RNA has not been detected in previous studies. During a search for persistent virus in the spleen, we identified LCMV-specific sequences present as DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in mice over 200 days after infection. In vivo and in vitro studies revealed that reverse transcription of viral RNA into complementary DNA occurred after acute infection of cells of its natural hosts, mouse and hamster, but not of other species and could be inhibited in vitro by azidothymidine (AZT), indicating that this was mediated by endogenous reverse transcriptase activity. These findings reveal a surprising and new pathway of interaction between exogenous RNA viruses and endogenous retroviral, and perhaps other host components, that results in the persistence of virally determined DNA. We speculate that the latter may function in vivo as a form of DNA vaccine.
All metazoan eukaryotes express microRNAs (miRNAs), roughly 22-nucleotide regulatory RNAs that can repress the expression of messenger RNAs bearing complementary sequences. Several DNA viruses also express miRNAs in infected cells, suggesting a role in viral replication and pathogenesis. Although specific viral miRNAs have been shown to autoregulate viral mRNAs or downregulate cellular mRNAs, the function of most viral miRNAs remains unknown. Here we report that the miR-K12-11 miRNA encoded by Kaposi's-sarcoma-associated herpes virus (KSHV) shows significant homology to cellular miR-155, including the entire miRNA 'seed' region. Using a range of assays, we show that expression of physiological levels of miR-K12-11 or miR-155 results in the downregulation of an extensive set of common mRNA targets, including genes with known roles in cell growth regulation. Our findings indicate that viral miR-K12-11 functions as an orthologue of cellular miR-155 and probably evolved to exploit a pre-existing gene regulatory pathway in B cells. Moreover, the known aetiological role of miR-155 in B-cell transformation suggests that miR-K12-11 may contribute to the induction of KSHV-positive B-cell tumours in infected patients.
Alopecia areata (AA) is among the most highly prevalent human autoimmune diseases, leading to disfiguring hair loss due to the collapse of immune privilege of the hair follicle and subsequent autoimmune attack. The genetic basis of AA is largely unknown. We undertook a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in a sample of 1,054 cases and 3,278 controls and identified 139 single nucleotide polymorphisms that are significantly associated with AA (P <or= 5 x 10(-7)). Here we show an association with genomic regions containing several genes controlling the activation and proliferation of regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells), cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA4), interleukin (IL)-2/IL-21, IL-2 receptor A (IL-2RA; CD25) and Eos (also known as Ikaros family zinc finger 4; IKZF4), as well as the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region. We also find association evidence for regions containing genes expressed in the hair follicle itself (PRDX5 and STX17). A region of strong association resides within the ULBP (cytomegalovirus UL16-binding protein) gene cluster on chromosome 6q25.1, encoding activating ligands of the natural killer cell receptor NKG2D that have not previously been implicated in an autoimmune disease. By probing the role of ULBP3 in disease pathogenesis, we also show that its expression in lesional scalp from patients with AA is markedly upregulated in the hair follicle dermal sheath during active disease. This study provides evidence for the involvement of both innate and acquired immunity in the pathogenesis of AA. We have defined the genetic underpinnings of AA, placing it within the context of shared pathways among autoimmune diseases, and implicating a novel disease mechanism, the upregulation of ULBP ligands, in triggering autoimmunity.
To establish productive infection, a retrovirus must insert a DNA replica of its genome into host cell chromosomal DNA. This process is operated by the intasome, a nucleoprotein complex composed of an integrase tetramer (IN) assembled on the viral DNA ends. The intasome engages chromosomal DNA within a target capture complex to carry out strand transfer, irreversibly joining the viral and cellular DNA molecules. Although several intasome/transpososome structures from the DDE(D) recombinase superfamily have been reported, the mechanics of target DNA capture and strand transfer by these enzymes remained unclear. Here we report crystal structures of the intasome from prototype foamy virus in complex with target DNA, elucidating the pre-integration target DNA capture and post-catalytic strand transfer intermediates of the retroviral integration process. The cleft between IN dimers within the intasome accommodates chromosomal DNA in a severely bent conformation, allowing widely spaced IN active sites to access the scissile phosphodiester bonds. Our results resolve the structural basis for retroviral DNA integration and provide a framework for the design of INs with altered target sequences.
The mechanism by which phytohormones, like abscisic acid (ABA), regulate gene expression is unknown. An activity in nuclear extracts that interacts with the ABA response element (ABRE) from the 5' regulatory region of the wheat Em gene was identified. A complementary DNA clone was isolated whose product is a DNA binding protein (EmBP-1) that interacts specifically with an 8-base pair (bp) sequence (CACGTGGC) in the ABRE. A 2-bp mutation in this sequence prevented binding of EmBP-1. The same mutation reduced the ability of the ABRE to confer ABA responsiveness on a viral promoter in a transient assay. The 8-bp EmBP-1 target sequence was found to be conserved in several other ABA-responsive promoters and in promoters from plants that respond to signals other than ABA. Similar sequences are found in promoters from mammals, yeast, and in the major late promoter of adenovirus. The deduced amino acid sequence of EmBP-1 contains conserved basic and leucine zipper domains found in transcription factors in plants, yeast, and mammals. EmBP-1 may be a member of a highly conserved family of proteins that recognize a core sequence found in the regulatory regions of various genes that are integrated into a number of different response pathways.
Rapidly labeled RNA of mouse L cells and labeled RNA of Mengo virus, unlike cellular RNA labeled under steady-state conditions, form detectable complexes with L-cell ribosomes. These ribosome-RNA complexes formed in vitro appear analogous to those assembled during polysome formation in vivo. When ribosomes are prepared from L cells exposed to homologous interferon, their capacity to associate with cell messenger is preserved, while their ability to interact with viral RNA is markedly reduced. The ribosomes from cells exposed to interferon are thus altered selectively to permit only certain messages to be bound and translated.
The binding of type C viral p12 proteins to purified viral RNA has been examined in vitro with the use of a family of closely related infectious primate type C viruses--the woolly monkey (SSAV) and gibbon (GALV) group. This in vitro protein-RNA binding is type specific. The system should serve as a model for studies of the evolution of nucleic acid binding proteins.
Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1), which causes AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), possesses an essential gene, tat, whose product, acting through the long terminal repeat (LTR) sequences of HIV-1, activates viral genes and replication. The mechanism by which tat trans-activates HIV genes is unclear. Some studies have reported that an increase in messenger RNA accumulation directed by the HIV-1 LTR can explain the action of tat, but others suggest that this increase in mRNA levels can only partially explain trans-activation, and that translational control mechanisms may also be involved. To test those possibilities we have established an efficient adenovirus system for delivering the HIV-1 LTR attached to a reporter gene (chloramphenicol acetyltransferase; CAT) into cells and monitoring its activity. The HIV-1 LTR expressed from this adenovirus responds to trans-activation in a HeLa cell line constitutively expressing the tat protein by increasing the transcription rate of the HIV-1 LTR and the accumulation of mRNA encoding CAT. In this system the translational efficiency of this CAT mRNA in the cell is unaffected by the presence of tat.
An obesity syndrome was found in a number of mice infected as young adults with canine distemper virus, a morbillivirus antigenically related to measles. Body weights of obese animals 16 to 20 weeks after infection were comparable to those reported for genetically obese mice and for mice rendered obese by hypothalamic lesions. The total number of adipocytes in specific fat deposits was greater in obese animals than in their lean littermates. This hyperplasia was accompanied by moderate cell enlargement. Pancreatic islet tissue was also hypercellular in the obese mice. Brain tissue from the obese mice showed no overt pathology, and immunofluorescence staining for viral antigens was negative. There may be a selective, virus-induced disruption of critical brain catecholamine pathways.
The hypothesis that quiescent CD4+ T lymphocytes carrying proviral DNA provide a reservoir for human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) in patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) was examined. In a study of 22 patients successfully treated with HAART for up to 30 months, replication-competent virus was routinely recovered from resting CD4+ T lymphocytes. The frequency of resting CD4+ T cells harboring latent HIV-1 was low, 0.2 to 16.4 per 10(6) cells, and, in cross-sectional analysis, did not decrease with increasing time on therapy. The recovered viruses generally did not show mutations associated with resistance to the relevant antiretroviral drugs. This reservoir of nonevolving latent virus in resting CD4+ T cells should be considered in deciding whether to terminate treatment in patients who respond to HAART.
Support for multistage models of oncogenesis has been provided by several highly leukaemogenic retrovirus isolates that have transduced more than one host cell gene. Where functional studies have been performed, these retroviral oncogenes show synergy for in vitro transformation and leukaemogenesis. In naturally occurring feline leukaemias associated with feline leukaemia virus (FeLV), retroviral transduction of myc is a frequent oncogenic mechanism. But evidence suggesting that the FeLV v-myc genes might be insufficient for leukaemogenesis was provided by the latency (12 weeks) and clonality of FeLV/v-myc-induced tumours and the absence of demonstrable in vitro transformation by these viruses. In the search for secondary leukaemogenic events in FeLV/v-myc tumours, we have identified a case of FeLV transduction of a T-cell antigen receptor beta-chain gene. The proviruses carrying this gene (which we have named v-tcr) were a separate population from those carrying v-myc. In its normal role, the T-cell receptor beta-chain forms part of a multimeric complex involved in antigen recognition and T-cell activation. We suggest that v-tcr is a novel viral oncogene which assisted v-myc in the genesis of a naturally occurring case of thymic lymphosarcoma.
The recent report by Koprowski et al. that human T-cell lymphotropic retroviruses (HTLVs) may be involved in the development of multiple sclerosis (MS) has aroused much interest. The report was based largely on immunological evidence, using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) with viral antigens or disrupted virions. We have accordingly sought confirmation by screening sera and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from MS patients against cell lines infected respectively with adult T-cell leukaemia (ATL) virus (ATLV/HTLV-I) of Japanese cells (MT-1 and MT-2 lines), our own isolate from British black patients with ATL, the MoT cell line which produce HTLV-II, and our own T-cell line containing a local isolate of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) virus (C-LAV/HTLV-III). We have failed to find antibodies against these retroviruses in the sera or CSF. Furthermore, neither virus could be isolated from the peripheral white blood cells of two MS patients.
The particle-bound RNA polymerase activity of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) can be demonstrated in vivo. Linear synthesis of viral RNA persists for 5 to 6 hours at 34 degrees C in infected monolayers of chick embryo cells treated with cycloheximide and actinomycin D to block synthesis of protein and cell-specific RNA. At least 55 percent of the RNA made under these conditions is complementary to virion RNA. RNA synthesis mediated by VSV polymerase activity is inhibited in cells first treated with chick-derived interferon or polyriboinosinate* polyribocytidylate, but not by mouse interferon. The RNA product of VSV polymerase activity is present throughout the cytoplasm, and its synthesis is inhibited by the interferon system, as judged by autoradiographs that show the physical distribution, in cells, of RNA produced by virion polymerase in the absence of translation-a demonstration of the transcription product of the viral genome.
Low pH induces a conformational change in the influenza virus haemagglutinin, which then mediates fusion of the viral and host cell membranes. The three-dimensional structure of a fragment of the haemagglutinin in this conformation reveals a major refolding of the secondary and tertiary structure of the molecule. The apolar fusion peptide moves at least 100 A to one tip of the molecule. At the other end a helical segment unfolds, a subdomain relocates reversing the chain direction, and part of the structure becomes disordered.
The cell type specificity of certain enhancers, competition experiments and the interactions that occur between proteins and enhancer sequences demonstrate that enhancers are the targets of specific factors involved in transcription control. The 246-base pair BclI-PvuII restriction enzyme fragment of polyoma virus has been shown to include two distinct enhancers, Py A and Py B, composed of several subdomains which interact with nuclear proteins from mouse fibroblasts. Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells do not permit polyoma virus infection: both viral transcription and DNA replication are blocked. Host-range mutants of polyoma virus (EC mutants) capable of overcoming the expression block in EC cells have mutations or sequence rearrangements in their enhancer region. In an attempt to understand the molecular basis of this host restriction we compared the binding patterns displayed on the viral enhancer sequences by nuclear proteins prepared from EC cells or from fibroblasts. We show that one of the fibroblast factors required for Py A enhancer function, almost undetectable in EC cells, is induced after differentiation of these cells into parietal endoderm, suggesting that this protein is crucial in the regulation of viral gene expression during cellular differentiation, and perhaps more generally in the control of gene expression during early embryonic development.
Glucan, a macrophage stimulant, was evaluated for its ability to alter survival and phagocytic dysfunction in mice challenged with mouse hepatitis virus strain MHV-A59. Administration of glucan before the mice were challenged with the virus significantly prolonged median survival time but did not modify overall mortality compared with control mice given dextrose. Maximal effectiveness was achieved when glucan was administered both before and after the viral challenge. In contrast to the marked hepatic parenchymal cell necrosis observed in the control mice, glucan-treated mice exhibited reduced pathology. Intraperitoneal administration of MHV-A59 resulted in a significant depression of phagocytic activity compared with controls that were not exposed to the virus. The enhancement in phagocytic function in glucan-treated control mice was unaltered in virus-challenged, glucan-treated mice. Thus glucan is capable of increasing survival, inhibiting hepatic necrosis, and maintaining an activated state of phagocytic activity in mice challenged with MHV-A59. Macrophage stimulants may have a significant role in the modification of virally induced hepatic lesions.
The genome of the human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 contains at least eight genes, of which three (sor, R, and 3' orf) have no known function. In this study, the role of the sor gene was examined by constructing a series of proviral genomes of HIV-1 that either lacked the coding sequences for sor or contained point mutations in sor. Analysis of four such mutants revealed that although each clone could generate morphologically normal virus particles upon transfection, the mutant viruses were limited in their capacity to establish stable infection. Virus derived from transfection of Cos-1 cells (OKT4-) with sor mutant proviral DNA's was resistant to transmission to OKT4+ "susceptible" cells under cell-free conditions, and was transmitted poorly by coculture. In contrast, virus derived from clones with an intact sor frame was readily propagated by either approach. Normal amounts of gag-, env-, and pol-derived proteins were produced by all four mutants and assays in both lymphoid and nonlymphoid cells indicated that their trans-activating capacity was intact and comparable with wild type. Thus the sor gene, although not absolutely required in HIV virion formation, influences virus transmission in vitro and is crucial in the efficient generation of infectious virus. The data also suggest that sor influences virus replication at a novel, post-translational stage and that its action is independent of the regulatory genes tat and trs.
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is frequently associated with human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infection. Supernatants from HIV-1-infected T cells carrying the CD4 antigen promote the growth of cells derived from KS lesions of AIDS patients (AIDS-KS cells), and the HIV-1 tat gene, introduced into the germ line of mice, induces skin lesions closely resembling KS. Here we report that the tat gene product (Tat) is released from both HIV-1-acutely infected H9 cells and tat-transfected COS-1 cells. These Tat-containing supernatants specifically promote growth of AIDS-KS cells which are inhibited by anti-Tat antibodies; recombinant Tat has the same growth-promoting properties. Therefore a viral regulatory gene product can be released as a biologically active protein and directly act as a growth stimulator. These and previous data indicate that extracellular Tat could be involved in the development or progression, or both, of KS in HIV-1-infected individuals.
The type I interferon response protects cells against invading viral pathogens. The cellular factors that mediate this defence are the products of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Although hundreds of ISGs have been identified since their discovery more than 25 years ago, only a few have been characterized with respect to antiviral activity. For most ISG products, little is known about their antiviral potential, their target specificity and their mechanisms of action. Using an overexpression screening approach, here we show that different viruses are targeted by unique sets of ISGs. We find that each viral species is susceptible to multiple antiviral genes, which together encompass a range of inhibitory activities. To conduct the screen, more than 380 human ISGs were tested for their ability to inhibit the replication of several important human and animal viruses, including hepatitis C virus, yellow fever virus, West Nile virus, chikungunya virus, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus and human immunodeficiency virus type-1. Broadly acting effectors included IRF1, C6orf150 (also known as MB21D1), HPSE, RIG-I (also known as DDX58), MDA5 (also known as IFIH1) and IFITM3, whereas more targeted antiviral specificity was observed with DDX60, IFI44L, IFI6, IFITM2, MAP3K14, MOV10, NAMPT (also known as PBEF1), OASL, RTP4, TREX1 and UNC84B (also known as SUN2). Combined expression of pairs of ISGs showed additive antiviral effects similar to those of moderate type I interferon doses. Mechanistic studies uncovered a common theme of translational inhibition for numerous effectors. Several ISGs, including ADAR, FAM46C, LY6E and MCOLN2, enhanced the replication of certain viruses, highlighting another layer of complexity in the highly pleiotropic type I interferon system.
The primary product of the adenovirus E1A gene is a protein that is sufficient for controlling host-cell proliferation and immortalizing primary rodent cells. The mechanism by which the protein induces these cellular effects is poorly understood, but might be linked to its ability to regulate RNA transcription from a number of viral and cellular genes. The mechanism of E1A's transcriptional-activation (trans-activation) was studied here by monitoring the protein's effect on specific adenovirus promoters in two types of transcriptional systems in vitro. One of these systems consisted of extracts from transformed cells constitutively expressing E1A, and the other consisted of extracts of HeLa cells supplemented with a plasmid-encoded E1A protein purified from Escherichia coli. The results show that the E1A protein specifically stimulates transcription from adenovirus promoters; thus, the induction of cellular transcription factors is not necessary to explain the stimulation of transcription by E1A.
A decline in the T-cell population usually marks the onset of progressive immunological disease in individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Because CD4+ cells help to coordinate efficient immune responses, some of the defects in the immune function in advanced cases of AIDS may be explained by the disappearance of these cells. Therefore, an understanding of the mechanisms used by HIV to induce the reduction of CD4+ cells is important. Here we use a Moloney murine leukaemia virus-based retroviral vector in order to express the nef gene of HIV-1 in three lymphocytic cell lines expressing CD4. In all cases we find that cell-surface CD4 expression is inversely related to nef expression. However, nef does not alter steady-state levels of CD4 RNA or CD4 protein. Also, nef can downregulate a CD4 triple mutant (Ser----Ala) that is neither phosphorylated nor down-regulated by phorbol esters, indicating that nef is acting by a different mechanism.
The "Spanish" influenza pandemic killed at least 20 million people in 1918-1919, making it the worst infectious pandemic in history. Understanding the origins of the 1918 virus and the basis for its exceptional virulence may aid in the prediction of future influenza pandemics. RNA from a victim of the 1918 pandemic was isolated from a formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, lung tissue sample. Nine fragments of viral RNA were sequenced from the coding regions of hemagglutinin, neuraminidase, nucleoprotein, matrix protein 1, and matrix protein 2. The sequences are consistent with a novel H1N1 influenza A virus that belongs to the subgroup of strains that infect humans and swine, not the avian subgroup.
To form an immature HIV-1 capsid, 1,500 HIV-1 Gag (p55) polypeptides must assemble properly along the host cell plasma membrane. Insect cells and many higher eukaryotic cell types support efficient capsid assembly, but yeast and murine cells do not, indicating that host machinery is required for immature HIV-1 capsid formation. Additionally, in a cell-free system that reconstitutes HIV-1 capsid formation, post-translational assembly events require ATP and a subcellular fraction, suggesting a requirement for a cellular ATP-binding protein. Here we identify such a protein (HP68), described previously as an RNase L inhibitor, and demonstrate that it associates post-translationally with HIV-1 Gag in a cell-free system and human T cells infected with HIV-1. Using a dominant negative mutant of HP68 in mammalian cells and depletion-reconstitution experiments in the cell-free system, we demonstrate that HP68 is essential for post-translational events in immature HIV-1 capsid assembly. Furthermore, in cells the HP68-Gag complex is associated with HIV-1 Vif, which is involved in virion morphogenesis and infectivity. These findings support a critical role for HP68 in post-translational events of HIV-1 assembly and reveal a previously unappreciated dimension of host-viral interaction.
Mammalian viruses often use components of the host's cellular DNA replication machinery to carry out replication of their genomes, which enables these viruses to be used as tools for characterizing factors that are involved in cellular DNA replication. The human papillomavirus (HPV) E1 protein is essential for replication of the virus DNA. Here we identify the cellular factor that participates in viral DNA replication by using a two-hybrid assay in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and E1 protein as bait. Using this assay, we isolated Inil/hSNF5, a component of the SWI/SNF complex which facilitates transcription by altering the structure of chromatin. In vitro binding and immunoprecipitation confirmed that E1 interacts directly with Ini1/hSNF5. Transient DNA-replication assay revealed that HPV DNA replication is stimulated in a dose-dependent manner by addition of Ini1/hSNF5, and that Ini1/hSNF5 antisense RNA blocks the replication of HPV DNA. Amino-acid substitution at residues that are conserved among E1 proteins prevented the E1-Ini1/hSNF5 interaction and reduced DNA replication of HPV in vivo. Our results indicate that Ini1/hSNF5 is required for the efficient replication of papillomavirus DNA and is therefore needed, either alone or in complex with SWI/SNF complex, for mammalian DNA replication as well.
Viruses, and more particularly phages (viruses that infect bacteria), represent one of the most abundant living entities in aquatic and terrestrial environments. The biogeography of phages has only recently been investigated and so far reveals a cosmopolitan distribution of phage genetic material (or genotypes). Here we address this cosmopolitan distribution through the analysis of phage communities in modern microbialites, the living representatives of one of the most ancient life forms on Earth. On the basis of a comparative metagenomic analysis of viral communities associated with marine (Highborne Cay, Bahamas) and freshwater (Pozas Azules II and Rio Mesquites, Mexico) microbialites, we show that some phage genotypes are geographically restricted. The high percentage of unknown sequences recovered from the three metagenomes (>97%), the low percentage similarities with sequences from other environmental viral (n = 42) and microbial (n = 36) metagenomes, and the absence of viral genotypes shared among microbialites indicate that viruses are genetically unique in these environments. Identifiable sequences in the Highborne Cay metagenome were dominated by single-stranded DNA microphages that were not detected in any other samples examined, including sea water, fresh water, sediment, terrestrial, extreme, metazoan-associated and marine microbial mats. Finally, a marine signature was present in the phage community of the Pozas Azules II microbialites, even though this environment has not been in contact with the ocean for tens of millions of years. Taken together, these results prove that viruses in modern microbialites display biogeographical variability and suggest that they may be derived from an ancient community.
Inhibitors of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) protease have entered clinical study as potential therapeutic agents for HIV-1 infection. The clinical efficacy of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase inhibitors has been limited by the emergence of resistant viral variants. Similarly, variants expressing resistance to protease inhibitors have been derived in cell culture. We now report the characterization of resistant variants isolated from patients undergoing therapy with the protease inhibitor MK-639 (formerly designated L-735,524). Five of these variants, isolated from four patients, exhibited cross-resistance to all members of a panel of six structurally diverse protease inhibitors. This suggests that combination therapy with multiple protease inhibitors may not prevent loss of antiviral activity resulting from resistance selection. In addition, previous therapy with one compound may abrogate the benefit of subsequent treatment with a second inhibitor.
Feline leukaemia viruses (FeLVs) have long been known to be associated with induction of proliferative and anti-proliferative diseases of domestic cats. Strains of FeLV have been recognized which specifically induce lymphosarcoma, aplastic anaemia, myelodysplastic anaemia, and, recently, feline AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), a naturally occurring immunosuppressive syndrome strikingly similar to human AIDS which is lethal in 100% of inoculated and viraemic specific-pathogen-free (SPF) cats. Here, we have analysed FeLV DNA in tissues of 22 SPF cats that had been inoculated with the feline AIDS strain (FeLV-FAIDS) and we find two classes of viral DNA--a monotypic common form which is detectable in bone marrow regardless of disease state, and variant forms, recognizable by restriction site differences, whose appearance correlates with onset of disease symptoms and persists throughout the course of the disease. FeLV-FAIDS variant DNA is detected at high concentration (10-50 copies per cell) and principally as unintegrated viral DNA (UVD) in bone marrow of cats with feline AIDS. In marked contrast high levels of UVD were not present in cats in the terminal-stages of T-cell lymphosarcoma, aplastic anaemia, or myelodysplastic anaemia induced by other FeLV strains. These results parallel recent observations in humans, where high levels of UVD were sometimes found in cells derived from AIDS patients infected with human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III)/lymph-adenopathy-associated virus (LAV), and suggest that persistence of unintegrated variant viral DNA is a crucial indicator of retrovirus-induced cytopathic disease syndromes such as AIDS.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) lyse virally infected cells that display viral peptide epitopes in association with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules on the cell surface. However, despite a strong CTL response directed against viral epitopes, untreated people infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) develop AIDS. To resolve this enigma, we have examined the ability of CTLs to recognize and kill infected primary T lymphocytes. We found that CTLs inefficiently lysed primary cells infected with HIV-1 if the viral nef gene product was expressed. Resistance of infected cells to CTL killing correlated with nef-mediated downregulation of MHC class I and could be overcome by adding an excess of the relevant HIV-1 epitope as soluble peptide. Thus, Nef protected infected cells by reducing the epitope density on their surface. This effect of nef may allow evasion of CTL lysis by HIV-1-infected cells.
Borna disease virus (BDV) causes a rare neurological disease in horses and sheep. The virus has not been classified because neither an infectious particle nor a specific nucleic acid had been identified. To identify the genome of BDV, a subtractive complementary DNA expression library was constructed with polyadenylate-selected RNA from a BDV-infected MDCK cell line. A clone (B8) was isolated that specifically hybridized to RNA isolated from BDV-infected brain tissue and BDV-infected cell lines. This clone hybridized to four BDV-specific positive strand RNAs (10.5, 3.6, 2.1, and 0.85 kilobases) and one negative strand RNA (10.5 kilobases) in BDV-infected rat brain. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the clone suggested that it represented a full-length messenger RNA which contained several open reading frames. In vitro transcription and translation of the clone resulted in the synthesis of the 14- and 24-kilodalton BDV-specific proteins. The 24-kilodalton protein, when translated in vitro from the clone, was recognized by antibodies in the sera of patients (three of seven) with behavioral disorders. This BDV-specific clone will provide the means to isolate the other BDV-specific nucleic acids and to identify the virus responsible for Borna disease. In addition, the significance of BDV or a BDV-related virus as a human pathogen can now be more directly examined.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infects human B lymphocytes, transforming the infected cells into dividing blasts that can proliferate indefinitely. The viral genome of 172 kilobase pairs (kbp) is a plasmid in most transformed cells. We have identified a region of EBV DNA, termed oriP (nucleotides 7,333-9,109 of strain B95-8), which acts in cis to permit linked DNAs to replicate as plasmids in cells containing EBV DNA. We have postulated the existence of a trans-acting gene allowing oriP function. Here we report that this gene lies in a 2.6-kbp region of the viral genome (nucleotides 107, 567-110, 176) which encodes the EBNA-1 antigen. We show that circular DNAs containing oriP, the EBNA-1 gene and a selectable marker replicate autonomously in cells derived from at least four developmental lineages and from at least three species. We also find that the one-third of the EBNA-1 gene repetitive in sequence is not essential for the trans-acting function that EBNA-1 gives oriP.
RNA recombination has been described for a number of viruses in the plant and animal kingdoms, but the mechanisms of selection of recombination sites are poorly understood. The nonrandom recombination between two subviral RNAs associated with turnip crinkle virus was used to study the requirement for specific sequences and structures in the generation of recombinant molecules. Single-base mutations that disrupted either the stem or the loop of one of the two computer-predicted stem-loop structures eliminated detectable recombinant molecules. However, recombinants were detected if compensatory mutations were generated that re-formed a stable hairpin structure. These results provide evidence for the necessity of specific structures in the formation of recombinant molecules in this system.
Most mammary carcinomas induced in C3H mice by the mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) bear a new proviral insertion within a highly conserved locus on chromosome 15 called int-1. A transcriptional unit within this locus is inactive in all tested normal tissues but expressed at low levels in mammary tumours with proviral insertions positioned on either the 5' and 3' sides of the gene. Transcription of the proviruses proceeds away from int-1; thus an indirect mechanism appears to activate expression of this putative oncogene.
Ribozymes are thought to have played a pivotal role in the early evolution of life, but relatively few have been identified in modern organisms. We performed an in vitro selection aimed at isolating self-cleaving RNAs from the human genome. The selection yielded several ribozymes, one of which is a conserved mammalian sequence that resides in an intron of the CPEB3 gene, which belongs to a family of genes regulating messenger RNA polyadenylation. The CPEB3 ribozyme is structurally and biochemically related to the human hepatitis delta virus (HDV) ribozymes. The occurrence of this ribozyme exclusively in mammals suggests that it may have evolved as recently as 200 million years ago. We postulate that HDV arose from the human transcriptome.
Biochemical and electron microscopic data indicate that the human hepatitis delta viral agent contains a covalently closed circular and single-stranded RNA genome that has certain similarities with viroid-like agents from plants. The sequence of the viral genome (1,678 nucleotides) has been determined and an open reading frame within the complementary strand has been shown to encode an antigen that binds specifically to antisera from patients with chronic hepatitis delta viral infections.
Infection of mouse and rat cells by the murine sarcoma virus (Moloney isolate) showed two-hit kinetics for focus production in mouse cells but one-hit kinetics in rat cells. Antiserum added to cultures after infection suppressed focus formation in mouse cells but not in rat cells. These studies suggest that, in rat cells infected with murine sarcoma virus, leukemina virus is not needed for focus formation and that these foci result from proliferation of the transformed rat cell; in mouse cells, on the other hand, leukemia virus is needed as "helper," and focus formation requires spread of virus. The term "defectiveness" then, if used, should not be applied to RNA tumor viruses without qualification for the viral function studied and the cell system employed.
Certain single base substitutions causing genetic diseases or resulting in polymorphisms linked to mutant alleles, alter a restriction enzyme cleavage site and can therefore be detected in total genomic DNA using DNA blots. Many base substitutions do not lead to an altered restriction site, but these can be detected using synthetic oligonucleotides as hybridization probes if the DNA sequence surrounding the base substitution is known. In the case of beta-thalassaemia, where 22 different single base mutations have been identified, a large number of probes would be required for diagnosis. An approach which was used to detect mutations in viral DNA involves the S1 nuclease treatment of heteroduplexes formed between wild-type and mutant DNA. Although certain single base mismatches are cleaved by S1 nuclease (ref. 11 and T. Shenk, personal communication), many other mismatches examined by this procedure are not cleaved (B. Seed, personal communication; R.M.M., unpublished data). Heteroduplexes between mutant and wild-type subgenomic fragments of double-stranded reovirus RNA migrate slower than the corresponding homoduplexes in polyacrylamide gels containing 7 M urea, but it is not known whether this method is applicable to DNA heteroduplexes containing single base mismatches. Here we describe a procedure that involves the electrophoretic separation of DNA heteroduplexes in a well-characterized gel system. We show that four different human beta-thalassaemia alleles with known single base mutations can be detected with as little as 5 micrograms of total genomic DNA. The method should be useful in the localization and diagnosis of mutations associated with genetic diseases.
In the eukaryotic cell, both secreted and plasma membrane proteins are synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum, then transported, via the Golgi complex, to the cell surface. Each of the compartments of this transport pathway carries out particular metabolic functions, and therefore presumably contains a distinct complement of membrane proteins. Thus, mechanisms must exist for localizing such proteins to their respective destinations. However, a major obstacle to the study of such mechanisms is that the isolation and detailed analysis of such internal membrane proteins pose formidable technical problems. We have therefore used the E1 glycoprotein from coronavirus MHV-A59 as a viral model for this class of protein. Here we present the primary structure of the protein, determined by analysis of cDNA clones prepared from viral mRNA. In combination with a previous study of its assembly into the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, the sequence reveals several unusual features of the protein which may be related to its intracellular localization.
The understanding of marine microbial ecology and metabolism has been hampered by the paucity of sequenced reference genomes. To this end, we report the sequencing of 137 diverse marine isolates collected from around the world. We analysed these sequences, along with previously published marine prokaryotic genomes, in the context of marine metagenomic data, to gain insights into the ecology of the surface ocean prokaryotic picoplankton (0.1-3.0 mm size range). The results suggest that the sequenced genomes define two microbial groups: one composed of only a few taxa that are nearly always abundant in picoplanktonic communities, and the other consisting of many microbial taxa that are rarely abundant. The genomic content of the second group suggests that these microbes are capable of slow growth and survival in energy-limited environments, and rapid growth in energy-rich environments. By contrast, the abundant and cosmopolitan picoplanktonic prokaryotes for which there is genomic representation have smaller genomes, are probably capable of only slow growth and seem to be relatively unable to sense or rapidly acclimate to energy-rich conditions. Their genomic features also lead us to propose that one method used to avoid predation by viruses and/or bacterivores is by means of slow growth and the maintenance of low biomass.
The three-dimensional structures of influenza virus haemagglutinins complexed with cell receptor analogues show sialic acids bound to a pocket of conserved amino acids surrounded by antibody-binding sites. Sialic acid fills the conserved pocket, demonstrating that it is the influenza virus receptor. The proximity of the antibody-binding sites suggests that antibodies neutralize virus infectivity by preventing virus-to-cell binding. The structures suggest approaches to the design of anti-viral drugs that could block attachment of viruses to cells.
African primates are naturally infected with over 40 different simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIVs), two of which have crossed the species barrier and generated human immunodeficiency virus types 1 and 2 (HIV-1 and HIV-2). Unlike the human viruses, however, SIVs do not generally cause acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in their natural hosts. Here we show that SIVcpz, the immediate precursor of HIV-1, is pathogenic in free-ranging chimpanzees. By following 94 members of two habituated chimpanzee communities in Gombe National Park, Tanzania, for over 9 years, we found a 10- to 16-fold higher age-corrected death hazard for SIVcpz-infected (n = 17) compared to uninfected (n = 77) chimpanzees. We also found that SIVcpz-infected females were less likely to give birth and had a higher infant mortality rate than uninfected females. Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization of post-mortem spleen and lymph node samples from three infected and two uninfected chimpanzees revealed significant CD4(+) T-cell depletion in all infected individuals, with evidence of high viral replication and extensive follicular dendritic cell virus trapping in one of them. One female, who died within 3 years of acquiring SIVcpz, had histopathological findings consistent with end-stage AIDS. These results indicate that SIVcpz, like HIV-1, is associated with progressive CD4(+) T-cell loss, lymphatic tissue destruction and premature death. These findings challenge the prevailing view that all natural SIV infections are non-pathogenic and suggest that SIVcpz has a substantial negative impact on the health, reproduction and lifespan of chimpanzees in the wild.
We report the first atomic resolution structure of an animal virus, human rhinovirus 14. It is strikingly similar to known icosahedral plant RNA viruses. Four neutralizing immunogenic regions have been identified. These, and corresponding antigenic sequences of polio and foot-and-mouth disease viruses, reside on external protrusions. A large cleft on each icosahedral face is probably the host cell receptor binding site.
Cryptosporidium species cause acute gastroenteritis and diarrhoea worldwide. They are members of the Apicomplexa--protozoan pathogens that invade host cells by using a specialized apical complex and are usually transmitted by an invertebrate vector or intermediate host. In contrast to other Apicomplexans, Cryptosporidium is transmitted by ingestion of oocysts and completes its life cycle in a single host. No therapy is available, and control focuses on eliminating oocysts in water supplies. Two species, C. hominis and C. parvum, which differ in host range, genotype and pathogenicity, are most relevant to humans. C. hominis is restricted to humans, whereas C. parvum also infects other mammals. Here we describe the eight-chromosome approximately 9.2-million-base genome of C. hominis. The complement of C. hominis protein-coding genes shows a striking concordance with the requirements imposed by the environmental niches the parasite inhabits. Energy metabolism is largely from glycolysis. Both aerobic and anaerobic metabolisms are available, the former requiring an alternative electron transport system in a simplified mitochondrion. Biosynthesis capabilities are limited, explaining an extensive array of transporters. Evidence of an apicoplast is absent, but genes associated with apical complex organelles are present. C. hominis and C. parvum exhibit very similar gene complements, and phenotypic differences between these parasites must be due to subtle sequence divergence.
TMV RNA is not an efficient template for translation of the viral coat protein, in spite of containing nucleotide sequences coding for the protein. Efficient translation requires the prior synthesis within infected cells of a smaller RNA carrying only a portion of the information encoded in the whole genome.
Observations with RNA isolated from the RNA virus indicate that regulation of protein synthesis occurs during translation. At least three electrophoretically separable proteins, one of which lacks histidine, appear as a result of adding purified viral RNA to a cell-free extract of Escherichia coli. This establishes that the RNA contains at least three cistrons. Comparison of the kinetics of appearance of the proteins that do and do not contain histidine reveals a control mechanism which determines the temporal order and the frequency of translation of each cistron. Such translational controls at the stage of message use provide additional devices for regulating protein synthesis which can supplement those functioning at the transcription step where genetic messages are produced.
Plants are able to respond to pathogen attack to restrain development of a systemic infection. The response of Brassica napus (oilseed rape) to systemic infection with the DNA virus cauliflower mosaic virus was shown to result in enhancement and subsequent suppression of viral gene expression in parallel with changes in symptom expression. Transgenes with homology to viral sequences were also affected. This phenomenon, which was shown to be mediated by both transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms, might be related to regulation of highly expressed genetic elements.
The mechanisms by which Ebola virus evades detection and infects cells to cause hemorrhagic fever have not been defined, though its glycoprotein, synthesized in either a secreted or transmembrane form, is likely involved. Here the secreted glycoprotein was found to interact with neutrophils through CD16b, the neutrophil-specific form of the Fc gamma receptor III, whereas the transmembrane glycoprotein was found to interact with endothelial cells but not neutrophils. A murine retroviral vector pseudotyped with the transmembrane glycoprotein preferentially infected endothelial cells. Thus, the secreted glycoprotein inhibits early neutrophil activation, which likely affects the host response to infection, whereas binding of the transmembrane glycoprotein to endothelial cells may contribute to the hemorrhagic symptoms of this disease.
A study was conducted to determine the fidelity of DNA synthesis catalyzed in vitro by the reverse transcriptase from a human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). Like other retroviral reverse transcriptases, the HIV-1 enzyme does not correct errors by exonucleolytic proofreading. Measurements with M13mp2-based fidelity assays indicated that the HIV-1 enzyme, isolated either from virus particles or from Escherichia coli cells infected with a plasmid expressing the cloned gene, was exceptionally inaccurate, having an average error rate per detectable nucleotide incorporated of 1/1700. It was, in fact, the least accurate reverse transcriptase described to date, one-tenth as accurate as the polymerases isolated from avian myeloblastosis or murine leukemia viruses, which have average error rates of approximately 1/17,000 and approximately 1/30,000, respectively. DNA sequence analyses of mutations generated by HIV-1 polymerase showed that base substitution, addition, and deletion errors were all produced. Certain template positions were mutational hotspots where the error rate could be as high as 1 per 70 polymerized nucleotides. The data are consistent with the notion that the exceptional diversity of the HIV-1 genome results from error-prone reverse transcription.
The large T antigen (T) of simian virus 40 is a multifunctional protein required for both viral DNA replication and cellular transformation. T antigen forms specific protein complexes with the host protein p53 in both virus-infected and transformed cells. p53 has recently been shown to be an oncogene, but its normal function is not clear. We previously established a radioimmunoassay to study the newly described complex between T antigen and DNA polymerase alpha, and have noted a similarity between the antigenic changes induced in T by the binding of both p53 and polymerase. We now extend this analysis to a larger collection of anti-T antibodies and formally establish that p53 and DNA polymerase alpha can compete for binding to the SV40 T antigen. At a critical concentration of the three components it is possible to detect a trimeric complex of T, p53 and DNA polymerase alpha. Our observations have important implications for the control by these nuclear oncogenes of viral and cellular DNA synthesis and viral host range in both normal and transformed cells. We present a model for the action of p53 in growth control.
Examination of homologies between retroviral oncogenes and transforming sequences defined by transfection reveals that the human bladder carcinoma (EJ) oncogene is homologous to the Harvey sarcoma virus oncogene (ras). Structural analysis limits the region of homology to a 3.0-kilobase SacI fragment of the EJ oncogene. Both EJ and ras DNA probes detect similar transcripts in transfectants derived from bladder carcinoma cell lines.
Most viruses have RNA genomes that are replicated and transcribed into messenger RNA by viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRps), usually in concert with other viral and host factors. Many, if not most, eukaryotes also encode putative RdRps that have been implicated in sequence-specific, RNA-triggered gene silencing. Although the viral and cellular RdRps have no sequence homology, they share functional similarities such as copying messenger RNA templates and intercellular spread of the amplified sequences. Better understanding of viral and host RdRps will improve our ability to control viruses and to use RNA silencing and viruses as tools for research, biotechnology, and medicine.
Glycoprotein B (gB) is the most conserved component of the complex cell-entry machinery of herpes viruses. A crystal structure of the gB ectodomain from herpes simplex virus type 1 reveals a multidomain trimer with unexpected homology to glycoprotein G from vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV G). An alpha-helical coiled-coil core relates gB to class I viral membrane fusion glycoproteins; two extended beta hairpins with hydrophobic tips, homologous to fusion peptides in VSV G, relate gB to class II fusion proteins. Members of both classes accomplish fusion through a large-scale conformational change, triggered by a signal from a receptor-binding component. The domain connectivity within a gB monomer would permit such a rearrangement, including long-range translocations linked to viral and cellular membranes.
Herpesviruses are characterized by their ability to maintain life-long latent infections in their animal hosts. However, the mechanisms that allow establishment and maintenance of the latent state remain poorly understood. Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) establishes latency in neurons of sensory ganglia, where the only abundant viral gene product is a non-coding RNA, the latency associated transcript (LAT). Here we show that LAT functions as a primary microRNA (miRNA) precursor that encodes four distinct miRNAs in HSV-1 infected cells. One of these miRNAs, miR-H2-3p, is transcribed in an antisense orientation to ICP0-a viral immediate-early transcriptional activator that is important for productive HSV-1 replication and thought to have a role in reactivation from latency. We show that miR-H2-3p is able to reduce ICP0 protein expression, but does not significantly affect ICP0 messenger RNA levels. We also identified a fifth HSV-1 miRNA in latently infected trigeminal ganglia, miR-H6, which derives from a previously unknown transcript distinct from LAT. miR-H6 shows extended seed complementarity to the mRNA encoding a second HSV-1 transcription factor, ICP4, and inhibits expression of ICP4, which is required for expression of most HSV-1 genes during productive infection. These results may explain the reported ability of LAT to promote latency. Thus, HSV-1 expresses at least two primary miRNA precursors in latently infected neurons that may facilitate the establishment and maintenance of viral latency by post-transcriptionally regulating viral gene expression.
The beta-chemokine receptor CCR-5 is an essential co-factor for fusion of HIV-1 strains of the non-syncytium-inducing (NSI) phenotype with CD4+ T-cells. The primary binding site for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 is the CD4 molecule, and the interaction is mediated by the viral surface glycoprotein gp120 (refs 6, 7). The mechanism of CCR-5 function during HIV-1 entry has not been defined, but we have shown previously that its beta-chemokine ligands prevent HIV-1 from fusing with the cell. We therefore investigated whether CCR-5 acts as a second binding site for HIV-1 simultaneously with or subsequent to the interaction between gp120 and CD4. We used a competition assay based on gp120 inhibition of the binding of the CCR-5 ligand, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1beta, to its receptor on activated CD4+ T cells or CCR-5-positive CD4- cells. We conclude that CD4 binding, although not absolutely necessary for the gp120-CCR-5 interaction, greatly increases its efficiency. Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against several sites on gp120, including the V3 loop and CD4-induced epitopes, inhibited the interaction of gp120 with CCR-5, without affecting gp120-CD4 binding. Interference with HIV-1 binding to one or both of its receptors (CD4 and CCR-5) may be an important mechanism of virus neutralization.
As is evident from the human immunodeficiency virus epidemic, there is no systematic method for producing a vaccine. Genetic immunization is a new approach to vaccine production that has many of the advantages of live/attenuated pathogens but no risk of infection. It involves introducing DNA encoding a pathogen protein into host cells and has shown promise in several disease models. Here we describe a new method for vaccine development, expression-library immunization, which makes use of the technique of genetic immunization and the fact that all the antigens of a pathogen are encoded in its DNA. An expression library of pathogen DNA is used to immunize a host thereby producing the effects of antigen presentation of a live vaccine without the risk. We show that even partial expression libraries made from the DNA of Mycoplasma pulmonis, a natural pathogen in rodents, provide protection against challenge from the pathogen. Expression library immunization may prove to be a general method for vaccination against any pathogen.
The large T protein coded by the early region of simian virus 40 (SV40) is involved in the induction and maintenance of cell transformation. It is not clear which properties of T are important in causing the transformation, since the protein is multifunctional. To clarify the action of T proteins in transformation, we have prepared several monoclonal antibodies directed against different regions of the T molecule. One of these antibodies, DL 3C4, recognizes an antigenic determinant on T that is also present on a host cell protein of molecular weight 68,000. This cross-reactive 68K protein is located within the nucleus of all mammalian cell types examined and has a characteristic granular distribution as shown by immunofluorescence. The antigenic determinant recognized by DL 3C4 is resistant to denaturation. Studies on Adeno-SV40 hybrid viruses show that the antigenic site on T is coded for by sequences located between 0.44 and 0.29 on the SV40 map.
A major impediment in the treatment of neurological diseases is the presence of the blood-brain barrier, which precludes the entry of therapeutic molecules from blood to brain. Here we show that a short peptide derived from rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG) enables the transvascular delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA) to the brain. This 29-amino-acid peptide specifically binds to the acetylcholine receptor expressed by neuronal cells. To enable siRNA binding, a chimaeric peptide was synthesized by adding nonamer arginine residues at the carboxy terminus of RVG. This RVG-9R peptide was able to bind and transduce siRNA to neuronal cells in vitro, resulting in efficient gene silencing. After intravenous injection into mice, RVG-9R delivered siRNA to the neuronal cells, resulting in specific gene silencing within the brain. Furthermore, intravenous treatment with RVG-9R-bound antiviral siRNA afforded robust protection against fatal viral encephalitis in mice. Repeated administration of RVG-9R-bound siRNA did not induce inflammatory cytokines or anti-peptide antibodies. Thus, RVG-9R provides a safe and noninvasive approach for the delivery of siRNA and potentially other therapeutic molecules across the blood-brain barrier.
The Harvey murine sarcoma virus (Ha-MuSV) transforming gene, v-rasH, encodes a 21,000 molecular weight protein (p21) that is closely related to the p21 proteins encoded by the cellular transforming genes of the ras gene family. The primary translation product (prop21), which is found in the cytosol, undergoes posttranslational modification and the mature protein subsequently becomes associated with the inner surface of the plasma membrane and binds lipid tightly. The p21 proteins have the capacity to bind guanine nucleotides non-covalently in vitro. To assess the biological relevance of these biochemical features of the protein, we have now studied a series of deletion mutants located at or near the C-terminus of the viral p21 protein. Our tissue culture studies indicate that amino acids located at or near the C-terminus are required for cellular transformation, membrane association and lipid binding.
Interactions between bacterial hosts and their viruses (phages) lead to reciprocal genome evolution through a dynamic co-evolutionary process. Phage-mediated transfer of host genes--often located in genome islands--has had a major impact on microbial evolution. Furthermore, phage genomes have clearly been shaped by the acquisition of genes from their hosts. Here we investigate whole-genome expression of a host and phage, the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus MED4 and the T7-like cyanophage P-SSP7, during lytic infection, to gain insight into these co-evolutionary processes. Although most of the phage genome was linearly transcribed over the course of infection, four phage-encoded bacterial metabolism genes formed part of the same expression cluster, even though they are physically separated on the genome. These genes--encoding photosystem II D1 (psbA), high-light inducible protein (hli), transaldolase (talC) and ribonucleotide reductase (nrd)--are transcribed together with phage DNA replication genes and seem to make up a functional unit involved in energy and deoxynucleotide production for phage replication in resource-poor oceans. Also unique to this system was the upregulation of numerous genes in the host during infection. These may be host stress response genes and/or genes induced by the phage. Many of these host genes are located in genome islands and have homologues in cyanophage genomes. We hypothesize that phage have evolved to use upregulated host genes, leading to their stable incorporation into phage genomes and their subsequent transfer back to hosts in genome islands. Thus activation of host genes during infection may be directing the co-evolution of gene content in both host and phage genomes.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) seem to provide the major line of defence against many viruses. CTL effector functions are mediated primarily by cells carrying the CD8 (Ly-2) antigen (CD8+ cells) and are triggered by interactions of the T-cell receptor with an antigenic complex, often termed 'self plus X', composed of viral determinants in association with class I molecules of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). The mechanism(s) of induction of virus-specific CTL in vivo is poorly understood, but data from in vitro experiments suggest that their generation is strictly dependent on functions provided by CD4+ helper T cells (also referred to as L3T4+; or TH) that respond to antigens in the context of class II (Ia) MHC determinants. The prevailing opinion that induction of most functions of CD8+ cells requires help provided by CD4+ cells has recently been challenged by the observation that CD8+ cells alone can mediate a variety of responses to alloantigens in vitro and in vivo; however, the possibility that CTL to self plus X could be generated in vivo in the absence of TH cells has not been evaluated. We report here that C57BL/6J (B6) and AKR/J mice, when functionally depleted of CD4+ cells by in vivo treatment with the CD4+-specific rat monoclonal antibody GK1.5 (refs 8-14) responded to ectromelia virus infection by developing an optimal in vivo virus-specific CTL response, and subsequently recovered from the disease (mousepox) that was lethal for similarly infected nude mice (CD4-, CD8-).
Intraperitoneal injection of neuropathogenic strains of lactic dehydrogenase virus (LDV) causes a histologically distinctive fatal paralytic disease characterized by an inflammatory destruction of motor neurones in the brain stem and cord in C58 mice aged over 9 months. To elicit the disease in the naturally susceptible C58 strain requires an age-associated or X-ray induced loss of immunological competence, LDV infection and genetic susceptibility. Genetic studies of the common inbred mouse strains showed that susceptibility to the disease was not linked to the major histocompatibility complex but correlated with the FV-1n allele, susceptibility to spontaneous leukaemia, and infection by neuropathogenic strains of LDV. These observations suggested that neuropathogenic strains of LDV elicit the disease only in those strains of mice that carry multiple copies of N-tropic C-type retroviruses in their genomes and that are permissive for retrovirus replication. Presumably the expression of these viral genomes (high titres of virus in tissues correlating with age) is the important factor. Here we present genetic evidence to support this hypothesis and briefly discuss the possible implications.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV, a betaherpes virus) is the cause of serious disease in immunologically compromised individuals, including those with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. One of the compounds used in the chemotherapy of HCMV infections is the nucleoside analogue 9-(1,3-dihydroxy-2-propoxymethyl)-guanine (ganciclovir). The mechanism of action of this drug is dependent on the formation of the nucleoside triphosphate, which is a strong inhibitor of the viral DNA polymerase. Thymidine kinase, which is encoded by many of the herpesviruses, catalyses the initial phosphorylation of ganciclovir. But there is no evidence for the coding of this enzyme by HCMV, and DNA sequence analysis of the HCMV genome has shown that there is no open reading frame characteristic of a herpesvirus thymidine kinase. Here we present biochemical and immunological evidence that the HCMV UL97 open reading frame codes for a protein capable of phosphorylating ganciclovir. This protein seems to be responsible for the selectivity of ganciclovir and will be useful tool in the understanding and refinement of the antiviral activity of new selective anti-HCMV compounds.
The stable introduction of a functional beta-globin gene in haematopoietic stem cells could be a powerful approach to treat beta-thalassaemia and sickle-cell disease. Genetic approaches aiming to increase normal beta-globin expression in the progeny of autologous haematopoietic stem cells might circumvent the limitations and risks of allogeneic cell transplants. However, low-level expression, position effects and transcriptional silencing hampered the effectiveness of viral transduction of the human beta-globin gene when it was linked to minimal regulatory sequences. Here we show that the use of recombinant lentiviruses enables efficient transfer and faithful integration of the human beta-globin gene together with large segments of its locus control region. In long-term recipients of unselected transduced bone marrow cells, tetramers of two murine alpha-globin and two human betaA-globin molecules account for up to 13% of total haemoglobin in mature red cells of normal mice. In beta-thalassaemic heterozygous mice higher percentages are obtained (17% to 24%), which are sufficient to ameliorate anaemia and red cell morphology. Such levels should be of therapeutic benefit in patients with severe defects in haemoglobin production.
The human hepatoma cell line PLC/PRF/5, which contains integrated hepatitis B virus DNA, synthesises and secretes hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg). When injected into BALB/c nude mice, these cells produce well-vascularized, encapsulated tumours in almost 100% of animals. HBsAg has been demonstrated on the surface and in the cytoplasm of PLC/PRF/5 cells using immunofluorescence techniques. Recently, we reported that monoclonal antibodies to HBsAg (IgG1, IgG2a and IgM isotypes) bind to HBsAg-associated viral determinants of PLC/PRF/5 cells in culture and immunoprecipitate HBsAg secreted into the growth medium. Also IgG2a and IgM antibodies to HBsAg (anti-HBs) produce specific lysis of PLC/PRF/5 cells in culture in the presence of complement, but have no lytic effect on human hepatoma cells which do not express HBsAg. In the present study, we demonstrate that IgM and IgG2a, but not IgG1, monoclonal anti-HBs specifically prevent or suppress tumour formation in a substantial number of athymic nude mice injected with PLC/PRF/5 cells.
Interferon research has been hampered by problems in its assay. The only widespread assays use tissue culture cells and compare some parameter of viral growth (such as viral RNA synthesis or host cell death) in the presence and absence of interferon. These complex biological assays, though sensitive, are laborious and subject to inherent variability. In particular, components other than interferon present in the assay sample often influence viral growth. There is clearly a need for a simple, direct, interferon assay; I now describe such an assay--an immunoradiometric assay utilizing monoclonal antibody.
Initiation of protein synthesis in eukaryotes requires recruitment of the 40S ribosomal subunit to the messenger RNA (mRNA). In most cases, this depends on recognition of a modified nucleotide cap on the 5' end of the mRNA. However, an alternate pathway uses a structured RNA element in the 5' untranslated region of the messenger or viral RNA called an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES). Here, we present a cryo-electron microscopy map of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) IRES bound to the 40S ribosomal subunit at about 20 A resolution. IRES binding induces a pronounced conformational change in the 40S subunit and closes the mRNA binding cleft, suggesting a mechanism for IRES-mediated positioning of mRNA in the ribosomal decoding center.
Latency and ongoing replication have both been proposed to explain the drug-insensitive human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) reservoir maintained during antiretroviral therapy. Here we explore a novel mechanism for ongoing HIV replication in the face of antiretroviral drugs. We propose a model whereby multiple infections per cell lead to reduced sensitivity to drugs without requiring drug-resistant mutations, and experimentally validate the model using multiple infections per cell by cell-free HIV in the presence of the drug tenofovir. We then examine the drug sensitivity of cell-to-cell spread of HIV, a mode of HIV transmission that can lead to multiple infection events per target cell. Infections originating from cell-free virus decrease strongly in the presence of antiretrovirals tenofovir and efavirenz whereas infections involving cell-to-cell spread are markedly less sensitive to the drugs. The reduction in sensitivity is sufficient to keep multiple rounds of infection from terminating in the presence of drugs. We examine replication from cell-to-cell spread in the presence of clinical drug concentrations using a stochastic infection model and find that replication is intermittent, without substantial accumulation of mutations. If cell-to-cell spread has the same properties in vivo, it may have adverse consequences for the immune system, lead to therapy failure in individuals with risk factors, and potentially contribute to viral persistence and hence be a barrier to curing HIV infection.
A growth hormone minigene carrying its natural promoter (237 nucleotides of chromosomal DNA) was stably propagated in a murine retrovirus containing hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase as a selectable marker. Glucocorticoid and thyroid hormone inducibility was transferred with the growth hormone gene. Recombinant virus with titers of 10(6) per milliliter was recovered. This demonstration that retroviruses can be used to transfer a nonselectable gene under its own regulatory control enlarges the scope of retroviral vectors as potent tools for gene transfer.
Sixty-one SARS coronavirus genomic sequences derived from the early, middle, and late phases of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic were analyzed together with two viral sequences from palm civets. Genotypes characteristic of each phase were discovered, and the earliest genotypes were similar to the animal SARS-like coronaviruses. Major deletions were observed in the Orf8 region of the genome, both at the start and the end of the epidemic. The neutral mutation rate of the viral genome was constant but the amino acid substitution rate of the coding sequences slowed during the course of the epidemic. The spike protein showed the strongest initial responses to positive selection pressures, followed by subsequent purifying selection and eventual stabilization.
A typical protein antigen contains several epitopes that can be recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), but in a characteristic antiviral immune response in vivo, CTL recognize only a small number of these potential epitopes, sometimes only one, this phenomenon is known as immunodominance. Antigenic variation within CTL epitopes has been demonstrated for the human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 (ref. 11) and other viruses and such 'antigenic escape' may be responsible for viral persistence. Here we develop a new mathematical model that deals with the interaction between CTL and multiple epitopes of a genetically variable pathogen, and show that the nonlinear competition among CTL responses against different epitopes can explain immunodominance. This model suggests that an antigenically homogeneous pathogen population tends to induce a dominant response against a single epitope, whereas a heterogeneous pathogen population can stimulate complicated fluctuating responses against multiple epitopes. Antigenic variation in the immunodominant epitope can shift responses to weaker epitopes and thereby reduce immunological control of the pathogen population. These ideas are consistent with detailed longitudinal studies of CTL responses in HIV-1 infected patients. For vaccine design, the model suggests that the major response should be directed against conserved epitopes even if they are subdominant.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) control viral infections by recognizing viral peptides presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A11-restricted CTLs that recognize peptide residues 416 to 424 of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen-4 frequently dominate EBV-induced responses in A11+ Caucasian donors. This epitope is conserved in type A EBV strains from Caucasians and central African populations, where A11 is relatively infrequent. However, strains from highly A11+ populations in New Guinea carry a lysine-to-threonine mutation at residue 424 that abrogates CTL recognition and binding of the peptide to nascent A11 molecules. The results suggest that evolution of a widespread and genetically stable virus such as EBV is influenced by pressure from MHC-restricted CTL responses.
During malignant transformation, cancer cells acquire genetic mutations that override the normal mechanisms controlling cellular proliferation. Primary rodent cells are efficiently converted into tumorigenic cells by the coexpression of cooperating oncogenes. However, similar experiments with human cells have consistently failed to yield tumorigenic transformants, indicating a fundamental difference in the biology of human and rodent cells. The few reported successes in the creation of human tumour cells have depended on the use of chemical or physical agents to achieve immortalization, the selection of rare, spontaneously arising immortalized cells, or the use of an entire viral genome. We show here that the ectopic expression of the telomerase catalytic subunit (hTERT) in combination with two oncogenes (the simian virus 40 large-T oncoprotein and an oncogenic allele of H-ras) results in direct tumorigenic conversion of normal human epithelial and fibroblast cells. These results demonstrate that disruption of the intracellular pathways regulated by large-T, oncogenic ras and telomerase suffices to create a human tumor cell.
Many retroviral oncogenes have been classified into one of several categories based on structure, enzymology and cellular localization. These genes originated from host cells and are probably derived from genes normally involved in the control of cell proliferation. The cellular counterparts of three oncogenes have been identified as a growth factor or growth factor receptor; related oncogenes include receptor-like membrane proteins which often express tyrosine kinase activity. These growth factor-related oncogenes are structurally and biochemically distinct from the membrane-associated ras gene family, which bind and hydrolyse GTP. Oncogenes localized primarily in the cytoplasm which probably have serine kinase activity, have also been identified. Although the structure and biochemistry of many oncogenes have been extensively studied, relatively little is known about the functional relationships of oncogene proteins within the cell. An opportunity to study such interaction is provided by the identification of a monoclonal antibody that neutralizes cellular ras proteins when microinjected into cells. It has been shown previously that the injected antibody inhibits the initiation of S-phase in NIH 3T3 cells. In the present study we injected this monoclonal antibody into NIH 3T3 cells transformed by a variety of oncogenes. The results show that transformation by three growth factor receptor-like oncogenes depends on c-ras proteins, while transformation by two cytoplasmic oncogenes appears to be independent of c-ras protein.
Hepatitis B viruses synthesize their open circular DNA genomes by reverse transcription of an RNA intermediate. The details of this process have been examined with the use of mammalian hepatitis B viruses to map the sites for initiation and termination of DNA synthesis and to explore the consequences of mutations introduced at short, separated direct repeats (DR1 and DR2) implicated in the mechanisms of initiation. The first DNA strand to be synthesized is initiated within DR1, apparently by a protein primer, and the completed strand has a short terminal redundancy. In contrast, the second DNA strand begins with the sequence adjacent to DR2, but its 5' end is joined to an oligoribonucleotide that contains DR1; thus the putative RNA primer has been transposed to the position of DR2. It is now possible to propose a detailed strategy for reverse transcription by hepatitis B viruses that can be instructively compared with that used by retroviruses.
Evidence indicates that cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) may be important in containing the spread of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the infected host. Although the use of recombinant viruses has been proposed as an approach to elicit protective immunity against HIV, the ability of recombinant viral constructs to elicit CD8+ CTL responses in higher primates has never been demonstrated. A live recombinant virus, vaccinia-simian immunodeficiency virus of macaques (SIVmac), was used to determine whether such a genetically restricted, T lymphocyte-mediated antiviral response could be generated in a primate. Vaccinia-SIVmac vaccination elicited an SIVmac Gag-specific, CD8+ CTL response in rhesus monkeys. These CTLs recognized a peptide fragment that spans residues 171 to 195 of the Gag protein. The rhesus monkey major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I gene product restricting this CTL response was defined. Both the vaccinated and SIVmac-infected monkeys that shared this MHC class I gene product developed CTLs with the same Gag epitope specificity. These findings support the use of recombinant virus vaccines for the prevention of HIV infections in humans.
Rabies, a viral disease affecting all warm-blooded animals, is prevalent in most parts of the world, where it propagates amongst wild animals, particularly the fox and dog. The public health and economic consequences of infection in man and livestock are well known. Attempts to control the disease by vaccinating wild carnivores with inactivated or attenuated rabies virus remain controversial, and we have instead evaluated here the potential of a recombinant vaccinia virus to protect foxes against the disease. We have found that the administration of vaccinia virus (VV) or a recombinant harbouring the rabies surface antigen gene (VVTGgRAB) is innocuous to foxes. The recombinant virus can elicit the production of titers of rabies-neutralizing antibodies equal or superior to those obtained with conventional vaccine, and 10(8) plaque-forming units (PFU) of VVTGgRAB administered subcutaneously, intradermally or orally confers complete protection to severe challenge infection with street rabies virus.
A new method for the classification of retroviruses is presented. The scheme is based on the length and sequence of a DNA transcript of the 5' end of the genome. The method can be used to detect similarities between distantly related viruses as well as to discriminate between very closely related viruses. The method is applied to viruses isolated from mice, baboons, gibbons, a woolly monkey and chickens.
Double-stranded ribonucleic acid (dsRNA) serves as a danger signal associated with viral infection and leads to stimulation of innate immune cells. In contrast, the immunostimulatory potential of single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) is poorly understood and innate immune receptors for ssRNA are unknown. We report that guanosine (G)- and uridine (U)-rich ssRNA oligonucleotides derived from human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) stimulate dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages to secrete interferon-alpha and proinflammatory, as well as regulatory, cytokines. By using Toll-like receptor (TLR)-deficient mice and genetic complementation, we show that murine TLR7 and human TLR8 mediate species-specific recognition of GU-rich ssRNA. These data suggest that ssRNA represents a physiological ligand for TLR7 and TLR8.
Cyanobacteria of the Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus genera are important contributors to photosynthetic productivity in the open oceans. Recently, core photosystem II (PSII) genes were identified in cyanophages and proposed to function in photosynthesis and in increasing viral fitness by supplementing the host production of these proteins. Here we show evidence for the presence of photosystem I (PSI) genes in the genomes of viruses that infect these marine cyanobacteria, using pre-existing metagenomic data from the global ocean sampling expedition as well as from viral biomes. The seven cyanobacterial core PSI genes identified in this study, psaA, B, C, D, E, K and a unique J and F fusion, form a cluster in cyanophage genomes, suggestive of selection for a distinct function in the virus life cycle. The existence of this PSI cluster was confirmed with overlapping and long polymerase chain reaction on environmental DNA from the Northern Line Islands. Potentially, the seven proteins encoded by the viral genes are sufficient to form an intact monomeric PSI complex. Projection of viral predicted peptides on the cyanobacterial PSI crystal structure suggested that the viral-PSI components might provide a unique way of funnelling reducing power from respiratory and other electron transfer chains to the PSI.
Cyclins are regulatory subunits which associate with kinases to form complexes that control many of the important steps in cell-cycle progression. The best characterized of the cyclin-containing complexes is the association of cyclin B with the p34cdc2 kinase. The p34cdc2/cyclin B complex is required for the G2 to M transition (see refs 1-4 for review), but the physiological role of other cyclin complexes is unclear. Human cyclin A binds independently to two kinases, associating with either p34cdc2 or a related protein, p33 (refs 5-7). In adenovirus-transformed cells, the viral E1A oncoprotein seems to associate with p33/cyclin A but not with p34cdc2/cyclin A (B. Faha, M.M., L-H.T. and E.H., manuscript submitted). To isolate the gene for p33, we have cloned several novel human cdc2-related genes. The protein product of one of these genes, cdk2 (cyclin-dependent kinase 2), shares 65% sequence identity with p34cdc2 (ref. 8) and 89% identity with the Xenopus Eg-1 gene product. Immunochemical characterization and partial proteolytic mapping show that the cdk2 gene product is the cyclin A-associated p33. Immunoprecipitations of the p33cdk2 protein suggest that it can act as a protein kinase in vitro. As p33cdk2 is bound to cyclin A and is targeted by the viral E1A protein, we suggest that the p33cdk2/cyclin A complex has a unique role in cell-cycle regulation of vertebrate cells.
A vaccine against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) would be highly effective in stopping the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic. A comprehensive evaluation of potential vaccine methodologies can be made by means of the simian model for AIDS, which takes advantage of the similarities in viral composition and disease potential between simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection of rhesus macaques and HIV infection in humans. Immunization with a formalin-inactivated whole SIV vaccine potentiated with either alum and the Syntex adjuvant threonyl muramyl dipeptide (MDP) or MDP alone resulted in the protection of eight of nine rhesus monkeys challenged with ten animal-infectious doses of pathogenic virus. These results demonstrate that a whole virus vaccine is highly effective in inducing immune responses that can protect against lentivirus infection and AIDS-like disease.
Lambda-like double-stranded (ds) DNA bacteriophage undergo massive conformational changes in their capsid shell during the packaging of their viral genomes. Capsid shells are complex organizations of hundreds of protein subunits that assemble into intricate quaternary complexes that ultimately are able to withstand over 50 atm of pressure during genome packaging. The extensive integration between subunits in capsids requires the formation of an intermediate complex, termed a procapsid, from which individual subunits can undergo the necessary refolding and structural rearrangements needed to transition to the more stable capsid. Although various mature capsids have been characterized at atomic resolution, no such procapsid structure is available for a dsDNA virus or bacteriophage. Here we present a procapsid X-ray structure at 3.65 A resolution, termed prohead II, of the lambda-like bacteriophage HK97, the mature capsid structure of which was previously solved to 3.44 A (ref. 2). A comparison of the two largely different capsid forms has unveiled an unprecedented expansion mechanism that describes the transition. Crystallographic and hydrogen/deuterium exchange data presented here demonstrate that the subunit tertiary structures are significantly different between the two states, with twisting and bending motions occurring in both helical and beta-sheet regions. We also identified subunit interactions at each three-fold axis of the capsid that are maintained throughout maturation. The interactions sustain capsid integrity during subunit refolding and provide a fixed hinge from which subunits undergo rotational and translational motions during maturation. Previously published calorimetric data of a closely related bacteriophage, P22, showed that capsid maturation was an exothermic process that resulted in a release of 90 kJ mol(-1) of energy. We propose that the major tertiary changes presented in this study reveal a structural basis for an exothermic maturation process probably present in many dsDNA bacteriophage and possibly viruses such as herpesvirus, which share the HK97 subunit fold.
Cells exposed to intact, noninfectious influenza virus were shown to be recognized by class I-restricted anti-influenza cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). Both internal and external proteins derived from virions were processed by cells for CTL recognition. Sensitization required the inactivation of viral neuraminidase activity and could be inhibited by preventing fusion of viral and cellular membranes. These findings are important in designing vaccines to elicit CTL responses, since they demonstrate that cells can process intact, exogenous proteins for recognition by CTLs and suggest that such processing depends on introduction of exogenous proteins into the cytoplasm.
Viral infection is sometimes associated with the initiation or exacerbation of autoimmune disease, although the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. One proposed mechanism is that viral determinants that mimic host antigens trigger self-reactive T cell clones to destroy host tissue. An epitope expressed by a coat protein of herpes simplex virus-type 1 (HSV-1) KOS strain has now been shown to be recognized by autoreactive T cells that target corneal antigens in a murine model of autoimmune herpes stromal keratitis. Mutant HSV-1 viruses that lacked this epitope did not induce autoimmune disease. Thus, expression of molecular mimics can influence the development of autoimmune disease after viral infection.
Transformation by several RNA tumour viruses seems to be mediated by virally coded protein kinases which specifically phosphorylate tyrosine. A tyrosine-specific protein kinase also seems to be involved in the mitogenic action of epidermal growth factor (EGF). This EGF-stimulated kinase activity is closely associated with the EGF receptor, with which it copurifies during EGF-affinity chromatography. Because both the virus- and EGF-stimulated tyrosine kinases may be involved in stimulation of cell growth, and because the viral kinases may be antigenically related to normal cell proteins, we examined the interaction of antibodies to viral tyrosine kinases with the affinity-purified EGF receptor-kinase preparation. We report here that the receptor-kinase specifically phosphorylates antibodies directed against the transforming protein kinase pp60src of Rous sarcoma virus. However, none of these antibodies, including those which cross-react with the normal cellular homologue of pp60src (pp60sarc), precipitate the receptor-kinase. These results suggest that the EGF receptor-kinase is related to, but probably not identical with, pp60sarc.
Protein kinase C is important in the transduction of signals generated at the plasma membrane. The physiological activators of protein kinase C are diacylglycerols, and the tumour-promoting phorbol esters, such as 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-14 acetate (TPA), constitute another group of specific activators. Many cellular substrates for phosphorylation by protein kinase C have been described, but proteins that directly control transcription in response to protein kinase C activation are yet to be identified. TPA treatment leads to induction of various proto-oncogenes, growth factor genes, and genes encoding secreted proteases. In addition. TPA increases the activity of viral enhancer elements. To identify trans-acting factors that mediate the transcriptional response to TPA we chose the simian virus 40 (SV40) enhancer as a model, because it is known to be composed of several discrete cis-acting elements which are recognized by multiple transacting factors. We report here that the SV40 enhancer contains at least four different TPA responsive elements whose activity is dependent on cell-type. The induction response is likely to involve at least two distinct post-translational steps which modulate the activity of the proteins that recognize these elements.
Genetic models predict that genomic rearrangement in hybrids can facilitate reproductive isolation and the formation of new species by preventing gene flow between the parent species and hybrid (sunflowers are an example). The mechanism underlying hybridization-induced chromosome remodelling is as yet unknown, although mobile element activity has been shown to be involved in DNA rearrangement in some dysgenic Drosophila hybrids. It has been proposed that DNA methylation evolved as a means of repressing the movement of mobile elements (the host defence model). If such a protective mechanism were to fail, mobile elements could be activated, and could cause major and rapid genome alterations. Here we demonstrate the occurrence of genome-wide undermethylation, retroviral element amplification and chromosome remodelling in an interspecific mammalian hybrid (Macropus eugenii x Wallabia bicolor). Atypically extended centromeres of Macropus eugenii derived autosomes in the hybrid were composed primarily of an unmethylated, amplified retroviral element not detectable in either parent species. These results, taken with the observation of deficient methylation and de novo chromosome change in other mammalian hybrids, indicate that the failure of DNA methylation and subsequent mobile-element activity in hybrids could facilitate rapid karyotypic evolution.
Bacterial, oomycete and fungal plant pathogens establish disease by translocation of effector proteins into host cells, where they may directly manipulate host innate immunity. In bacteria, translocation is through the type III secretion system, but analogous processes for effector delivery are uncharacterized in fungi and oomycetes. Here we report functional analyses of two motifs, RXLR and EER, present in translocated oomycete effectors. We use the Phytophthora infestans RXLR-EER-containing protein Avr3a as a reporter for translocation because it triggers RXLR-EER-independent hypersensitive cell death following recognition within plant cells that contain the R3a resistance protein. We show that Avr3a, with or without RXLR-EER motifs, is secreted from P. infestans biotrophic structures called haustoria, demonstrating that these motifs are not required for targeting to haustoria or for secretion. However, following replacement of Avr3a RXLR-EER motifs with alanine residues, singly or in combination, or with residues KMIK-DDK--representing a change that conserves physicochemical properties of the protein--P. infestans fails to deliver Avr3a or an Avr3a-GUS fusion protein into plant cells, demonstrating that these motifs are required for translocation. We show that RXLR-EER-encoding genes are transcriptionally upregulated during infection. Bioinformatic analysis identifies 425 potential genes encoding secreted RXLR-EER class proteins in the P. infestans genome. Identification of this class of proteins provides unparalleled opportunities to determine how oomycetes manipulate hosts to establish infection.
Viral infection of mammalian cells rapidly triggers intracellular signalling events leading to interferon alpha/beta production and a cellular antiviral state. This 'host response' is our first line of immune defence against infection as it imposes several barriers to viral replication and spread. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) evades the host response through a complex combination of processes that include signalling interference, effector modulation and continual viral genetic variation. These evasion strategies support persistent infection and the spread of HCV. Defining the molecular mechanisms by which HCV regulates the host response is of crucial importance and may reveal targets for novel therapeutic strategies.
The v-myc oncogene can induce tumours in haematopoietic, mesenchymal and epithelial tissues. The corresponding c-myc proto-oncogene can contribute to the genesis and/or the progression of an equally wide variety of tumours when activated by retroviral insertions, chromosomal translocations or gene amplification. The c-myc gene product is a DNA-binding, nuclear phosphoprotein that is involved in the control of cell proliferation and possibly in DNA synthesis. The replication of Simian virus 40 (SV40) is a useful model system to study eukaryotic DNA replication as the virus relies almost entirely on cellular DNA replication apparatus. The SV40-based vector, pSVEpR4, replicates poorly in the human BJAB lymphoma line and in most human cells, but replicates well in Burkitt lymphoma lines, which have fused immunoglobulin and c-myc genes, resulting in high c-myc expression. Cotransfection of the BJAB cells with a c-myc-expressing construct (pI4-P6) increased the replication of pSVEpR4 tenfold. Our findings indicate that overexpression of the c-myc gene product allows the replication of SV40 in human lymphoma cells, suggesting that c-myc is involved in the control of replication.
Bacteriophage fd is a class I filamentous virus (others are M13 and f1) that comprises a circular, single-stranded DNA molecule enclosed in a cylindrical protein sheath to form a flexible particle approximately 890 nm long and 7 nm in diameter. The viral DNA contains 6,408 nucleotides incorporating 10 genes, and the protein sheath is composed of about 2,700 major coat protein subunits in a shingled helical array, the symmetry of which is defined by a fivefold rotational axis combined with a twofold screw axis of pitch 3.2 nm. The DNA extends throughout the length of the particle but is not base-paired and has a symmetry different from that of the protein helix. How the DNA is packed remains unclear but the number (2.4) of nucleotides packaged per major coat protein subunit is certainly not integral, in contrast with, say, the packaging of RNA in tobacco mosaic virus. The coat protein subunit is 50 amino-acid residues in length and, in the virus particle, adopts a largely alpha-helical conformation, with the long axis of the helix aligned close to the long axis of the filament. This protein is arranged with its negatively charged N-terminal region on the outside of the filament and its positively charged C-terminal region on the inside abutting the DNA. We report here that positive charge on one of the four lysine side chains in the latter region has a direct effect on DNA packaging, because when this charge is absent, elongated particles are produced with lengths that can be correlated with the residual positive charge in the C-terminal region of the coat protein subunit.
RNA silencing is a sequence-specific RNA degradation mechanism that is operational in plants and animals. Here, we show that flock house virus (FHV) is both an initiator and a target of RNA silencing in Drosophila host cells and that FHV infection requires suppression of RNA silencing by an FHV-encoded protein, B2. These findings establish RNA silencing as an adaptive antiviral defense in animal cells. B2 also inhibits RNA silencing in transgenic plants, providing evidence for a conserved RNA silencing pathway in the plant and animal kingdoms.
The role of viral oncoprotein expression in the maintenance of cellular transformation was examined as a function of time through controlled expression of simian virus 40 T antigen (TAg). Expression of TAg in the submandibular gland of transgenic mice from the time of birth induced cellular transformation and extensive ductal hyperplasia by 4 months of age. The hyperplasia was reversed when TAg expression was silenced for 3 weeks. When TAg expression was silenced after 7 months, however, the hyperplasia persisted even though TAg was absent. Although the polyploidy of ductal cells could be reversed at 4 months of age, cells at 7 months of age remained polyploid even in the absence of TAg. These results support a model of time-dependent multistep tumorigenesis, in which virally transformed cells eventually lose their dependence on the viral oncoprotein for maintenance of the transformed state.
Avian myelocytomatosis virus strain MC29 is a replication-defective avian oncovirus which in newborn chickens causes myelocytomatosis and liver and kidney tumours. In vitro infection of bone marrow cells gives rise to colonies of transformed macrophage-like cells, and cloned viruses is also capable of transforming fibroblasts. The genome of MC29 contains cellular sequences which are closely related to those in other defective leukaemia viruses with similar transforming spectra. Consequently, these cellular sequences have been postulated to represent a new oncogene which has been designated mac, for macrophage transformation. MC29-transformed cells contain a gag gene-related protein of a 110,000 molecular weight (MW) (p110), which by tryptic peptide analysis has been shown to be a fusion product comprised of a gag gene-derived sequences and sequences which are presumed to be coded by the adjacent mac gene. These findings suggest that this protein may be implicated in transformation by MC29. We now describe three mutants of MC29 and synthesize smaller gag gene-related proteins. These mutants have an altered ability to transform bone marrow cells but not fibroblasts. This demonstrates for the first time a direct involvement of the p110 protein of MC29 in transformation.
The three-dimensional structure of the human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) nucleocapsid protein (NC) bound to the SL3 stem-loop recognition element of the genomic Psi RNA packaging signal has been determined by heteronuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Tight binding (dissociation constant, approximately 100 nM) is mediated by specific interactions between the amino- and carboxyl-terminal CCHC-type zinc knuckles of the NC protein and the G7 and G9 nucleotide bases, respectively, of the G6-G7-A8-G9 RNA tetraloop. A8 packs against the amino-terminal knuckle and forms a hydrogen bond with conserved Arg32, and residues Lys3 to Arg10 of NC form a 310 helix that binds to the major groove of the RNA stem and also packs against the amino-terminal zinc knuckle. The structure provides insights into the mechanism of viral genome recognition, explains extensive amino acid conservation within NC, and serves as a basis for the development of inhibitors designed to interfere with genome encapsidation.
A pseudo--half-knot can be formed by binding an oligonucleotide asymmetrically to an RNA hairpin loop. This binding motif was used to target the human immunodeficiency virus TAR element, an important viral RNA structure that is the receptor for Tat, the major viral transactivator protein. Oligonucleotides complementary to different halves of the TAR structure bound with greater affinity than molecules designed to bind symmetrically around the hairpin. The pseudo--half-knot--forming oligonucleotides altered the TAR structure so that specific recognition and binding of a Tat-derived peptide was disrupted. This general binding motif may be used to disrupt the structure of regulatory RNA hairpins.
The integration of retroviral genomes into cellular DNA can induce mutations by altering the expression of nearby cellular genes and can serve to identify the gene affected. The construction of a retrovirus that stably carries a suppressor transfer RNA gene from Escherichia coli has allowed facile recovery of the viral genome in vectors marked with amber mutations. This virus can be used for rapid isolation of cellular sequences at the site of proviral insertion.
Infection by human rhinovirus (HRV) is a major cause of upper and lower respiratory tract disease worldwide and displays considerable phenotypic variation. We examined diversity by completing the genome sequences for all known serotypes (n = 99). Superimposition of capsid crystal structure and optimal-energy RNA configurations established alignments and phylogeny. These revealed conserved motifs; clade-specific diversity, including a potential newly identified species (HRV-D); mutations in field isolates; and recombination. In analogy with poliovirus, a hypervariable 5' untranslated region tract may affect virulence. A configuration consistent with nonscanning internal ribosome entry was found in all HRVs and may account for rapid translation. The data density from complete sequences of the reference HRVs provided high resolution for this degree of modeling and serves as a platform for full genome-based epidemiologic studies and antiviral or vaccine development.
A retroviral vector system based on the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was developed that, in contrast to a murine leukemia virus-based counterpart, transduced heterologous sequences into HeLa cells and rat fibroblasts blocked in the cell cycle, as well as into human primary macrophages. Additionally, the HIV vector could mediate stable in vivo gene transfer into terminally differentiated neurons. The ability of HIV-based viral vectors to deliver genes in vivo into nondividing cells could increase the applicability of retroviral vectors in human gene therapy.
A variant of human T-lymphotropic virus type III (HTLV-III) is described that replicates but does not kill normal human T cells in vitro. This variant, designated X10-1, was derived from the genome of a cytopathic HTLV-III clone (pHXB2D) by excision of a 200-base pair segment in the 3' region of the virus, spanning the env and 3'-orf genes. Comparable variants with 55 to 109 base pairs deleted exclusively in 3'-orf produced, in contrast, virus that was extremely cytopathic. On the basis of these findings it is concluded that the 3'-orf gene is not required for cytopathogenicity or replication of HTLV-III. In addition, the results suggest that virus replication and cytotoxicity are not intrinsically coupled. Furthermore, since clone X10-1 retains the ability to trans-activate genes linked to the viral long terminal repeats, trans-activation per se is not responsible for T-cell killing by HTLV-III. These results also raise the possibility that the carboxyl terminus of the envelope gene of HTLV-III has a direct role in T-cell killing by this virus.
The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor gene EGFR has been placed in a retrovirus vector to examine the growth properties of cells that experimentally overproduce a full-length EGF receptor. NIH 3T3 cells transfected with the viral DNA or infected with the corresponding rescued retrovirus developed a fully transformed phenotype in vitro that required both functional EGFR expression and the presence of EGF in the growth medium. Cells expressing 4 x 10(5) EGF receptors formed tumors in nude mice, while control cells did not. Therefore, the EGFR retrovirus, which had a titer on NIH 3T3 cells that was greater than 10(7) focus-forming units per milliliter, can efficiently transfer and express this gene, and increased numbers of EGF receptors can contribute to the transformed phenotype.
Asthma is caused by a combination of poorly understood genetic and environmental factors. We have systematically mapped the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the presence of childhood onset asthma by genome-wide association. We characterized more than 317,000 SNPs in DNA from 994 patients with childhood onset asthma and 1,243 non-asthmatics, using family and case-referent panels. Here we show multiple markers on chromosome 17q21 to be strongly and reproducibly associated with childhood onset asthma in family and case-referent panels with a combined P value of P < 10(-12). In independent replication studies the 17q21 locus showed strong association with diagnosis of childhood asthma in 2,320 subjects from a cohort of German children (P = 0.0003) and in 3,301 subjects from the British 1958 Birth Cohort (P = 0.0005). We systematically evaluated the relationships between markers of the 17q21 locus and transcript levels of genes in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines from children in the asthma family panel used in our association study. The SNPs associated with childhood asthma were consistently and strongly associated (P < 10(-22)) in cis with transcript levels of ORMDL3, a member of a gene family that encodes transmembrane proteins anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum. The results indicate that genetic variants regulating ORMDL3 expression are determinants of susceptibility to childhood asthma.
A wide variety of virally and spontaneously transformed fibroblasts secrete a major transformation-related phosphoprotein with a molecular weight (MW), depending on the species of origin, of about 62,000 (62K). Markedly elevated extracellular levels of this major 32P-labelled protein are not simply linked to exponential growth but instead are associated directly with transformation. The phosphoprotein is not antigenically related to p60src, p60c-src or simian virus 40 (SV40) non-viral T antigen, and it is further distinguishable from SV40 non-viral T antigen (pp 53) on the basis of its electrophoretic mobility. In this study we have compared a variety of normal and transformed epithelial cells for secretion of this 32P-labelled protein and have found that this marker distinguishes neoplastic from preneoplastic and normal mouse mammary epithelium and also identifies highly tumorigenic cells derived from guinea pig bile duct epithelium and rat liver epithelium. Because the classical phenotypic properties commonly associated with transformation of fibroblasts cannot be generally used to discriminate tumorigenic from non-tumorigenic epithelial cells, this phosphoprotein, which identifies tumorigenic cells of both fibroblastic and epithelial origin, is likely to be of particular importance.
Most of the small number of cases of poliomyelitis which occur in countries where Sabin's attenuated poliovirus vaccines are used are temporally associated with administration of vaccine and involve polioviruses of types 2 and 3 (ref. 1). Recent studies have provided convincing evidence that the Sabin type 2 and 3 viruses themselves may revert to a neurovirulent phenotype on passage in man. We report here that a point mutation in the 5' noncoding region of the genome of the poliovirus type 3 vaccine consistently reverts to wild type in strains isolated from cases of vaccine-associated poliomyelitis. Virus with this change is rapidly selected on passage through the human gastrointestinal tract. The change is associated with a demonstrable increase in the neurovirulence of the virus.
Knowledge of the tertiary structure of the proteinase from human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 is important to the design of inhibitors that might possess antiviral activity and thus be useful in the treatment of AIDS. The conserved Asp-Thr/Ser-Gly sequence in retroviral proteinases suggests that they exist as dimers similar to the ancestor proposed for the pepsins. Although this has been confirmed by X-ray analyses of Rous sarcoma virus and HIV-1 proteinases, these structures have overall folds that are similar to each other only where they are also similar to the pepsins. We now report a further X-ray analysis of a recombinant HIV-1 proteinase at 2.7 A resolution. The polypeptide chain adopts a fold in which the N- and C-terminal strands are organized together in a four-stranded beta-sheet. A helix precedes the single C-terminal strand, as in the Rous sarcoma virus proteinase and also in a synthetic HIV-1 proteinase, in which the cysteines have been replaced by alpha-aminobuytric acid. The structure reported here provides an explanation for the amino acid invariance amongst retroviral proteinases, but differs from that reported earlier in some residues that are candidates for substrate interactions at P3, and in the mode of intramolecular cleavage during processing of the polyprotein.
Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) is an acutely oncogenic avian retrovirus which induces sarcomas in animals and transforms fibroblasts in cell culture. Genetic analysis indicates that the viral src gene (v-src) mediates neoplastic transformation. The product of v-src is a 60,000 molecular weight (MW) phosphoprotein (pp60v-src) possessing the enzymatic activity of a tyrosine-specific protein kinase. The viral src gene is derived from a cellular gene (c-src) which also encodes a 60,000 MW phosphoprotein (pp60c-src) with tyrosine-specific protein kinase activity. Both birds and mammals are known to possess c-src. Shilo and Weinberg have reported that the genome of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, contains nucleotide sequences that are homologous to v-src. We report here the molecular cloning and chromosomal mapping of three loci from the Drosophila genome that contain such sequences. We also show that Drosophila contain both phosphotyrosine and a tyrosine-specific protein kinase activity immunoprecipitated by antisera directed against pp60v-src. It should now be possible to identify the precise locus that encodes a src-specific protein kinase in Drosophila, and to explore the role of c-src in the growth and development of D. melanogaster.
The acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is characterized by T-lymphocyte dysfunction and is frequently accompanied by opportunistic infections and Kaposi's sarcoma. Human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV) is associated with T-cell malignancies and can transform T lymphocytes in vitro. In an attempt to find evidence of HTLV infection in patients with AIDS, DNA from samples of peripheral blood lymphocytes from 33 AIDS patients was analyzed by Southern blot-hybridization with a radiolabeled cloned HTLV DNA probe. Analysis of DNA from both the fresh (uncultured) lymphocytes and from T cells cultured with T-cell growth factor revealed the presence of integrated HTLV proviral sequences in lymphocytes from two of the patients, both of whom had antibody to HTLV. The proviral sequences could not be detected in blood samples obtained from these individuals at a later date, consistent with the possibility that the population of infected cells had become depleted.
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) induces a disease similar to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in cats, yet in contrast to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), CD4 is not the viral receptor. We identified a primary receptor for FIV as CD134 (OX40), a T cell activation antigen and costimulatory molecule. CD134 expression promotes viral binding and renders cells permissive for viral entry, productive infection, and syncytium formation. Infection is CXCR4-dependent, analogous to infection with X4 strains of HIV. Thus, despite the evolutionary divergence of the feline and human lentiviruses, both viruses use receptors that target the virus to a subset of cells that are pivotal to the acquired immune response.
The DNA in sperm and certain viruses is condensed by arginine-rich proteins into toroidal subunits, a form of packaging that inactivates their entire genome. Individual DNA molecules were manipulated with an optical trap to examine the kinetics of torus formation induced by the binding of protamine and a subset of its DNA binding domain, Arg6. Condensation and decondensation experiments with lambda-phage DNA show that toroid formation and stability are influenced by the number of arginine-rich anchoring domains in protamine. The results explain why protamines contain so much arginine and suggest that these proteins must be actively removed from sperm chromatin after fertilization.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the causative agent of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) a disease which poses a serious challenge to modern medicine. If we are to conquer this disease we will need a protective vaccine or effective drugs able to block the life cycle of the virus. An early stage in the invasion of the host cell is the conversion of the RNA genome of the virus to a double-stranded DNA intermediate which subsequently becomes integrated into the host cell chromosome. The enzyme reverse transcriptase is crucial in this process and is thus an obvious chemotherapeutic target. In this study we have used site-directed mutagenesis of this enzyme expressed in Escherichia coli to reveal several important functional regions of the protein including putative components of the triphosphate binding site and pyrophosphate exchange sites.
Genomes of all mammals encode apobec3 genes, which are thought to have a function in intrinsic cellular immunity to several viruses including human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). APOBEC3 (A3) proteins are packaged into virions and inhibit retroviral replication in newly infected cells, at least in part by deaminating cytidines on the negative strand DNA intermediates. However, the role of A3 in innate resistance to mouse retroviruses is not understood. Here we show that A3 functions during retroviral infection in vivo and provides partial protection to mice against infection with mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV). Both mouse A3 and human A3G proteins interacted with the MMTV nucleocapsid in an RNA-dependent fashion and were packaged into virions. In addition, mouse A3-containing and human A3G-containing virions showed a marked decrease in titre. Last, A3(-/-) mice were more susceptible to MMTV infection, because virus spread was more rapid and extensive than in their wild-type littermates.
Polyadenylated RNAs of certain human tumour cell lines are shown to contain transcripts related to the cell-derived transforming onc genes of molecularly cloned primate, murine or avian transforming retrovirus genomes. Thus, analogues of retroviral transforming genes are both present and frequently expressed in human neoplastic cells.
Different classes of retroviruses have been shown to induce immunodeficiency diseases in various animal species. These animal models may provide an insight into our understanding of AIDS but, with the exception of one strain of feline leukaemia virus, the determinants of pathogenicity have not yet been mapped to these viral genomes. The immunodeficiency-inducing feline leukaemia virus is replication-defective, harbouring the determinant of pathogenicity within its env sequences. We have studied the Duplan strain of murine leukaemia virus which induces, in C57BL/6 mice, a severe immunodeficiency disease with striking similarities to human AIDS. We have identified the aetiological agent of this murine immunodeficiency disease as another defective retrovirus, with a genome of 4.8 kilobases. Molecular cloning and sequencing of this DNA showed that the pol and env genes have been deleted, but that the complete gag region has been conserved and has a novel sequence encoding the p12 protein. As with the feline leukaemia virus, these results provide evidence for the role of defective retroviruses in inducing immunodeficiency and facilitate the study of the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency syndromes, including AIDS.
Cells with properties characteristic of mononuclear phagocytes were evaluated for infectivity with five different isolates of the AIDS virus, HTLV-III/LAV. Mononuclear phagocytes cultured from brain and lung tissues of AIDS patients harbored the virus. In vitro-infected macrophages from the peripheral blood, bone marrow, or cord blood of healthy donors produced large quantities of virus. Virus production persisted for at least 40 days and was not dependent on host cell proliferation. Giant multinucleated cells were frequently observed in the macrophage cultures and numerous virus particles, often located within vacuole-like structures, were present in infected cells. The different virus isolates were compared for their ability to infect macrophages and T cells. Isolates from lung- and brain-derived macrophages had a significantly higher ability to infect macrophages than T cells. In contrast, the prototype HTLV-III beta showed a 10,000-fold lower ability to infect macrophages than T cells and virus production was one-tenth that in macrophage cultures infected with other isolates, indicating that a particular variant of HTLV-III/LAV may have a preferential tropism for macrophages or T cells. These results suggest that mononuclear phagocytes may serve as primary targets for infection and agents for virus dissemination and that these virus-infected cells may play a role in the pathogenesis of the disease.
Virus-specific CD4+ T helper lymphocytes are critical to the maintenance of effective immunity in a number of chronic viral infections, but are characteristically undetectable in chronic human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 (HIV-1) infection. In individuals who control viremia in the absence of antiviral therapy, polyclonal, persistent, and vigorous HIV-1-specific CD4+ T cell proliferative responses were present, resulting in the elaboration of interferon-gamma and antiviral beta chemokines. In persons with chronic infection, HIV-1-specific proliferative responses to p24 were inversely related to viral load. Strong HIV-1-specific proliferative responses were also detected following treatment of acutely infected persons with potent antiviral therapy. The HIV-1-specific helper cells are likely to be important in immunotherapeutic interventions and vaccine development.
Endogenous avian and murine C-type viruses are genetic elements which are transmitted at several distinct chromosomal loci. Different patterns of virus activation have been observed in a variety of different mouse strains. However, because there are multiple copies of closely related endogenous viruses in every mouse strain, the genetic basis of the differential expression of these genes is poorly understood. A new substrain of mice, BALB/Mo, was derived previously carrying the exogenous Moloney leukaemia virus (M-MuLV) genome on chromosome 6 (ref. 14). Virus activation occurs in lymphatic tissues of all BALB/Mo mice soon after birth. We report here the derivation of three new substrains of mice each carrying a single M-MuLV genome on different chromosomal integration sites. Each locus was associated with a distinct phenotype of virus expression. Evidence is presented that apparently identical viral genomes show differences in spontaneous virus activation and that defective viral genomes can be carried in the germ line of mice.
Natural killer (NK) cells destroy virus-infected and tumour cells, apparently without the need for previous antigen stimulation. In part, target cells are recognized by their diminished expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules, which normally interact with inhibitory receptors on the NK cell surface. NK cells also express triggering receptors that are specific for non-MHC ligands; but the nature of the ligands recognized on target cells is undefined. NKp46 is thought to be the main activating receptor for human NK cells. Here we show that a soluble NKp46-immunoglobulin fusion protein binds to both the haemagglutinin of influenza virus and the haemagglutinin-neuraminidase of parainfluenza virus. In a substantial subset of NK cells, recognition by NKp46 is required to lyse cells expressing the corresponding viral glycoproteins. The binding requires the sialylation of NKp46 oligosaccharides, which is consistent with the known sialic binding capacity of the viral glycoproteins. These findings indicate how NKp46-expressing NK cells may recognize target cells infected by influenza or parainfluenza without the decreased expression of target-cell MHC class I protein.
Mobile genetic elements have been reported in prokaryotes, plants, yeast and Drosophila. The only transposon-like sequences reported for mammalian organisms are closely related to retroviruses, although undoubtedly other transposon families exist within the mammalian genome. Although mobile genetic elements can only be identified as such if their mobility can be demonstrated in existing populations, transposon and transposon-like elements share several common biochemical and structural features. Here we demonstrate that a repetitive human sequence has many of the diagnostic features of transposable elements. This 2.3-kilobase (kb) transposon-like element contains two flanking long terminal repeat (LTR)-like 350-base pair (bp) repetitive sequences, each of which begins with the sequence 5' TG... and ends with ...CA 3'. The transposon-like element is bounded by 5-bp direct repeats. Discrete-length polyadenylated transcripts from HeLa cells are homologous to the transposon-like element. Members of this transposon-like family are found in extrachromosomal circular DNA molecules.
The influenza pandemic of 1918-19 was responsible for about 50 million deaths worldwide. Modern histopathological analysis of autopsy samples from human influenza cases from 1918 revealed significant damage to the lungs with acute, focal bronchitis and alveolitis associated with massive pulmonary oedema, haemorrhage and rapid destruction of the respiratory epithelium. The contribution of the host immune response leading to this severe pathology remains largely unknown. Here we show, in a comprehensive analysis of the global host response induced by the 1918 influenza virus, that mice infected with the reconstructed 1918 influenza virus displayed an increased and accelerated activation of host immune response genes associated with severe pulmonary pathology. We found that mice infected with a virus containing all eight genes from the pandemic virus showed marked activation of pro-inflammatory and cell-death pathways by 24 h after infection that remained unabated until death on day 5. This was in contrast with smaller host immune responses as measured at the genomic level, accompanied by less severe disease pathology and delays in death in mice infected with influenza viruses containing only subsets of 1918 genes. The results indicate a cooperative interaction between the 1918 influenza genes and show that study of the virulence of the 1918 influenza virus requires the use of the fully reconstructed virus. With recent concerns about the introduction of highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses into humans and their potential to cause a worldwide pandemic with disastrous health and economic consequences, a comprehensive understanding of the global host response to the 1918 virus is crucial. Moreover, understanding the contribution of host immune responses to virulent influenza virus infections is an important starting point for the identification of prognostic indicators and the development of novel antiviral therapies.
The reverse transcriptase of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) catalyses a series of reactions to convert the single-stranded RNA genome of HIV into double-stranded DNA for host-cell integration. This task requires the reverse transcriptase to discriminate a variety of nucleic-acid substrates such that active sites of the enzyme are correctly positioned to support one of three catalytic functions: RNA-directed DNA synthesis, DNA-directed DNA synthesis and DNA-directed RNA hydrolysis. However, the mechanism by which substrates regulate reverse transcriptase activities remains unclear. Here we report distinct orientational dynamics of reverse transcriptase observed on different substrates with a single-molecule assay. The enzyme adopted opposite binding orientations on duplexes containing DNA or RNA primers, directing its DNA synthesis or RNA hydrolysis activity, respectively. On duplexes containing the unique polypurine RNA primers for plus-strand DNA synthesis, the enzyme can rapidly switch between the two orientations. The switching kinetics were regulated by cognate nucleotides and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, a major class of anti-HIV drugs. These results indicate that the activities of reverse transcriptase are determined by its binding orientation on substrates.
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) detect viruses in the acidified endosomes by means of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Yet, pDC responses to certain single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) viruses occur only after live viral infection. We present evidence here that the recognition of such viruses by TLR7 requires transport of cytosolic viral replication intermediates into the lysosome by the process of autophagy. In addition, autophagy was found to be required for the production of interferon-alpha by pDCs. These results support a key role for autophagy in mediating ssRNA virus detection and interferon-alpha secretion by pDCs and suggest that cytosolic replication intermediates of viruses serve as pathogen signatures recognized by TLR7.
Human influenza A (subtype H3N2) is characterized genetically by the limited standing diversity of its hemagglutinin and antigenically by clusters that emerge and replace each other within 2 to 8 years. By introducing an epidemiological model that allows for differences between the genetic and antigenic properties of the virus's hemagglutinin, we show that these patterns can arise from cluster-specific immunity alone. Central to the formulation is a genotype-to-phenotype mapping, based on neutral networks, with antigenic phenotypes, not genotypes, determining the degree of strain cross-immunity. The model parsimoniously explains well-known, as well as previously unremarked, features of interpandemic influenza dynamics and evolution. It captures the observed boom-and-bust pattern of viral evolution, with periods of antigenic stasis during which genetic diversity grows, and with episodic contraction of this diversity during cluster transitions.
The transcription factor ISGF3 transduces interferon (IFN)-alpha signals and activates the transcription of cellular antiviral defence genes. Adenovirus E1A blocks the IFN-alpha response, allowing unhindered viral replication. ISGF3 consists of Stat1, Stat2 and p48. Here we show that p300 and/or CBP (CREB-binding protein), which are transcription adaptors targeted by E1A, interact specifically with Stat2. Binding occurs between the first cysteine-histidine-rich region of p300/CBP and the carboxy-terminal segment of Stat2, a domain essential for ISGF3 function. We find that this domain of Stat2 has transactivation potential, which correlates with its binding to p300/CBP. Moreover, E1A represses Stat2 transactivation and IFN-alpha-activated transcription by inhibiting p300/CBP function. This provides a new mechanism for inhibition of the IFN-alpha-activated antiviral response by E1A, and supports the view that E1A binding to p300/CBP has functional significance for adenovirus replication in its natural host.
The large chlorella virus PBCV-1, which contains double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), encodes a 94-codon open reading frame (ORF) that contains a motif resembling the signature sequence of the pore domain of potassium channel proteins. Phylogenetic analyses of the encoded protein, Kcv, indicate a previously unidentified type of potassium channel. The messenger RNA encoded by the ORF leads to functional expression of a potassium-selective conductance in Xenopus laevis oocytes. The channel blockers amantadine and barium, but not cesium, inhibit this conductance, in addition to virus plaque formation. Thus, PBCV-1 encodes the first known viral protein that functions as a potassium-selective channel and is essential in the virus life cycle.
The human cytomegalovirus genome encodes proteins that trigger destruction of newly synthesized major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. The human cytomegalovirus gene US2 specifies a product capable of dislocating MHC class I molecules from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol and delivering them to the proteasome. This process involves the Sec61 complex, in what appears to be a reversal of the reaction by which it translocates nascent chains into the endoplasmic reticulum.
Human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is an etiological agent of adult T-cell leukemia. A viral gene pX encodes for p40X and it has been proposed that this protein trans-activates the viral long terminal repeat and possibly some cellular genes; this activation may be associated with T-cell transformation. The mechanism of pX gene expression and the primary structure of p40X are now reported. Two-step splicing generates the 2.1-kilobase pX mRNA; the initiator methionine for env becomes part of the pX protein. These splicing signals are conserved among all members of the HTLV family except for the acquired immune deficiency syndrome-associated viruses.
A series of peptide derivatives based on the transition-state mimetic concept has been designed that inhibit the proteinase from the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The more active compounds inhibit both HIV-1 and HIV-2 proteinases in the nanomolar range with little effect at 10 micromolar against the structurally related human aspartic proteinases. Proteolytic cleavage of the HIV-1 gag polyprotein (p55) to the viral structural protein p24 was inhibited in chronically infected CEM cells. Antiviral activity was observed in the nanomolar range (with one compound active below 10 nanomolar) in three different cell systems, as assessed by p24 antigen and syncytium formation. Cytotoxicity was not detected at 10 and 5 micromolar in C8166 and JM cells, respectively, indicating a high therapeutic index for this new class of HIV proteinase inhibitors.
From the complete nucleotide sequence of the genome of the avian sarcoma virus Y73, we have predicted amino acid sequence of p90 gag-yes, the product of the transforming gene. Contrary to previous evidence from molecular hybridization studies p90 gag-yes was found to have much homology with the transforming gene product p60 src of Rous sarcoma virus, suggesting that the cellular counterparts of the two (c-yes and c-src) originated from a common prototype sequence.
Regulation of the expression of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) genome is accomplished in large part by controlling transcription elongation. The viral protein Tat hijacks the host cell's RNA polymerase II elongation control machinery through interaction with the positive transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, and directs the factor to promote productive elongation of HIV mRNA. Here we describe the crystal structure of the Tat.P-TEFb complex containing HIV-1 Tat, human Cdk9 (also known as CDK9), and human cyclin T1 (also known as CCNT1). Tat adopts a structure complementary to the surface of P-TEFb and makes extensive contacts, mainly with the cyclin T1 subunit of P-TEFb, but also with the T-loop of the Cdk9 subunit. The structure provides a plausible explanation for the tolerance of Tat to sequence variations at certain sites. Importantly, Tat induces significant conformational changes in P-TEFb. This finding lays a foundation for the design of compounds that would specifically inhibit the Tat.P-TEFb complex and block HIV replication.
The mechanism of replication of the simian virus 40 (SV40) genome closely resembles that of cellular chromosomes, thereby providing an excellent model system for examining the enzymatic requirements for DNA replication. Only one viral gene product, the large tumour antigen (large-T antigen), is required for viral replication, so the majority of replication enzymes must be cellular. Indeed, a number of enzymatic activities associated with replication and the S phase of the cell cycle are induced upon SV40 infection. Cell-free extracts derived from human cells, when supplemented with immunopurified SV40 large-T antigen support efficient replication of plasmids that contain the SV40 origin of DNA replication. Using this system, a cellular protein of relative molecular mass 36,000 (Mr = 36K) that is required for the elongation stage of SV40 DNA replication in vitro has been purified and identified as a known cell-cycle regulated protein, alternatively called the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) or cyclin. It was noticed that, in its physical characteristics, PCNA closely resembles a protein that regulates the activity of calf thymus DNA polymerase-delta. Here we show that PCNA and the polymerase-delta auxiliary protein have similar electrophoretic behaviour and are both recognized by anti-PCNA human autoantibodies. More importantly, both proteins are functionally equivalent; they stimulate SV40 DNA replication in vitro and increase the processivity of calf thymus DNA polymerase-delta. These results implicate a novel animal cell DNA polymerase, DNA polymerase-delta, in the elongation stage of replicative DNA synthesis in vitro.
Tax protein activates transcription of the human T-cell leukaemia virus type I (HTLV-I) genome through three imperfect cyclic AMP-responsive element (CRE) target sites located within the viral promoter. Previous work has shown that Tax interacts with the bZIP element of proteins that bind the CRE target site to promote peptide dimerization, suggesting an association between Tax and bZIP coiled coil. Here we show that the site of interaction with Tax is not the coiled coil, but the basic segment. This interaction increases the stability of the GCN4 bZIP dimer by 1.7 kcal mol-1 and the DNA affinity of the dimer by 1.9 kcal mol-1. The differential effect of Tax on several bZip-DNA complexes that differ in peptide sequence or DNA conformation suggests a model for Tax action based on stabilization of a distinct DNA-bound protein structure. This model may explain how Tax interacts with transcription factors of considerable sequence diversity to alter patterns of gene expression.
In situ hybridization was used to detect human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of some naturally infected (seropositive) individuals. A subpopulation of cells hybridized specifically to a portion of the HCMV genome that is heavily transcribed during the immediate-early period of infection. The hybridization signal was markedly reduced by base hydrolysis and ribonuclease, and therefore the probe appears to be detecting viral RNA. A fluorescence-activated cell sorter was used to select lymphocytes bearing the OKT4 and OKT8 markers. Hybridization with the HCMV probe revealed a higher proportion of positive cells in the OKT4 than in the OKT8 subset. This observation specifically identifies lymphocytes as a cell population involved in natural HCMV infection and suggests that lymphocytes may be a reservoir for maintaining infection and may also serve as a vehicle for its spread by blood transfusion.
Measures to prevent sexual mucosal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 are urgently needed to curb the growth of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) pandemic and ultimately bring it to an end. Studies in animal models and acute HIV-1 infection reviewed here reveal potential viral vulnerabilities at the mucosal portal of entry in the earliest stages of infection that might be most effectively targeted by vaccines and microbicides, thereby preventing acquisition and averting systemic infection, CD4 T-cell depletion and pathologies that otherwise rapidly ensue.
Human (HeLa) cells contain a host-cell-encoded transcription factor, Sp1, which is required for transcription of simian virus 40 (SV40) promoters. Since the discovery of Sp1 we have been interested in learning what role this factor plays in uninfected cells. A monkey cellular gene promoter interacts with Sp1, but no gene products linked to this promoter have yet been identified. The finding that the sequence of the 5'-flanking DNA of the mouse dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene contains several regions showing strong homology to the Sp1 binding region of simian virus 40 (SV40) prompted us to undertake experiments with dhfr. We report here that Sp1 binds to these regions in the dhfr promoter, and that Sp1-containing preparations stimulate transcription from the dhfr promoter in an in vitro reaction. Our results suggest that in addition to its interactions with the SV40 viral promoter, one function of Sp1 is to direct the expression of the cellular DHFR gene.
Oligonucleotide recognition offers a powerful chemical approach for the sequence-specific binding of double-helical DNA. In the pyrimidine-Hoogsteen model, a binding size of greater than 15 homopurine base pairs affords greater than 30 discrete sequence-specific hydrogen bonds to duplex DNA. Because pyrimidine oligonucleotides limit triple helix formation to homopurine tracts, it is desirable to determine whether oligonucleotides can be used to bind all four base pairs of DNA. A general solution would allow targeting of oligonucleotides (or their analogs) to any given sequence in the human genome. A study of 20 base triplets reveals that the triple helix can be extended from homopurine to mixed sequences. Guanine contained within a pyrimidine oligonucleotide specifically recognizes thymine.adenine base pairs in duplex DNA. Such specificity allows binding at mixed sites in DNA from simian virus 40 and human immunodeficiency virus.
Normal cells in culture have membrane receptors for epidermal growth factor (EGF); EGF stimulates cells to divide by binding to these receptors. Cells transformed by murine and feline sarcoma viruses rapidly lose the ability to bind EGF, whereas cells transformed by the DNA tumour viruses, polyoma and SV40, or infected with non-transforming RNA tumour viruses have normal levels of functional EGF receptors. The results suggest that a product of the sarcoma virus genome specifically changes cell EGF receptors; the sarcoma gene product may, then, be functionally related to EGF.
It has been shown that genetic information encoded by the 3' open reading frames (ORFs), E2, E3, E4 and E5, of bovine papillomavirus type 1 (BPV-1), is sufficient to induce cellular transformation of certain mouse cells. The product of the E2 ORF has further been shown to be responsible for the trans-activation of a transcriptional regulatory element located in the noncoding region (NCR) of the BPV-1 genome. To examine whether or not the E2 trans-activation function is encoded by the same gene that encodes the 3' ORF viral transformation function, we have now analysed the expression of the trans-activation function in series of mouse C127 cells transformed by BPV-1 deletion mutants. In addition, using mutated complementary DNA clones generated by the insertion of a premature translational termination linker into different sites of a BPV-1 cDNA clone containing the 3' ORFs intact, we demonstrate that transformation and transcriptional trans-activation functions can be dissociated and that they map respectively to the E5 and E2 ORFs.
Difficulties associated with in vitro manipulation and culture of the early chicken embryo have restricted generation of transgenic chickens to approaches that use replication-competent retroviruses. The need to produce transgenic chickens in the absence of replicating virus prompted development of a new method of gene transfer into the chicken. Microinjection of the replication-defective reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) vector ME111 beneath unincubated chicken embryo blastoderms results in infection of germline stem cells. This vector contains genetic information exogenous to the chicken genome, including both the herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase gene and the Tn5 neomycin phosphotransferase gene. About 8 percent of male birds hatched from injected embryos contained vector DNA in their semen. All four positive males tested passed vector sequences onto their progeny. Analysis of G1 offspring showed that gonads of G0 male birds were mosaic with respect to insertion of vector provirus. Thus, primordial germ cells present in the unincubated chicken embryo blastoderm are susceptible to infection by defective REV vectors.
How does human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) gain access to the carefully guarded nucleus of the host cell? In a Perspective, Segura-Totten and Wilson elaborate on new findings (de Noronha et al.) showing that the HIV protein Vpr is crucial for causing transient herniations in the host cell nuclear envelope. These ruptures are sufficient to enable the preintegration complexes of invading virions to enter the nucleus and to integrate with host cell DNA.
In HEp-2 cells infected with herpes simplex virus the rate of protein synthesis at first decline, is stimulated between 4 and 8 hours after infection, and progressively and irreversibly declines from 9 to 16 hours later. The increase and decrease in rates coincide with corresponding changes in the amounts of cytoplasmic polysomes and amounts of labeled amino acids in nascent peptides bound to polysomes. The data indicate that (i) early and late inhibition and intervening stimulation of protein synthesis are due to the corresponding breakdown and formation of polysomes, and (ii) the bulk of viral proteins is probably made on cytoplasmic polysomes.
Better understanding of the pathogenesis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) would be greatly facilitated by a relevant animal model that uses molecularly cloned virus of defined sequence to induce the disease. Such a system would also be of great value for AIDS vaccine research. An infectious molecular clone of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) was identified that induces AIDS in common rhesus monkeys in a time frame suitable for laboratory investigation. These results provide another strong link in the chain of evidence for the viral etiology of AIDS. More importantly, they define a system for molecular dissection of the determinants of AIDS pathogenesis.
Development of materials that deliver more energy at high rates is important for high-power applications, including portable electronic devices and hybrid electric vehicles. For lithium-ion (Li+) batteries, reducing material dimensions can boost Li+ ion and electron transfer in nanostructured electrodes. By manipulating two genes, we equipped viruses with peptide groups having affinity for single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) on one end and peptides capable of nucleating amorphous iron phosphate(a-FePO4) fused to the viral major coat protein. The virus clone with the greatest affinity toward SWNTs enabled power performance of a-FePO4 comparable to that of crystalline lithium iron phosphate (c-LiFePO4) and showed excellent capacity retention upon cycling at 1C. This environmentally benign low-temperature biological scaffold could facilitate fabrication of electrodes from materials previously excluded because of extremely low electronic conductivity.
West Nile virus (WNV), and related flaviviruses such as tick-borne encephalitis, Japanese encephalitis, yellow fever and dengue viruses, constitute a significant global human health problem. However, our understanding of the molecular interaction of such flaviviruses with mammalian host cells is limited. WNV encodes only 10 proteins, implying that it may use many cellular proteins for infection. WNV enters the cytoplasm through pH-dependent endocytosis, undergoes cycles of translation and replication, assembles progeny virions in association with endoplasmic reticulum, and exits along the secretory pathway. RNA interference (RNAi) presents a powerful forward genetics approach to dissect virus-host cell interactions. Here we report the identification of 305 host proteins that affect WNV infection, using a human-genome-wide RNAi screen. Functional clustering of the genes revealed a complex dependence of this virus on host cell physiology, requiring a wide variety of molecules and cellular pathways for successful infection. We further demonstrate a requirement for the ubiquitin ligase CBLL1 in WNV internalization, a post-entry role for the endoplasmic-reticulum-associated degradation pathway in viral infection, and the monocarboxylic acid transporter MCT4 as a viral replication resistance factor. By extending this study to dengue virus, we show that flaviviruses have both overlapping and unique interaction strategies with host cells. This study provides a comprehensive molecular portrait of WNV-human cell interactions that forms a model for understanding single plus-stranded RNA virus infection, and reveals potential antiviral targets.
The murine leukemia viruses of Rauscher and Friend, derived from plasnma of infected Balb/c mice, was purified. Their antigenic relationship was studied by quantitative complement-fixation reactions with the virion antigen and homologous antiserums. The complement-fixation curves observed in cross-reactions indicated close antigenic similarity between these two leukemia viruses. Highly purified viral preparations contained detectable amounts of host antigens.
Recombinant retroviruses containing the complete genomic human beta globin gene (under the control of its own promoter) and the bacterial neomycin phosphotransferase gene (under the control of the normal or enhancerless viral promoter) were used to derive transgenic mouse strains by infection of preimplantation embryos. Expression of the beta globin gene in hematopoietic tissues was observed in all transgenic strains. In addition, one strain showed ectopic expression of beta globin in the same tissues that also expressed high levels of RNA from the viral promoter. It is likely that expression from the long terminal repeat (LTR), in contrast to expression from the internal promoter, is dependent on the site of integration. Thus, retroviral vectors can be used for tissue-specific expression of foreign genes in transgenic mice, as well as for the identification of loci that allow developmental activation of a provirus.
The characterization of HIV-1 (HTLV-III/LAV), the human retrovirus associated with AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) has led to the identification of a group of related human and simian retroviruses which also infect CD4-bearing T lymphocytes. Simian T-lymphotropic virus type III (simian immodeficiency virus) from macaques (STLV-IIIMAC) induces symptoms similar to those of AIDS in infected macaques, but isolates from African green monkeys (STLV-IIIAGM) and mangabeys (STLV-IIMM) appear to be non-pathogenic in these animals. A human virus immunologically related to STLV-IIIAGM (HTLV-IV), reported to have been isolated from healthy humans, has been shown to be almost identical to STLV-IIIAGM, which has called into question the independent origin of these viruses. Here we report the complete DNA sequence of STLV-IIIAGM and analyse its relationship with the genomes of the HTLV-IIIB strain of HIV-1, HIV-2ROD (previously called LAV-2) and several ungulate lentiretroviruses. STLV-IIIAGM and HIV-2 are closely related, and more distantly related to HIV-1.
In vitro stimulation of mononuclear cells from human peripheral blood with mitogens causes the release of factors (monokines and lymphokines) which possess distinct biological activities. One such factor, termed 22K, can induce production of human beta-interferon (HuIFN-beta) in cultured human fibroblasts, thereby rendering these cells resistant to virus infection. Here we report the complete purification and partial sequencing (39 N-terminal amino acids) of this factor, whose relative molecular mass was estimated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis to be 17,000 (17K). In addition to an antiviral effect, the pure protein exhibits several other biological activities. Most significantly, intravenous (i.v.) injection of the factor in rabbits caused fever and granulopenia at doses of 0.1-1 microgram per kg, effects which we attribute to a monokine called endogenous pyrogen (EP). In vitro, the protein was scored as positive in a LAF (lymphocyte-activating factor) assay at 0.1-1 ng ml-1. LAF and EP are considered to be members of one family of monokines, called interleukin-1 (IL-1). For this reason, and also because the amino-acid sequence of the 22K factor is at least partially homologous to a complementary DNA-derived IL-1 sequence, we postulate that the 22K factor also belongs to the IL-1 family.
The sequence of the entire RNA genome of the type flavivirus, yellow fever virus, has been obtained. Inspection of this sequence reveals a single long open reading frame of 10,233 nucleotides, which could encode a polypeptide of 3411 amino acids. The structural proteins are found within the amino-terminal 780 residues of this polyprotein; the remainder of the open reading frame consists of nonstructural viral polypeptides. This genome organization implies that mature viral proteins are produced by posttranslational cleavage of a polyprotein precursor and has implications for flavivirus RNA replication and for the evolutionary relation of this virus family to other RNA viruses.
Herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) infection causes significant morbidity and is an important cofactor for the transmission of HIV infection. A microbicide to prevent sexual transmission of HSV-2 would contribute substantially to controlling the spread of HIV and other infections. Because RNA interference (RNAi) provides effective antiviral defence in plants and other organisms, several studies have focused on harnessing RNAi to inhibit viral infection. Here we show that vaginal instillation of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting HSV-2 protects mice from lethal infection. siRNAs mixed with lipid are efficiently taken up by epithelial and lamina propria cells and silence gene expression in the mouse vagina and ectocervix for at least nine days. Intravaginal application of siRNAs targeting the HSV-2 UL27 and UL29 genes (which encode an envelope glycoprotein and a DNA binding protein, respectively) was well tolerated, did not induce interferon-responsive genes or cause inflammation, and protected mice when administered before and/or after lethal HSV-2 challenge. These results suggest that siRNAs are attractive candidates for the active component of a microbicide designed to prevent viral infection or transmission.
The role of costimulatory signals in T cell induction was evaluated in mice lacking the interleukin-2 (IL-2) gene. In vitro secondary antiviral T cell responses were absent unless IL-2 was added, confirming the crucial role of IL-2 in vitro. In vivo, primary and secondary cytotoxic T cell responses against vaccinia and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus were within normal ranges. B cell reactivity to vesicular stomatitis virus was not impaired. T helper cell responses were delayed but biologically functional. Natural killer cell activity was markedly reduced but inducible. These normal in vivo immune responses in IL-2-deficient mice question the importance of IL-2 as defined by in vitro studies.
Guinea pigs were vaccinated with truncated herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1) glycoprotein D produced in the genetically engineered mammalian cell line gD10.2. Vaccinated animals formed antibodies that neutralized both HSV-1 and herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) in an in vitro neutralization assay. Vaccinated animals were challenged with HSV-2 by intravaginal infection. Animals that received the immunogen in Freund's complete adjuvant were completely protected from the clinical manifestations of genital HSV-2 infection. Animals that received the immunogen incorporated in alum adjuvants were partly protected from clinical disease; the infections that did develop were significantly less severe than those that occurred in control animals injected with adjuvant alone. The results demonstrate that immunization with a purified viral protein can provide significant protection against primary genital infection by HSV-2 in guinea pigs.
Increasing evidence indicates that potent anti-HIV-1 activity is mediated by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs); however, the effects of this immune pressure on viral transmission and evolution have not been determined. Here we investigate mother-child transmission in the setting of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B27 expression, selected for analysis because it is associated with prolonged immune containment in adult infection. In adults, mutations in a dominant and highly conserved B27-restricted Gag CTL epitope lead to loss of recognition and disease progression. In mothers expressing HLA-B27 who transmit HIV-1 perinatally, we document transmission of viruses encoding CTL escape variants in this dominant Gag epitope that no longer bind to B27. Their infected infants target an otherwise subdominant B27-restricted epitope and fail to contain HIV replication. These CTL escape variants remain stable without reversion in the absence of the evolutionary pressure that originally selected the mutation. These data suggest that CTL escape mutations in epitopes associated with suppression of viraemia will accumulate as the epidemic progresses, and therefore have important implications for vaccine design.
Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an emerging mosquito-borne alphavirus that has caused widespread outbreaks of debilitating human disease in the past five years. CHIKV invasion of susceptible cells is mediated by two viral glycoproteins, E1 and E2, which carry the main antigenic determinants and form an icosahedral shell at the virion surface. Glycoprotein E2, derived from furin cleavage of the p62 precursor into E3 and E2, is responsible for receptor binding, and E1 for membrane fusion. In the context of a concerted multidisciplinary effort to understand the biology of CHIKV, here we report the crystal structures of the precursor p62-E1 heterodimer and of the mature E3-E2-E1 glycoprotein complexes. The resulting atomic models allow the synthesis of a wealth of genetic, biochemical, immunological and electron microscopy data accumulated over the years on alphaviruses in general. This combination yields a detailed picture of the functional architecture of the 25 MDa alphavirus surface glycoprotein shell. Together with the accompanying report on the structure of the Sindbis virus E2-E1 heterodimer at acidic pH (ref. 3), this work also provides new insight into the acid-triggered conformational change on the virus particle and its inbuilt inhibition mechanism in the immature complex.
Retroviral nucleocapsid and gag-precursor proteins from all known strains of retroviruses contain one or two copies of an invariant sequence, Cys-X2-Cys-X4-His-X4-Cys, that is populated with zinc in mature particles. Modification of cysteine or histidine residues results in defective packaging of genomic viral RNA and formation of non-infectious particles, making these structures potentially attractive targets for antiviral therapy. We recently reported that aromatic C-nitroso ligands of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase preferentially destabilize one of the two (Cys-X2-Cys-X28-His-X2-Cys) zinc-fingers with concomitant loss of enzymatic activity, coincidental with selective cytocidal action of the C-nitroso substituted ligands on cancer cells. Based on the occurrence of (3Cys, 1His) zinc-binding sites in both retroviral nucleocapsid and gag proteins and in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, we reasoned that the C-nitroso compounds may also have antiretroviral effects. We show here that two such compounds, 3-nitrosobenzamide and 6-nitroso-1,2-benzopyrone, inhibit infection of human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 in human lymphocytes and also eject zinc from isoalted HIV-1 nucleocapsid zinc fingers and from intact HIV-1 virions. Thus the design of zinc-ejecting agents that target retroviral zinc fingers represents a new approach to the chemotherapy of AIDS.
Simian virus 40 large tumour antigen (T) is a replication origin binding protein required for viral DNA synthesis. Unphosphorylated T antigen is deficient in promoting DNA replication in vitro but can be activated by phosphorylation at residue threonine 124 by the cdc2 protein kinase. This observation demonstrates that T is regulated by phosphorylation and provides a model for cdc2 function in the control of DNA replication.
Mice of the AKR strain are characterised by a high incidence of spontaneous thymic lymphomas. AKR chromosomes contain the genomes of ecotropic murine leukaemia virus (MuLV) at two loci, termed Akv-1 and Akv-2 (refs 2-6). Shortly after birth, the normal tissues of AKR mice begin to produce high levels of this XC-positive MuLV (ref. 7) (that is, one that forms XC plaques). A second class of MuLV, termed mink cell focus-inducing virus (MCF), is produced specifically by preleukaemic and leukaemic AKR thymocytes. Nowinski et al. have established a series of tissue culture lines from AKR leukaemias and reported that the resulting cell lines produce virus particles, but that these particles, surprisingly, do not give rise to XC plaques. We have analysed the virus particles produced by one of these cell lines, termed AKRSL2. We show here that, unlike most or all of the nonmalignant tissues in the AKR mouse, these cultured lymphoma cells produce very little non-defective ecotropic MuLV; however, they do produce replication-defective ecotropic MuLV.
Interactions between animal viruses and antiviral antisera may exceptionally result in an apparent increase in viral infectivity. Halstead and coworkers demonstrated enhanced replication of dengue virus (a Flavivirus, family Togaviridae) in human or simian peripheral blood leucocytes carrying Fc receptors at subneutralising concentrations of antidengue antibody. We have used three continuous cell lines which express macrophage markers to explore the mechanism of this phenomenon. Dengue virus failed to replicate in these cells, but West Nile virus, another Flavivirus, replicated in all three, and we were able to demonstrate reproducibly 50--100-fold enhancement of virus yields in the presence of Flavivirus antisera, the effect also being directly demonstrable in P388D1 cells by increased numbers of virus-induced plaques. The phenomenon of antibody-dependent enhancement of viral replication is not unique to dengue virus, and may have far wider relevance in other viral infections.
The oligonucleotide (2'-5') oligoadenylate that is induced in interferon-treated animal cells protects plant tissue from infection by the tobacco mosaic virus. This inhibition of virus multiplication was obtained at concentrations comparable to those affecting protein synthesis and antiviral activities in animal cells. After treatment with (2'-5') oligoadenylate, the multiplicability of tobacco mosaic virus was reduced by 80 to 90 percent as measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. These results, along with the observation that human interferon protects tobacco tissue from infection by tobacco mosaic virus, indicate that plants and animals may have a common pathway for virus resistance.
RNA polymerase (Pol) II catalyses DNA-dependent RNA synthesis during gene transcription. There is, however, evidence that Pol II also possesses RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) activity. Pol II can use a homopolymeric RNA template, can extend RNA by several nucleotides in the absence of DNA, and has been implicated in the replication of the RNA genomes of hepatitis delta virus (HDV) and plant viroids. Here we show the intrinsic RdRP activity of Pol II with only pure polymerase, an RNA template-product scaffold and nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs). Crystallography reveals the template-product duplex in the site occupied by the DNA-RNA hybrid during transcription. RdRP activity resides at the active site used during transcription, but it is slower and less processive than DNA-dependent activity. RdRP activity is also obtained with part of the HDV antigenome. The complex of transcription factor IIS (TFIIS) with Pol II can cleave one HDV strand, create a reactive stem-loop in the hybrid site, and extend the new RNA 3' end. Short RNA stem-loops with a 5' extension suffice for activity, but their growth to a critical length apparently impairs processivity. The RdRP activity of Pol II provides a missing link in molecular evolution, because it suggests that Pol II evolved from an ancient replicase that duplicated RNA genomes.
Run-on transcription experiments were used to demonstrate that transcription of T cell receptor beta chain V genes is activated by DNA rearrangement, in a manner similar to immunoglobulin genes. A transcriptional enhancer likely to be involved in this activation has been identified. A 25-kilobase region from J beta 1 to V beta 14 was tested for enhancer activity by transient transfections, and an enhancer was found 7.5 kilobases 3' of C beta 2. The beta enhancer has low activity relative to the simian virus 40 viral enhancer, does not display a preference for V beta promoters, has a T cell-specific activity, and binds two purified immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer factors.
Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) is closely related to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), their matrix antigens (MAs) sharing some 50% sequence identity. MA is a component of Pr55Gag, the sole protein required for assembly of the virion shell. MA targets Pr55 to the plasma membrane, and facilitates incorporation of the virus envelope protein and assembly of the Pr55Gag shell. Cleavage of Pr55 by the viral protease produces the mature protein of relative molecular mass 17-18K, which underlies the host-derived membrane and is important in both virus entry and nuclear localization of the virion core. Here we report the crystal structure of SIV MA. The molecule forms a trimer consistent with oligomerization in vitro, the observed virion architecture, and various biological properties of MA.
The nucleotide sequences of the terminal regions of an infectious integrated retrovirus cloned in the modified lambda phage cloning vector Charon 4A have been elucidated. There is a 569-base pair direct repeat at both ends of the viral DNA. The cell-virus junctions at each end consist of a 5-base pair direct repeat of cell DNA next to a 3-base pair inverted repeat of viral DNA. This structure resembles that of a transposable element and is consistent with the protovirus hypothesis that retroviruses evolved from the cell genome.
The retroviruses human T-cell lymphotrophic virus-I (HTLV-I) and HTLV-III/LAV (lymphadenopathy-associated virus) are clearly linked to human diseases. Patients with HTLV-I-positive neoplasms may respond transiently to traditional chemotherapy, but are not cured. For patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) there is no curative therapy. In retroviruses of different species, viral propagation crucially depends on reverse transcriptase, an enzyme not present in normal mammalian cells and different from mammalian DNA polymerases, making it a target for specific inhibition. Reverse transcriptase has been well conserved through evolution: an LAV isolate contained a 250-amino-acid-long domain, presumably the reverse transcriptase core sequence, which has 21% homology to Moloney murine leukaemia virus (MoMLV). Because HTLV-III infects only humans and chimpanzees, we substituted murine retroviruses for in vivo evaluation of candidate anti-AIDS drugs after ascertaining similar inhibition in vitro of HTLV-III and MLVs, which were chosen for their short incubation time. The triphosphate of 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) is incorporated into complementary DNA by retroviral reverse transcriptase, causing premature chain termination. Here we show that chronic AZT treatment of mice infected with Rauscher murine leukaemia virus complex (RLV) prevents infection of splenocytes and development of splenomegaly, and suppresses viraemia if started soon after inoculation. Starting AZT late in the course of disease still leads to significant prolongation of life; anaemia, however is a significant side-effect. By analogy, AZT may have a role in preventing retroviral disease in humans if started early after infection, and it may lead to significant survival gains even if started later in the course of disease.
The susceptibility of neonates to virus-induced disease is thought to reflect, in part, the immaturity of their immune systems. However, inoculation of newborn mice with low doses of Cas-Br-M murine leukemia virus induced a protective cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response. The inability of neonates to develop a CTL response to high doses of virus was not the result of immunological immaturity but correlated with the induction of a nonprotective type 2 cytokine response. Thus, the initial viral dose is critical in the development of protective immunity in newborns.
The adenovirus L1 unit represents an example of an alternatively spliced precursor messenger (pre-mRNA) where on 5' splice can be jointed to one of two alternative 3' splice sites, producing the 52,55K or the IIIa mRNAs (Fig. 1a). Efficient usage of the distal IIIa 3' splice site requires late viral protein synthesis and is therefore confined to the late phase of virus infection. Here we show that, in extracts from uninfected cells, the classical SR proteins, which are essential splicing factors, inhibit IIIa pre-mRNA splicing by binding to an intronic repressor element and preventing recruitment of the U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle to the spliceosome. We further show that the viral repressor element has splicing-enhancer activity when appropriately placed in the pre-mRNA. Together, our results demonstrate that SR proteins function as activators or repressors of splicing depending on where on the pre-mRNA they bind.
Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) increases CD4(+) cell numbers, but its ability to correct the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-induced immune deficiency remains unknown. A three-phase T cell reconstitution was demonstrated after HAART, with: (i) an early rise of memory CD4(+) cells, (ii) a reduction in T cell activation correlated to the decreasing retroviral activity together with an improved CD4(+) T cell reactivity to recall antigens, and (iii) a late rise of "naive" CD4(+) lymphocytes while CD8(+) T cells declined, however, without complete normalization of these parameters. Thus, decreasing the HIV load can reverse HIV-driven activation and CD4(+) T cell defects in advanced HIV-infected patients.
Multiple copies of a gene that encodes human U1 small nuclear RNA were introduced into mouse C127 cells with bovine papilloma virus as the vector. For some recombinant constructions, the human U1 gene copies were maintained extrachromosomally on the viral episome in an unrearranged fashion. The relative abundance of human and mouse U1 small nuclear RNA varied from one cell line to another, but in some lines human U1 RNA accounted for as much as one-third of the total U1. Regardless of the level of human U1 expression, the total amount of U1 RNA (both mouse and human) in each cell line was nearly the same relative to endogenous mouse 5S or U2 RNA. This result was obtained whether measurements were made of total cellular U1 or of only the U1 in small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles that could be precipitated with antibody directed against the Sm antigen. The data suggest that the multigene families encoding mammalian U1 RNA are subject to some form of dosage compensation.
The recently discovered similarity between the human epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and the avian erythroblastosis virus v-erb-B protein supports the hypothesis that viral oncogenes share a common evolutionary origin with genes encoding growth-regulating cell-surface receptors. To elucidate the relationship between receptors and malignant transformation, we have now used a fragment of v-erb-B as a probe to screen a cDNA library of mRNA from A431 human carcinoma cells, which possess a large number of EGF receptors. Of the six clones isolated, the largest (pE7) contains an insert of 2.4 kilobase pairs (kbp) whose deduced amino acid sequence is homologous to the v-erb-B protein and identical to reported EGF receptor peptide sequences. This pE7 cDNA hybridized to three prominent RNAs of approximately 10, 5.6 and 2.9 kilobases (kb), and to three minor species of 6.3, 4.6 and 3.3 kb. All were present in elevated levels in A431 cells. The prominent 2.9-kb RNA was homologous only to the 5' portion of the pE7 insert. This result raises the possibility that differential RNA processing is used by A431 cells to generate a variety of RNAs.
1) Continuously cultured tissue cells afford numerous potential advantages for the propagation of viruses to be used in vaccines. 2) Because continuously cultured tissue cells sooner or later become capable of growing into neoplasms when transplanted into a suitable host, every possible precaution should be taken to ensure that viral vaccines grown in cell cultures are free from living cells and cell particles larger than 0.5 to 1.0 micron. 3) The radical abnormalities that occur in cell lines derived from neoplasms and those that develop sooner or later in cell lines derived from normal tissue cannot be ignored. However, no evidence has been recorded (i) that untoward consequences follow administration of cell-free preparations from such cultures to humans or (ii) that oncogenic or other viral activity is associated with the ability of cells of these lines to grow into neoplasms when transplanted into a suitable host. It seems very unlikely, nevertheless, that acceptance could be won at present for the general use of a live-virus vaccine prepared from a virus grown in cells showing evidences of malignancy. This conclusion is based more on psychological and public relations considerations than on the available scientific information, which, however, needs considerable augmentation. In this connection, careful consideration should be given to the question whether the absence of the cited kinds of abnormalities from a continuously cultured cell system is a sufficient indicator of freedom from oncogenic potential. In the absence of unfavorable data, we judge that present knowledge does not preclude judicious extension of clinical trials, in volunteers, of appropriately filtered and otherwise controlled experimental live-virus vaccines grown in carefully selected continuously cultured cell systems. Only in this way can sufficient data be collected, and adequate criteria be developed, to define eventually the conditions for acceptability of such preparations for general administration to humans. 4) Every possible effort should be devoted to the development of non-oncogenic and otherwise acceptable cell lines from normal tissues for use in viral vaccine production. It is suggested that exploratory studies begin with continuously cultured mixed-cell populations in the diploid state and stabilized cloned cultures. Criteria for the selection and monitoring of cell lines, and progressive steps leading to large-scale application are outlined. 5) If the need for immunization against a particular viral disease should be deemed sufficiently urgent, and if no practicable alternative were available, serious consideration might be given to a vaccine prepared by inactivating the virus, grown in such a selected stabilized cell line as HeLa or human skin epithelium. The conditions of preparation would have to be such as would inactivate the most resistant known viruses and infective nucleic acids with a generous margin of safety. 6) Principal areas needing intensified research emphasis are indicated.
Retroviruses cause a wide variety of diseases in avian and mammalian species. Human acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) leads to collapse of the immune system and death by a wide variety of opportunistic infections; unusual forms of cancer are associated with this syndrome. Retroviruses have been recovered from tissues of AIDS patients and from patients with related conditions. These similar newly-isolated viruses are lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV), human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV-III) and AIDS-associated retrovirus (ARV-2). We have identified a RNA genome of approximately 9 kilobases (kb) in virions purified from the culture medium of a human T-cell tumour line infected with ARV-2. A cDNA probe made from viral RNA detected circular DNA molecules and proviral forms in infected cells. We prepared a library of infected cell DNA. Recombinant phage included those with a 9.5-kb proviral DNA and viral DNA permuted with respect to the single EcoRI site. Comparison of three ARV isolates from different AIDS patients revealed polymorphism of restriction endonuclease sites.
Human cytomegalovirus infection perturbs multiple cellular processes that could promote the release of proapoptotic stimuli. Consequently, it encodes mechanisms to prevent cell death during infection. Using rotenone, a potent inhibitor of the mitochondrial enzyme complex I (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-ubiquinone oxido-reductase), we found that human cytomegalovirus infection protected cells from rotenone-induced apoptosis, a protection mediated by a 2.7-kilobase virally encoded RNA (beta2.7). During infection, beta2.7 RNA interacted with complex I and prevented the relocalization of the essential subunit genes associated with retinoid/interferon-induced mortality-19, in response to apoptotic stimuli. This interaction, which is important for stabilizing the mitochondrial membrane potential, resulted in continued adenosine triphosphate production, which is critical for the successful completion of the virus' life cycle. Complex I targeting by a viral RNA represents a refined strategy to modulate the metabolic viability of the infected host cell.
Neoplastic transformation by C-type retroviruses requires synthesis of a DNA copy (the provirus) of the RNA genome and its integration into the host cell DNA. We have previously shown that interferon (IFN) can stably prevent transformation of murine fibroblasts by the Kirsten strain of murine sarcoma virus (KiMSV), a murine leukaemia virus (MLV). A series of cell clones (IFN clones), isolated in the presence of IFN (10(4) U ml-1) from cultures of NIH-3T3 cells which had been treated with IFN, and then infected with KiMSV (KiMLV) in conditions where every cell was infected, were shown to be phenotypically untransformed. These untransformed cells did not produce virus or contain rescuable KiMSV. However, cells isolated using an identical procedure, but in the absence of IFN, were uniformly transformed and all produced KiMSV (KiMLV) or contained rescuable KiMSV. It was concluded that IFN either prevents synthesis or integration of the provirus, or else that in the presence of IFN the provirus is integrated such that it is not expressed. We now show that five representative clones contain no detectable KiMSV proviral DNA, and also that the initial stages of infection by KiMSV (KiMLV) are inhibited by IFN treatment. IFN seems to act before integration, preventing either the synthesis or the integration of proviral DNA.
The pressing need for a better experimental system for AIDS research has brought into sharp focus the shortcomings of available animal models and the practical and ethical limitations of studies of immune responses and viral pathogenesis in humans. Current studies of the human immune responses are limited to relatively restrictive in vivo experiments and several in vitro systems that, although useful, allow only short-term studies and support responses to a few antigens. Neither model is particularly amenable to studies of the pathogenesis of diseases of the immune system. We report here that injection of human peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) can result in the stable long-term reconstitution of a functional human immune system in mice with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). Human PBL transplanted to SCID mice increase in number and survive for at least six months; reconstituted mice show spontaneous secretion of human immunoglobulin and a specific human antibody response is induced following immunization with tetanus toxoid. All of the major cell populations present in PBL are found in the lymphoid tissue and blood of SCID recipients, although the relative proportions of B cells, T-cell subsets and monocytes/macrophages in long-term recipients differ from those found in normal PBL and, in mice transplanted with 50 x 10(6) or more PBL from Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-seropositive donors, EBV-positive B-cell lymphomas often develop. Our results suggest that xenogeneic transplantation of human lymphoid cells into SCID mice may provide a useful model for the study of normal human immune function, the response of the immune system to pathogenic agents and early events in lymphomagensis.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is the most common blood-borne infection in the United States, with estimates of 4 million HCV-infected individuals in the United States and 170 million worldwide. Most (70-80%) HCV infections persist and about 30% of individuals with persistent infection develop chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Epidemiological, viral and host factors have been associated with the differences in HCV clearance or persistence, and studies have demonstrated that a strong host immune response against HCV favours viral clearance. Thus, variation in genes involved in the immune response may contribute to the ability to clear the virus. In a recent genome-wide association study, a single nucleotide polymorphism (rs12979860) 3 kilobases upstream of the IL28B gene, which encodes the type III interferon IFN-3, was shown to associate strongly with more than a twofold difference in response to HCV drug treatment. To determine the potential effect of rs12979860 variation on outcome to HCV infection in a natural history setting, we genotyped this variant in HCV cohorts comprised of individuals who spontaneously cleared the virus (n = 388) or had persistent infection (n = 620). We show that the C/C genotype strongly enhances resolution of HCV infection among individuals of both European and African ancestry. To our knowledge, this is the strongest and most significant genetic effect associated with natural clearance of HCV, and these results implicate a primary role for IL28B in resolution of HCV infection.
Cat cells transformed by Moloney murine sarcoma virus contain virus-specific sequences in their RNA and DNA. Cloned, spontaneous revertant cell lines derived from clones of these cells had no evidence of the sarcoma genome in the cell RNA or DNA as judged by RNA-complementary DNA or DNA-complementary DNA hybridizations. ?This is apparently the first report of loss of a transforming genome in a revertant cell line.
Recent studies indicate that human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV) gene expression can be dramatically enhanced by certain heterologous viral and chemical agents, implicating these as potential reactivating agents of latent virus infection. A common denominator shared by these agents is their ability to cause stress responses in cells. In an effort to determine whether stress responses affect HIV gene expression, we examined the effects of ultraviolet light (UV) and mitomycin C, on HIV gene expression as well as on viral growth and development. We demonstrate that these agents enhance HIV gene expression up to 150-fold. These levels are similar to those obtained by the tat gene product, the HIV trans-activating factor responsible for enhancing viral gene expression. The increase in gene expression after UV irradiation appears to require transcription but not de novo protein synthesis, and correlates with an accumulation of stable mRNA. Most importantly, UV irradiation of human T-cells prior to viral infection significantly shortens the viral growth cycle. Apparently, UV-induced cellular stress is highly conducive for viral replication and growth. We further demonstrate that even direct sunlight can activate HIV gene expression. These results demonstrate that DNA damaging agents, and perhaps other agents which elicit SOS-like stress responses in mammalian cells, can activate HIV expression thereby enhancing viral replication and development.
Epstein-Barr virus, a human herpesvirus with oncogenic potential, infects two target tissues in vivo: B lymphocytes, where the infection is largely non-productive, and stratified squamous epithelium in which virus replication occurs. The interaction with B cells, initiated through virus binding to the B-cell surface molecule CR2 (ref. 4), has been studied in vitro and the virus 'latent' genes associated with B-cell growth transformation defined. By comparison, viral infection of epithelium remains poorly understood, reflecting the lack of an appropriate cell-culture model. Here we describe the development of such a model using as targets CR2-expressing transfected cells of two independent human epithelial lines. A high proportion of these cells bind virus and become actively infected, expressing the small EBER RNAs (small non-polyadenylated virus-coded RNAs) and the Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen 1 but not other latent proteins; thereafter, under conditions favouring epithelial differentiation, up to 30% of the cells can be induced to enter virus productive cycle with some progressing to full virus replication. We find significant differences between laboratory virus strains in their ability to infect epithelium that do not correlate with their B-cell growth-transforming activity.
A morbillivirus has been isolated and added to an increasing list of emerging viral diseases. This virus caused an outbreak of fatal respiratory disease in horses and humans. Genetic analyses show it to be only distantly related to the classic morbilliviruses rinderpest, measles, and canine distemper. When seen by electron microscopy, viruses had 10- and 18-nanometer surface projections that gave them a "double-fringed" appearance. The virus induced syncytia that developed in the endothelium of blood vessels, particularly the lungs.
The worm Caenorhabditis elegans is a model system for studying many aspects of biology, including host responses to bacterial pathogens, but it is not known to support replication of any virus. Plants and insects encode multiple Dicer enzymes that recognize distinct precursors of small RNAs and may act cooperatively. However, it is not known whether the single Dicer of worms and mammals is able to initiate the small RNA-guided RNA interference (RNAi) antiviral immunity as occurs in plants and insects. Here we show complete replication of the Flock house virus (FHV) bipartite, plus-strand RNA genome in C. elegans. We show that FHV replication in C. elegans triggers potent antiviral silencing that requires RDE-1, an Argonaute protein essential for RNAi mediated by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) but not by microRNAs. This immunity system is capable of rapid virus clearance in the absence of FHV B2 protein, which acts as a broad-spectrum RNAi inhibitor upstream of rde-1 by targeting the siRNA precursor. This work establishes a C. elegans model for genetic studies of animal virus-host interactions and indicates that mammals might use a siRNA pathway as an antiviral response.
The crystal structure of the protease of the human immunodeficiency virus type (HIV-1), which releases structural proteins and enzymes from viral polyprotein products, has been determined to 3 A resolution. Large regions of the protease dimer, including the active site, have structural homology to the family of microbial aspartyl proteases. The structure suggests a mechanism for the autoproteolytic release of protease and a role in the control of virus maturation.
Humoral immunity is important for protection against viral infection and neutralization of extracellular virus, but clearance of virus from infected tissues is thought to be mediated solely by cellular immunity. However, in a SCID mouse model of persistent alphavirus encephalomyelitis, adoptive transfer of hyperimmune serum resulted in clearance of infectious virus and viral RNA from the nervous system, whereas adoptive transfer of sensitized T lymphocytes had no effect on viral replication. Three monoclonal antibodies to two different epitopes on the E2 envelope glycoprotein mediated viral clearance. Treatment of alphavirus-infected primary cultured rat neurons with these monoclonal antibodies to E2 resulted in decreased viral protein synthesis, followed by gradual termination of mature infectious virion production. Thus, antibody can mediate clearance of alphavirus infection from neurons by restricting viral gene expression.
The adoptive transfer of antigen-specific T cells to establish immunity is an effective therapy for viral infections and tumors in animal models. The application of this approach to human disease would require the isolation and in vitro expansion of human antigen-specific T cells and evidence that such T cells persist and function in vivo after transfer. Cytomegalovirus-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T cell (CTL) clones could be isolated from bone marrow donors, propagated in vitro, and adoptively transferred to immunodeficient bone marrow transplant recipients. No toxicity developed and the clones provided persistent reconstitution of CD8+ cytomegalovirus-specific CTL responses.
The nucleotide sequences of the six regions within the normal human cellular locus (c-sis) that correspond to the entire transforming region of the simian sarcoma virus (SSV) genome (v-sis) were determined. The regions are bounded by acceptor and donor splice sites and, except for region 6, resemble exons. Region 6 lacks a 3' donor splice site and terminates -5 base pairs from the 3' v-sis-helper-viral junction. This is consistent with a model proposing that SSV was generated by recombination between proviral DNA of a simian sarcoma associated virus and proto-sis and that introns were spliced out subsequently from a fused viral-sis messenger RNA. This also suggests that the 3' recombination occurred within an exon of the woolly monkey (Lagothrix) genome. The open reading frames predicting the v-sis and c-sis gene products coincide with the stop codon of c-sis located 123 nucleotides into the fifth region of homology. The overall nucleotide homology was 91 percent with substitutions mainly in the third codon positions within the open reading frame and with greatest divergence within the untranslated 3' portion of the sequences. The predicted protein products for v-sis and c-sis are 93 percent homologous. The predicted c-sis gene product is identical in 31 of 31 amino acids to one of the published sequences of platelet-derived growth factor. Thus, c-sis encodes one chain of human platelet-derived growth factor.
Human T-cell leukaemias and lymphomas associated with the human T-cell leukaemia viruses (HTLV) are invariably neoplasms of cells with mature T-lymphocyte phenotype. Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B- lymphoycte lines which are productively infected with HTLV may be isolated from patients with HTLV malignancies, but no non-lymphoid tissues seem to be involved. Here, to investigate the basis for this tissue specificity, we introduced type II HTLV (HTLV-II) into a variety of human cells by infection and also by transfection of recombinant genomes. We found no HTLV-II expression in non-lymphoid tissues although expression and correct initiation of transcription was observed in B and T lymphocytes. Our results using recombinant genomes indicate that the restriction of expression is at least partly due to cis-acting functions of the long terminal repeats which lie at each end of the HTLV genome.
Innate immune defences are essential for the control of virus infection and are triggered through host recognition of viral macromolecular motifs known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is an RNA virus that replicates in the liver, and infects 200 million people worldwide. Infection is regulated by hepatic immune defences triggered by the cellular RIG-I helicase. RIG-I binds PAMP RNA and signals interferon regulatory factor 3 activation to induce the expression of interferon-alpha/beta and antiviral/interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) that limit infection. Here we identify the polyuridine motif of the HCV genome 3' non-translated region and its replication intermediate as the PAMP substrate of RIG-I, and show that this and similar homopolyuridine or homopolyriboadenine motifs present in the genomes of RNA viruses are the chief feature of RIG-I recognition and immune triggering in human and murine cells. 5' terminal triphosphate on the PAMP RNA was necessary but not sufficient for RIG-I binding, which was primarily dependent on homopolymeric ribonucleotide composition, linear structure and length. The HCV PAMP RNA stimulated RIG-I-dependent signalling to induce a hepatic innate immune response in vivo, and triggered interferon and ISG expression to suppress HCV infection in vitro. These results provide a conceptual advance by defining specific homopolymeric RNA motifs within the genome of HCV and other RNA viruses as the PAMP substrate of RIG-I, and demonstrate immunogenic features of the PAMP-RIG-I interaction that could be used as an immune adjuvant for vaccine and immunotherapy approaches.
MHC class I molecules function to present peptides eight to ten residues long to the immune system. These peptides originate primarily from a cytosolic pool of proteins through the actions of proteasomes, and are transported into the endoplasmic reticulum, where they assemble with nascent class I molecules. Most peptides are generated from proteins that are apparently metabolically stable. To explain this, we previously proposed that peptides arise from proteasomal degradation of defective ribosomal products (DRiPs). DRiPs are polypeptides that never attain native structure owing to errors in translation or post-translational processes necessary for proper protein folding. Here we show, first, that DRiPs constitute upwards of 30% of newly synthesized proteins as determined in a variety of cell types; second, that at least some DRiPs represent ubiquitinated proteins; and last, that ubiquitinated DRiPs are formed from human immunodeficiency virus Gag polyprotein, a long-lived viral protein that serves as a source of antigenic peptides.
Overexpression of dominant-negative mutants of various viral proteins can result in 'intracellular immunization'. Here we describe a new approach to interfering with viral replication in which a nuclease is fused to a capsid component so that the nuclease is encapsidated inside the virion where it can inactivate viral nucleic acid. We used Ty1, a yeast retrotransposon whose transposition closely parallels retroviral replication mechanisms and serves as an easily manipulated model for the retroviral infection process. We constructed fusion genes consisting of the region encoding the N-terminal portion of the TYA/TYB open reading frames of retrotransposon Ty1 and either of two different nuclease genes. Ty1-nuclease fusion proteins are targeted to Ty1 virus-like particles, and are active in degrading nucleic acids. A Ty1-barnase fusion protein causes 98-99% reduction in the efficiency of Ty1 transposition in vivo, presumably by degrading encapsidated Ty1 RNA. This strategy, referred to as capsid-targeted viral inactivation, may be useful for interfering with the replication of retroviruses and other viruses.
All humans become infected with multiple herpesviruses during childhood. After clearance of acute infection, herpesviruses enter a dormant state known as latency. Latency persists for the life of the host and is presumed to be parasitic, as it leaves the individual at risk for subsequent viral reactivation and disease. Here we show that herpesvirus latency also confers a surprising benefit to the host. Mice latently infected with either murine gammaherpesvirus 68 or murine cytomegalovirus, which are genetically highly similar to the human pathogens Epstein-Barr virus and human cytomegalovirus, respectively, are resistant to infection with the bacterial pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Yersinia pestis. Latency-induced protection is not antigen specific but involves prolonged production of the antiviral cytokine interferon-gamma and systemic activation of macrophages. Latency thereby upregulates the basal activation state of innate immunity against subsequent infections. We speculate that herpesvirus latency may also sculpt the immune response to self and environmental antigens through establishment of a polarized cytokine environment. Thus, whereas the immune evasion capabilities and lifelong persistence of herpesviruses are commonly viewed as solely pathogenic, our data suggest that latency is a symbiotic relationship with immune benefits for the host.
Interferons (IFNs) have an important role in cell growth and differentiation. The most well-known function of IFNs is their antiviral activity; viral infections result in induction of the transcription of the IFN-alpha and IFN-beta genes. Recently we isolated the gene encoding a transcription factor, IRF-1, that may play a part in the induction of IFN genes. Interestingly, the IRF-1 gene itself is virus-inducible, suggesting the importance of de novo production of IRF-1 in IFN gene induction. Here we show that high-level expression of the cloned mouse IRF-1 gene in monkey COS cells results in the induction of endogenous IFN-alpha and IFN-beta genes without viral stimulation. Furthermore, we demonstrate the induction of these genes by an IRF-1/yeast GAL4 chimaeric transcription factor. This may be the first demonstration of the specific induction of silent chromosomal genes by transfection of a single transcription factor gene in mammalian cells.
The successful killing of virus-infected cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) is dependent on the recognition of both a viral product and class I antigens of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) on the infected cell surface. Whether these two entities are found independently on the cell surface and therefore recognized by two different CTL receptors, or whether they are associated together and can therefore be recognized by a single receptor is not known. The association between an adenovirus-encoded glycoprotein expressed on the cell surface early after infection and class I antigens has been investigated and it has been found that antisera against class I antigens can co-precipitate the antigen and the viral glycoprotein from an adenovirus-transformed cell line from the Hooded-Lister rat strain. We show here by in vitro affinity chromatography and in vivo immunoprecipitation that the viral glycoprotein specifically binds to the heavy chain of class I antigens in both man and mouse.
